7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/435
City of Bridgeport
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 3
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 2/11/19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
HOME RULE CHARTER
CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS*
The Charter of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, was approved by the voters of the City of Bridgeport on May 7, 2016,
and filed in the office of the Secretary of State on May 19, 2016, and recorded in Book 88, pages 326-372 in the
Book of the City Charters and Amendments
Charter Election May 7, 2016
CHAPTER I - INCORPORATION AND POWERS OF CITY
1.01 Incorporation, Corporate Name
All inhabitants of the City of Bridgeport, Wise County, Texas, within the boundaries of the City now established or
as hereinafter established in the manner provided by law, shall constitute a municipal body politic incorporated
under the name of “City of Bridgeport”, hereinafter referred to as the “City”, with such powers, rights, authority,
privileges, obligations and immunities as are herein provided. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
1.02 Corporate Boundaries
(a) The boundaries of the City shall be as they exist when this Charter is adopted, until changed by the City
Council.
(b) The boundaries and limits of the City shall be those established and described on an official map duly
adopted by the City Council by ordinance and amended from time to time to include annexations and
disannexations from the corporate limits. The City Secretary shall at all times keep a correct and complete
description and official map on file, with recent annexations and disannexations.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.
1.03 Annexation
(a) The Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix boundaries of the City and to provide for the alteration
or the extension of said boundaries, voluntarily, or involuntarily.
(b) The annexation ordinance shall describe the territory to be annexed. Notice shall be published and public
hearings held as required by State law. Amendments not enlarging or extending the boundaries set forth in the
proposed ordinance may be incorporated into the proposed ordinance without the necessity of republication of
said notice. The additional territory annexed shall be a part of the City and the property situated therein shall bear
its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City as provided by State law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/435
all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to
annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 43.021; annexation of property during tax year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
26.14.
1.04 Disannexation
The Council may, by ordinance, disannex any territory within the corporate boundaries of the City if the Council
determines the territory is not necessary or suitable for City purposes, and may, by agreement approved by
resolution or ordinance, exchange territory with other municipalities. When the disannexation ordinance is passed,
the disannexed territory shall cease to be a part of the City but the disannexed territory shall remain liable for its
pro rata share of any indebtedness incurred while the area was a part of the City and the City shall continue to
levy, assess and collect taxes on the property in the disannexed territory until such indebtedness has been paid,
unless the council determines that it is not necessary or advisable. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Disannexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 43.141 et seq.
1.05 Form of Government
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as “Council-Manager Government.” Pursuant
to the provisions of, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, State Laws and this
Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the “Council.”
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
1.06 General Powers of the City
(a) The City shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature, that
are now or hereafter may be granted to a Home Rule City by the Constitution and laws of this State, together with
all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all such powers granted.
(b) Such powers shall include but are not limited to the following: the City shall have police powers, the power to
adjust boundaries, to contract and to co-operate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency or
subdivision thereof, or with the federal government or any agency thereof to accomplish any lawful purpose. The
City may use a corporate seal; may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose
in fee simple, or in any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, exchange, condemnation, and
subject to the provisions of this Charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve, exchange and control
property as may now or hereafter be owned by it; may access [assess], levy and collect taxes for general and
special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money and appropriate money for all lawful
purposes; may furnish municipal services, both within and without its corporate limits; may provide for the
expenditure of public funds for a retirement system, group health, life and accident insurance coverage, and surety
bonds for City employees or officers; may pass ordinances, resolutions, and enact such regulations as may be
expedient for the maintenance of good government, order and peace of the City and the interest, welfare, health,
morals, comfort, safety, security and convenience of the City for its inhabitants consistent with the provisions of this
Charter.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.S. art. 1175; general powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.
1.07 General Powers Adopted
The enumeration of the particular powers of this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive of, but in
addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City
shall have and may exercise all powers of local self-government and all other powers which, under the Constitution
and laws of the State of Texas it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. (Ordinance 2016-
05 adopted 2/16/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/435
1.08 Eminent Domain
The City shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary to
carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas.
The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take fee title and easement
interest in the lands so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public or
private property for such purposes. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch. 21; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, ch. 251.
1.09 Power to Acquire Property Inside and Outside the City for Public Purposes
The City shall have the power to sell and to acquire by purchase or condemnation either private or public property
located inside or outside of the corporate limits for public purposes. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
1.10 Street Powers
The City shall have exclusive domain, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under all alleys, streets, gutters
and sidewalks, situated in the City, and the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade,
drain, abandon and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the
use thereof, and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property or places of all
obstructions, telegraph, telephone or other poles carrying electric wires or signs, encroachments of every nature or
character upon any said streets and sidewalks, and to vacate and close private ways; and when a street or alley
has been vacated or abandoned, the City shall have the right to sell the same in any lawful manner. The city shall
have the power to assess property owners for improvements. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in,
upon, over or under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, parkways, alleys and highways of the City shall also
include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of all utility
pipes, lines, wires or other property of any sort. The right of control and use of the public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and alleys is hereby declared to be inalienable to the City, except by ordinances not in conflict with this
Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, sec. 311.001.
1.11 Health and Police Powers
(a) The Council shall have the power to provide for and/or own and regulate the following, but not to the
exclusion of other powers:
(1) a solid waste collection and disposal system;
(2) a sanitary sewer utility or system;
(3) a water utility or system;
(4) an electric utility or system;
(5) a fire department;
(6) a police department;
(7) a health department;
(8) parks and playgrounds.
(b) The Council shall have the power to define all nuisances and prohibit them within the City and outside the
City limits for at least a distance of 5,000 feet.
(c) The Council shall have the power to provide for fixing of penalties for failure of any person, firm, corporation
or association to comply with any such rules and regulations so prescribed by the Council under the provisions of
this section; it being the intention to vest in the Council not only powers expressly enumerated in this section but all
other powers reasonably necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its
inhabitants.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/435
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER II - CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR
2.01 Governing Body
The governing and lawmaking body of the City shall consist of the Mayor and five (5) Councilmembers and shall
be known as the City Council. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.02 Elective Officers
(a) The members of the Council shall be elected and hold office as herein provided. All members of the Council,
and the Mayor, shall be elected under the place system. The Mayor and each member of the Council shall hold
office for a two (2) year term. Upon expiration of the terms of the current Mayor and Councilmembers, their
successors shall be elected for terms as follows:
Place 3, Place 4 and Place 5 shall be elected for a term of two (2) years, beginning with a City
election held in May, 2017.
Place 1, Place 2 and the Mayor shall be elected for two (2) year terms, beginning with the regular
City election held in May, 2018.
Upon the expiration of the above terms of the Mayor and Councilmembers, their successors shall be elected for
terms of two (2) years. All places, including Mayor, will be elected at large by a plurality vote.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.03 Qualifications of Candidates
Each person who becomes a candidate for Mayor or Council member shall meet the following qualifications:
(1) be at least eighteen 18 years of age, on the date application is made for a place on the ballot;
(2) be a citizen of the United States;
(3) be a qualified voter of the City;
(4) reside and have resided for at least twelve (12) months preceding the date of the election within
the corporate limits of the City;
(5) not be indebted to the City or be delinquent in the payment to the City of any tax or assessment;
(6) no candidate may file for more than one office or position number per election;
(7) no employee of the City shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for an elective
office.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.04 Compensation of Elective Officers
(a) The Mayor and the members of the Council shall receive the following salary for their service:
Mayor - $400 per month
Councilmembers - $200 per month
(b) The Mayor and the members of the Council shall receive the following reimbursement for normal local travel
and other expenses incurred in the conduct of City business:
Mayor - $150 per month
Councilmembers - $75 per month
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/435
(c) In addition, the Mayor and the members of the Council shall be entitled to reimbursement of documented
unusual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties (such as seminar and travel expenses).
(d) The City Council may increase or decrease the salary and expense reimbursement amounts set forth above
by ordinance, but only after holding a public hearing and upon the affirmative vote of at least 3/4 of the entire
membership. Any such change in the salary or expense reimbursement amounts shall not take effect until the next
fiscal year. The Mayor and the members of the Council shall be entitled to donate the salary and expense
reimbursement set forth above, or a portion thereof, back to the City.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.05 Presiding Officer - Duties of the Mayor
The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Council and perform such other duties consistent with the office
as may be imposed upon the Mayor by this Charter, and by ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance
thereof. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts for the purpose of enforcing
military law and for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall not vote except in the event of a tie. (Ordinance
2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.06 Mayor Pro Tem
At the first meeting after each general election or general election run-off, if any, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the City Council shall appoint one of the Councilmembers as Mayor Pro Tem who shall hold office for
one (1) year. The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor in case of the absence or disability of the
Mayor. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.07 Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office: Filling of Vacancies
(a) Vacancies. The office of the Mayor or a Council member shall become vacant upon the Mayor or Council
member's death, resignation, removal from office (in any manner authorized by law), or forfeiture of office.
(b) Forfeiture of Office. The Mayor or a Council member shall forfeit his or her office if during a term of office, the
Mayor or Council member:
(1) lacks any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by other law;
(2) violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter;
(3) is convicted of a felony, whether final for purposes of appeal or not, or a crime involving moral
turpitude; or
(4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being excused by the
Council.
The Council shall, by an affirmative 3/4 vote of the entire membership, be the final judge in matters involving
forfeiture of office by a Council member or the Mayor.
(c) Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the City Council and there is more than six months remaining in
the term of office so vacated, then in that event the City Council may call a special election or appoint a qualified
person to fill the unexpired term. If there is less than six months remaining, then the Council shall appoint a
qualified person to fill the unexpired term.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
2.08 Meetings of the City Council
The Council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month at a time to be fixed by ordinance, unless the
date falls on a regularly observed City holiday, provided that the Council may establish as many additional regular
meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the City and its citizens.
Prescribed meeting dates may be cancelled by a vote of the Council at a regular scheduled meeting. All meetings
of the Council shall be open in accordance with and except as provided by the Texas Open Meetings Act, and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/435
shall be held at the City Hall, unless the Council designates another place for the meetings. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
2.09 Special Meetings
The Mayor, any two members of the Council, or the City Manager may call special meetings by giving notice to the
City Secretary who shall notify each member of the Council of the time of the meeting and its purpose. (Ordinance
2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.10 Rules of the Council: Minutes and Procedures
(a) The City Council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members.
Minutes of the proceedings of the City Council shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all
reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the City. The vote upon the passage of all
ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by a show of hands or other method to indicate the vote of each
member and entered into the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution upon its final passage, shall be
authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the City Secretary,
and kept as required by law.
(b) Any item requested by one (1) or more members of the Council, or by the City Manager, or by the Mayor,
shall be placed on the agenda by the City Secretary. The Mayor will establish the order of the agenda for each
Council meeting. The City Secretary shall prepare the agenda, which shall be publicly posted at City Hall in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.11 Quorum and Voting
Three (3) Councilmembers, excluding the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum to do business and no action of the
Council shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three (3) or more members of the
Council, including the Mayor in the event of a tie. A number less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members. If the Council is reduced to less than three (3) members on account of
vacancies, the remaining members shall constitute a quorum for the sole purpose of calling an election.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
2.12 Code of Ethics and Conduct
The City Council shall adopt by ordinance a code of ethics and conduct that is consistent with the provisions of this
Charter and state and federal law applicable to elected officers, appointed board, commission, and committee
members, and employees of the City. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER III - RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
3.01 Powers of the Council
All powers and authority, including determination of all matters of policy, which are expressly or by implication
conferred on or possessed by the City, shall be vested in and exercised by the Council; provided, however, that the
Council shall have no authority to exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other City officers by
this Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
3.02 Appointment of Members of Boards
The members of all boards, commissions or committees created by this Charter or by the Council shall be
appointed by the Council. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
3.03 Investigative Powers of the Council
The Council as a body (including the Mayor) shall have the power to inquire into or investigate the official conduct
of any department, agency, officer or employee of the City and for that purpose shall have the power to administer
oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, records or other evidence, and as it shall
provide by Ordinance, to punish and fix penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any such subpoena or
to produce any such books, papers, records or other evidence. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/435
3.04 Depository of City Funds
The Council is authorized to select a depository, according to State law, for the City funds. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 105.
3.05 Interference in Administrative Matters
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City.
Except for the purpose of inquiry or investigation, Council members and the Mayor shall deal with the
administrative departments and personnel solely through the City Manager, and no member of the Council or the
Mayor shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
3.06 Appointive Offices
In addition to the elected officers, the other officers of the City shall be the City Manager, City Secretary, City
Attorney, and such other officers as the Council may from time to time direct. The Council may appoint, abolish or
consolidate such offices and positions as it may deem to be in the best interest of the City and may divide the
administration of such offices or positions as it may deem advisable, create new offices and positions and
discontinue any office or position at its discretion except the offices of City Manager, City Secretary, and City
Attorney. Removal of officers appointed by the Council shall be at the discretion of the Council, by an affirmative
vote of at least 3/4 of the entire membership. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
3.07 State of Emergency
(a) A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist during periods of impending or actual public crisis or disaster.
A state of emergency may be declared by the vote of the Council, or by order of the Mayor, or, in the Mayor's
absence or disability, the Mayor Pro Tem, if a meeting of the Council cannot be called within the time available,
whenever conditions threaten to render inadequate the normal procedures of the City for protection of persons or
property.
(b) During a state of emergency, the Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence or disability, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall
have all the powers which would be vested in the Council by State law to the extent the Mayor considers
reasonable, or necessary for the protection of persons or property.
(c) The emergency powers herein provided shall be exercised only to the extent made necessary by the nature
of the emergency and during the continuation of the state of emergency.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
3.08 Validation of all Ordinances, Rules and Regulations
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City heretofore ordained, passed, adopted, or enacted,
that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall
remain in full force until altered, amended or repealed by the Council after such Charter takes effect. (Ordinance
2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
3.09 Action Requiring an Ordinance
(a) The Council shall legislate by ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of
this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Council shall be by ordinance which:
(1) adopt, amend or establish an administrative code;
(2) provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or
other penalty is imposed;
(3) levy taxes;
(4) adopt a budget;
(5) grant, renew or extend a franchise;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/435
(6) regulate the rate charged for services by a public utility;
(7) authorize the borrowing of money that cannot be repaid within the current fiscal year;
(8) adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the initiative power; and
(9) amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in Chapter
[Article] 8 of this Charter with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum
power.
(b) Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance, resolution or
minute order.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out other powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 51.001.
3.10 Form of Ordinances
Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in substantially the form required for final adoption.
The subject of the ordinance shall be clearly expressed in its title except ordinances or resolutions making
appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be: “Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Bridgeport,” but the same shall be omitted when the ordinances of the City are codified and published in a book or
pamphlet form by the City. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the City code
shall clearly set forth the provision or provisions being repealed or amended (which may be done by reference to
code provisions) and, if amended, shall further clearly set forth the amendment being made. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
3.11 Procedure for Enacting Ordinances and Resolutions; Publication
(a) Ordinances and resolutions may be passed at any regular meeting or special meeting called for that purpose
provided notice has been given in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(b) All ordinances and resolutions, unless otherwise provided by State law, this Charter, or the ordinance itself
shall be final on the passage or adoption by the required majority of the Council. Every ordinance, resolution or
motion shall require on final passage the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Council unless more is
required by State law or this Charter.
(c) The descriptive caption or title of an ordinance that imposes a penalty, fine or forfeiture and the penalty for
violating the ordinance shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City and posted on the
City's website during the period of publication in the newspaper.
(d) An ordinance required to be published takes effect when the publication requirement is satisfied, unless the
ordinance provides otherwise, and an ordinance that is not required to be published takes effect when adopted
unless the ordinance provides otherwise.
(e) All ordinances and resolutions may be admitted and received in all courts, subject to the rules of evidence
and laws of jurisdictions where proof of such ordinances and resolutions are tendered, without further proof.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013.
3.12 Codification of Ordinances
The City Manager, as soon as practical after the adoption of this Charter shall cause to be codified and properly
entered and published for public distribution or for anyone desiring same, the ordinances of the City, which
codification shall be revised and updated at least annually. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 53.
CHAPTER IV - CITY ADMINISTRATION*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/435
4.01 Administrative Departments
(a) There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and may be established
by ordinance and excepting as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under
the direction of the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to establish administrative
departments or offices not herein provided by this Charter. The City Manager may discontinue, redesignate, or
combine any of the administrative departments or offices.
(b) The head of each department shall be a chief, director, superintendent or coordinator who shall be appointed
by the City Manager, and such chief, director, superintendent or coordinator shall have supervision and control
over that department. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, and the City Manager
may act as City Secretary and may head one or more departments.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.02 Appointment and Qualifications of City Manager
(a) The Council, by majority vote of the Council qualified and serving, shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be
the chief administrative officer of the City.
(b) The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the Council so long as the method insures orderly,
non-partisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The City Manager shall
be chosen solely upon the basis of the person's administrative training, experience, ability and character.
(c) Neither the Mayor nor any Council member shall be appointed City Manager or acting City Manager while
holding office, or for a period of one (1) year after leaving office.
(d) The City Manager shall establish residency in the City of Bridgeport unless excused by the City Council.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.03 Compensation of City Manager
The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the Council according to the person's
experience, education and training. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.04 Term and Removal of City Manager
(a) The City Manager may be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the discretion of the Council,
by an affirmative vote of at least 3/4 of the entire membership.
(b) The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this
Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the Council.
(c) The Council is authorized to enter into a contract with a City Manager to establish terms of employment.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.05 Bond of City Manager
The Council shall require the City Manager before entering office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company
bond, in such amount as the Council may require, payable to the City and conditioned for the faithful performance
of the duties of the City Manager's office. The premium of such bond is to be paid by the City. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
4.06 Powers and Duties of City Manager
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the City. The
City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City and to
that end shall have the power and be required to:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/435
(1) In cooperation with the City Attorney, see that all State laws and City ordinances are effectively
enforced.
(2) Appoint, suspend and/or remove all or any one of the heads of departments and all subordinate
officers and employees of the City; provided, however, that the Council by ordinance may provide for
personnel procedures or policies that permit designated department heads an appeal to the Council
regarding termination of employment.
(3) Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter, or that
may hereafter be created by the Council, except as hereinafter provided.
(4) See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility
franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the
same to the attention of the City Attorney, whose duty it shall be to take such steps as may be
necessary to enforce the same.
(5) Attend all meetings of the Council, except when excused by the Council.
(6) Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the Council on or before August 1 of each
year and be responsible for its administration after its adoption.
(7) Administer the budget of the City.
(8) Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances
and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year.
(9) Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such
recommendations as the City Manager may deem advisable.
(10) Prepare personnel rules subject to the approval of the Council.
(11) Prepare the official agenda of all Council meetings and meetings of the boards and
commissions.
(12) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by the Council.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.07 Acting City Manager
(a) The City Manager, within thirty (30) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City
Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager in his or her
absence or disability. Such designation shall be subject to approval of the Council. No member of the City Council
nor the Mayor shall serve as Acting City Manager. Upon resignation or termination of the City Manager, the Acting
City Manager shall perform the duties of the City Manager until a new City Manager or Acting City Manager is
appointed by the Council.
(b) Should the need for an Acting City Manager occur prior to the City Manager submitting a designee or prior to
the Council's approval of the City Manager's designee, the Council shall appoint an Acting City Manager.
(c) The City Manager may select a different Acting City Manager by replacing the letter of designation and
obtaining the Council's approval. The previous designation is rescinded by this action.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.08 Appointment of City Secretary
The Council shall appoint a City Secretary who shall report to the Council and act as the Secretary to the Council
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. The City Secretary shall be entitled to a seat at the Council
table at all official meetings. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.09 Duties of the City Secretary
The duties and powers of the City Secretary shall be as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/435
(1) Record the minutes of all official meetings of the Council; provided, however, only the captions of
duly enacted ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded in the minutes.
(2) Be the custodian of all municipal records of the Council.
(3) Recommend to the Council rules and regulations to be adopted by ordinances to protect the
safety and security of the municipal records.
(4) Hold and maintain the City Seal and affix to all instruments requiring such seal.
(5) Inquire into or investigate the genuineness of any signature on and the factual sufficiency of any
initiative, referendum or recall petition filed with the City Secretary in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter, and for that purpose the City Secretary shall have the power to administer oaths,
subpoena witnesses, [and] compel the production of books, papers, records, and other evidence.
(6) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Council or required by law.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
4.10 Compensation of City Secretary
The Council shall set the compensation of the City Secretary. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER V - MUNICIPAL COURT*
5.01 Purpose of the Municipal Court
There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a Municipal Court for the trial of misdemeanor
offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the State of
Texas relative to Municipal Courts. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
5.02 Judge of the Court
The “Judge of the Municipal Court,” shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Council for a
term concurrent with the Mayor. The Judge shall be a resident of this State, and a citizen of the United States. The
Council shall fix the compensation for the Judge and such compensation shall never be based on fines assessed
or collected. Removal of the Judge shall be at the discretion of the Council, by vote of the majority of the Council.
The Judge may request a public hearing prior to his or her removal. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004 et seq.; term of municipal court judge,
V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.005.
5.03 Clerk of the Court
There shall be a Clerk of said court appointed by the City Manager for a term concurrent with the Judge of the
Municipal Court. The Clerk of the court and such deputies as the Clerk may appoint, shall have the power to
administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, keep minutes of the proceeding[s] of the court, affix the seal of
said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary as performed by clerks and
deputies of courts. The Council may require the Court Clerk, before entering upon the duties of the office, to
execute a good and sufficient surety company bond, in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the
City and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The premium of such bond is to be paid
by the City. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
5.04 Absence of Judge
The City Manager with the approval of the Council may appoint one or more alternate Judge(s) who shall have the
same qualifications as the Judge of the Municipal Court and who shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the
Council. In case of the temporary disability or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, an alternate Judge
shall have authority to act as Judge of said court. The Council shall by appointment fill a vacancy in the office of
the Judge for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
5.05 Fines
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/435
All monies received as court imposed fines or penalties shall be paid into the general fund of the City treasury,
unless otherwise required by State law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER VI - CITY ATTORNEY*
6.01 City Attorney
(a) The Council shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, licensed and practicing attorney in the State of Texas,
to be an attorney for the City, hereinafter referred to as the “City Attorney.” The City Attorney shall serve at the
discretion of the Council and shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. The City Attorney
shall be the adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the City, and shall represent the City
in all litigation and legal proceedings; provided, that the Council may retain special counsel at any time they deem
same appropriate and necessary. The City Attorney shall review and concur or dissent upon all documents,
contracts, and legal instruments in which the City may have an interest. The City Attorney shall perform other
duties prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or as directed by the Council.
(b) The Council may contract with an attorney or with a firm of attorneys who may designate one (1) member of
said firm, with Council approval, to serve as City Attorney.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
6.02 City Prosecutor
All cases in the Municipal Court shall be prosecuted by the City Attorney, or such designated Prosecutor as the
Council may authorize. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Municipal prosecutions by city attorney or deputy city attorney, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.201.
CHAPTER VII - ELECTIONS†
7.01 City Elections
The regular City Election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, or other date permitted by State law,
at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices, the terms of which expire that year. The Council shall fix
the hours and place for holding elections. Notice of the election shall be published according to State law. In the
ordinance or resolution of the Council calling any election, at which more than one (1) Council member is to be
elected, the Council shall, in calling the election, provide for a separate place on the ballot for each place to be
filled at such election, designating such places as Place No. One, Place No. Two, etc.; and in case an unexpired
term is to be filled at such election, the place for the unexpired term shall be so designated. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 41; notice of elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 4.
7.02 Special Elections
The Council, by ordinance or resolution, may call special elections as are authorized by the State law, this Charter,
or for any other reason the Council deems necessary, fix the time and place of holding same, and provide all
means for holding special elections in accordance with State law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7.03 Regulation of Elections
All general and special elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the
holding of municipal elections and in accordance with this Charter and ordinances or resolutions adopted by the
Council for the conduct of elections. The Council shall appoint the election judges and shall provide for the
compensation of all election officials in the City elections and for all other expenses in holding the elections.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7.04 Exception of Election Code
In the event there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this Charter and the Texas Election Code or an
omission of any elements or provisions necessary for the conduct of an election, then those provisions of the
Texas Election Code then existing shall prevail. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7.05 Filing for Office/Procedures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/435
(a) Each candidate for an elective office shall meet the qualifications set forth in Section 2.03.
(b) Any person so qualified who desires to become a candidate for election shall file an application with the City
Secretary, in accordance with the Texas Election Code. Such an application shall be in compliance with the Texas
Election Code.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence
requirements for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003; candidate's application for home-rule city office,
V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 143.005.
7.06 Holding Other Office
(a) No person elected to the Council shall, during the term for which the person is elected to the Council, hold or
be appointed to any compensated office, position, or employment in the service of the City. This Section shall not
prohibit a Council member from serving on the board of an economic development corporation, crime control and
prevention district, or other instrumentality of the City.
(b) If any appointive officer of the City shall become a candidate for election to any public office, the officer shall,
immediately upon becoming a candidate, forfeit the office held with the City.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7.07 Official Ballots
(a) Candidate Names on Ballots. The names of all candidates who have filed for office shall be printed on the
official ballots without party designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for each office or
position shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Secretary, or as
otherwise required by State law.
(b) Absentee Balloting. Voting shall be governed by the Texas Election Code.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
7.08 Canvassing and Election Results
Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the City Secretary with a
copy of the returns being sent to the Mayor. The Council shall canvass the returns, investigate the qualifications of
the candidates and declare the official results of the election in accordance with the Texas Election Code. The
results of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council. The qualified person receiving
the most votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared elected by said Council. The decision of the Council,
as to qualifications of candidates, shall be conclusive and final for all purposes. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted
2/16/16)
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
7.09 Election By Plurality/Run-Off Elections
The candidate receiving the most votes cast for an office shall be elected. In the event of a tie vote, the Council
shall immediately upon declaring the official results of the election, order a run-off election for each office to which
no one was elected. Such run-off election shall be held in accordance with State law. In such run-off election the
two (2) candidates who received the tie vote shall be voted on again by the qualified voters, and the candidate who
receives the majority of the votes for each such office in the run-off election shall be elected to such office.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Election by plurality, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.001 et seq.; runoff election, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, sec. 2.021 et seq.
7.10 Notification of City Officers
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/435
The City Secretary, with the concurrence of the Council, shall promptly notify all persons elected to office. A
candidate who is elected in a regular, special or run-off City election shall, after taking the oath of office as
prescribed herein, take office, and enter upon his or her duties at the next Council meeting after the date of the
election. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7.11 Oath of Office
Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall take the oaths of office prescribed by the Texas
Constitution prior to assuming office. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
CHAPTER VIII - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
8.01 Initiative, Referendum and Recall
(a) The Power of Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the
Council, and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or
reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any
ordinance relating to zoning, appropriation of money, levy of taxes, issuance of bonds and notes, borrowing of
money, salaries or duties of City officers or employees, or matters related to administration of municipal
employees, annexation, or municipal boundary adjustments, or in any instance where a court of proper jurisdiction
determines that the initiated ordinance has been removed from the field of initiative. Such initiative power may be
used to enact a new ordinance, or to repeal or to amend sections of any existing ordinances.
(b) The Power of Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by
the Council of any adopted ordinance, and if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve
or reject it at a City election provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any
ordinance relating to zoning, appropriation of money, levy of taxes, issuance of bonds and notes, borrowing of
money, salaries or duties of City officers or employees, or matters related to administration of municipal
employees, annexation, or municipal boundary adjustments, or in any instance where a court of proper jurisdiction
determines that the referred ordinance has been removed from the field of referendum.
(c) The Power of Recall. Any member of the City Council may be removed from office by a recall election held
by the qualified voters of the City.
(d) As used herein, a qualified voter is a person who possesses voter qualifications established by the Election
Code, and is a registered voter as defined by the Election Code.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.02 Commencement of Proceedings for Initiative and Referendum; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit
(a) Any ten (10) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City
Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all
notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered. The Petitioners' Committee shall designate one contact person for
communications with the City and to receive all notices.
(b) Promptly after the affidavit of the Petitioners' Committee is filed, the City Secretary shall verify that the
applicants are qualified voters, and if they are, shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners'
Committee.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.03 Petitions for Initiative and Referendum
(a) Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City
equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the total number of current qualified voters registered to vote on
the date the affidavit of the Petitioners' Committee is filed with the City Secretary.
(b) Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one
instrument for filing. The form and content of a petition shall meet the requirements set forth in the Election Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/435
Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed
or sought to be reconsidered.
(c) Time for Filing Petitions. Initiative and Referendum petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days after
issuance of the appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners' Committee; additional time as specified in [Section]
8.04 shall be allowed for amending petitions. All petitions shall be filed with the City Secretary.
(d) Withdrawal of Signatures. No signature shall be withdrawn from any petition after such petition has been
filed with the City Secretary.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.04 Procedure After Filing Petition for Initiative or Referendum
(a) Review by City Secretary. Upon the filing of a petition, the City Secretary shall review the petition to
determine the existence of the requisite number of signatures of qualified voters and whether the form of the
petition complies with the provisions of this Charter. The City Secretary shall also review the petition to determine
the genuineness of the signatures. The Council may provide by ordinance the punishment and penalties for
contempt for failure or refusal to obey any subpoena, or request for production of evidence issued by the City
Secretary or City Attorney.
(b) Certificate of City Secretary. Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete
a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall
promptly send a copy of the certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail.
(c) Amendment by Petitioner. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures or
due to inadequate form or content may be amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of intention to
amend it with the City Secretary within five (5) days after receiving the copy of this certificate and files a
supplementary petition with additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such
supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of [Section] 8.03, and within five (5)
days after it is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended
and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail as in the case of an
original petition.
(d) Submission to City Council. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended
petition is certified insufficient and the Petitioners' Committee does not elect to amend as provided in subsection
(c) within the time required, the City Secretary shall promptly present this certificate to the Council and the
certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.05 Action on Initiative or Referendum Petitions
(a) Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the
Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances
or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance
without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30)
days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance
to the voters of the City.
(b) Submission to Voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held on the next
election date authorized by the Texas Election Code that allows sufficient time for compliance with the
requirements of the Texas Election Code regarding deadlines to call elections. Copies of the proposed or referred
ordinance shall be made available at the polls and shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the
City and on the City's website no later than fifteen (15) days before the date of the election.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.06 Results of Election for Initiative and/or Referendum
(a) Initiative. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall
be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same
manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same
election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/435
(b) Referendum. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a referred ordinance vote in favor of repealing it, it
shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results.
(c) The Council may reconsider any ordinance adopted or repealed by initiative or referendum after the
expiration of twelve (12) months.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.07 Limitation on Initiative and Referendum
The same initiative or referendum petition shall be prohibited to be filed within one (1) year of the City Secretary's
certification of the previous petition. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.08 Commencement of Recall Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit
Any ten (10) qualified voters of the City may commence recall proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an
affidavit stating they will constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and
filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the
committee are to be sent, and setting out the name of the Councilmember to be removed and a clear and concise
statement of the grounds for his or her removal. As used herein for purposes of recall, “Councilmember” shall
include the office of Mayor. The Petitioners' Committee shall designate one contact person for communications
with the City and to receive all notices. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.09 Recall Petitions
(a) Number of Signatures. Recall petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at
least fifteen (15) percent of the total number of current qualified voters registered to vote on the date the affidavit of
the Petitioners' Committee is filed with the City Secretary.
(b) Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one
instrument for filing. The form and content of a petition shall meet the requirements set forth in the Election Code.
Recall petitions shall contain the name of the Councilmember whose removal is sought, and a clear and concise
statement of the grounds for removal. There shall be a separate petition for each Councilmember whose removal
is sought.
(c) Time for Filing Petitions. Recall petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days after issuance of the appropriate
petition blanks to the Petitioners' Committee; additional time as specified in Section 8.10 shall be allowed for
amending petitions. All petitions shall be filed with the City Secretary.
(d) Withdrawal of Signatures. No signature shall be withdrawn from any petition after such petition has been
filed with the City Secretary.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.10 Procedure After Filing Petition for Recall
(a) Review by City Secretary. Upon the filing of a petition, the City Secretary shall review the petition to
determine the existence of the requisite number of signatures of qualified voters and whether the form of the
petition complies with the provisions of this Charter. The City Secretary shall also review the petition to determine
the genuineness of the signatures. The City Attorney shall review the petition for legal sufficiency. The Council may
provide by ordinance the punishment and penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any subpoena, or
request for production of evidence issued by the City Secretary or City Attorney.
(b) Certification of City Secretary. Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete
a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall
promptly send a copy of the certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail.
(c) Amendment by Petitioner. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures or
due to inadequate form or content may be amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of intention to
amend it with the City Secretary within five (5) days after receiving the copy of this certificate and files a
supplementary petition with additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such
supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of [Section] 8.09, and within five (5)
days after it is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/435
and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail as in the case of an
original petition.
(d) Submission to City Council. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended
petition is certified insufficient and the Petitioners' Committee does not elect to amend as provided in subsection
(c) within the time required, the City Secretary shall promptly present this certificate to the Council and the
certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. The City Secretary immediately
shall notify the Councilmember whose removal is sought and provide him or her with a copy of the petition.
(e) Action on Recall Petition. In the event the petition is certified sufficient, and if the Councilmember whose
removal is sought does not resign within seven (7) days after the certified petition is presented to the Council, the
City Council, at its next regular meeting or at a specially called meeting, shall order a recall election to be held on
the first uniform election date occurring that allows sufficient time for compliance with the requirements of the
Texas Election Code regarding deadlines to call elections.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.11 Public Hearing
The Councilmember whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been
presented to the Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit the Councilmember to present facts
pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such public hearing to
be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public
hearing. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.12 Recall Ballot
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) With respect to each Councilmember whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted:
“Shall (Name of person) be removed from the office of (Name of office) by recall?”
(2) Immediately to the left of each such question there shall be printed the following words, one
above the other, in the order indicated:
“YES”
“NO”
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.13 Results of Recall Election
If the majority of the votes cast at the election be for the removal of the Councilmember named on the ballot, the
Council shall immediately declare his or her office forfeited and vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in
accordance with provision 2.07 of this Charter for the filling of vacancies. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall
election shall be against removal of the Councilmember named on the ballot, he or she shall continue in office.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.14 Limitation on Recall
No recall petition shall be filed against a Councilmember within six (6) months after the Councilmember takes
office, or within one year after a failed recall election. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
8.15 Failure of City Council to Call an Election
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Council shall fail or refuse to receive
the initiative, referendum or recall petition, or order such initiative, referendum or recall election, or discharge other
duties imposed upon said Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such initiative, referendum or
recall, then the County Judge of Wise County, Texas, shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be
discharged by the City Secretary or by the Council. In addition, any qualified voter in the City may seek judicial
relief in the district court of Wise County, Texas, to have any of the provisions of this Charter pertaining to initiative,
referendum or recall carried out by the proper official. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/435
CHAPTER IX - FINANCE*
A. BUDGET†
9.01 Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end the last day of September of each
calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the Budget and Accounting year. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted
2/16/16)
State law references–Power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year,
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
9.02 Annual Budget
Operating Budget. The operating budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City Funds and activities
and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the
Council may require. The budget message shall explain the budget in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs
for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City, and shall include such other
materials, as the City Manager deems necessary. The budget message shall include a forecast of a five-year
estimate of revenues and expenditures and an explanation of its effect on taxation. The source or basis of the
estimates shall be part of the forecast.
The budget shall contain the following:
(1) Comparative figures for the actual and estimated tax rate, revenues, and other income and
expenditures to compare the current and prior fiscal year;
(2) The proposed expenditures of each office, department, or function;
(3) A schedule showing the debt service requirement due on indebtedness and on any proposed
debt;
(4) Total proposed expenditures not to exceed the sum of the income and the balance of available
funds; and
(5) Such other information as may be required by State law, deemed appropriate by the City
Manager.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Annual budget required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.002; itemized budget and
contents, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.003.
9.03 Capital Facilities and Property Budget
The City Manager shall propose annually a five (5) year Capital Facilities and Property budget, which may be
revised and extended each year to indicate capital improvements pending or in process of construction or
acquisition, and which shall provide the following items:
(1) A summary of proposed programs;
(2) A list of all capital facilities and property improvements which are proposed to be undertaken
during the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity
for such improvements;
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such
improvement with the estimated effect on the tax levy and;
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or
acquired over the five (5) year period.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/435
9.04 Submission
The City Manager shall submit to the Council a proposed budget and accompanying message on or before the first
day of August of each year. The Council shall review the proposed budget and revise it as deemed appropriate
prior to general circulation for public hearing. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.05 Public Notice and Hearing
The Council shall post notice in the City Hall and on the City's website, and publish notice in the official newspaper
as required by State law prior to any required public hearing on the budget. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Proposed budget filed with municipal clerk and public inspection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 102.005; public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.006; special notice by
publication for budget hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.0065.
9.06 Amendment before Adoption
The Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment at a regular or special meeting. In amending the
budget, it may add or increase any programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts,
except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment
to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income
plus funds available from prior years. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.07 Adoption
The Council, by majority vote, shall adopt the budget by ordinance not later than the 30th day of September.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amount specified therein as expenditures from the
funds indicated, and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted
2/16/16)
State law reference–Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.007.
9.08 Defect Shall Not Invalidate Tax Levy
Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements
shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.09 Failure to Adopt a Budget
If the Council fails to adopt the budget by the beginning of the fiscal year, the amounts appropriated for the prior
fiscal year just completed shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis with all
items in it pro-rated accordingly until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.10 Public Records
Copies of the approved operation budget, capital facilities and property budget and supporting papers shall be filed
with the City Secretary and shall be public records available to the public for inspection upon request. (Ordinance
2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.11 Specified Reserve Fund
Specified reserve funds may be created for specific purposes, and may be used only for such purposes.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
B. AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION
9.12 Supplemental Appropriations
If during the fiscal year the City Manager certifies that there are revenues available for appropriation in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the Council may make supplemental appropriations to fund the appropriations as
desired or carry the excess into the next fiscal year. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.13 Emergency Appropriations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/435
To meet a public emergency created by a natural disaster or man-made calamity affecting life, health, property, or
the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations, and may authorize the issuance of emergency
debt or notes. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.14 Reduction of Appropriations
If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the City Manager shall report to the Council without delay, indicating
the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial actions taken by the City Manager and the City Manager's
recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems
necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose the Council may by ordinance reduce one or
more appropriations. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.15 Transfer of Appropriations
At any time during the fiscal year the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation
balance among programs within a department, division or office and transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another, within the same fund. If the City Manager
transfers from one department, office or agency to another, then the City Manager shall provide a written
accounting of all transfers to the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
9.16 Limitations
No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any
amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.17 Effective Date
The supplemental and emergency appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately
upon adoption of the ordinance or budget amendments. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
C. BORROWING*
9.18 Authority to Incur Indebtedness
The Council shall have the power to incur, create, refund and refinance indebtedness and borrow money for public
purposes; to issue special or general obligation bonds, certificates of obligation, industrial bonds, revenue bonds,
funding and refunding bonds, time warrants and any other evidences of indebtedness permitted by law, and to
secure and pay the same in the manner and in accordance with the procedures provided and required by State
law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.19 Bonds Incontestable
All bonds of the City having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall
thereafter be incontestable and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued
shall and after said exchange, be incontestable. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.20 Borrowing in Anticipation of Property Tax
In any budget year, the Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the
collection of the property tax for the same year whether levied or to be levied. Notes may be issued for periods not
exceeding one (1) year and must be retired by the end of the budget year in which issued. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
9.21 Use of Bond Funds
Any and all bond funds approved by a vote of the citizens of Bridgeport will be expended only for the purposes
stated in the bond issue. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
D. ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/435
9.22 Administration of Budget
No payment shall be made or obligation incurred except those specifically allowed for in the budget. Any
authorization of payment or incurring of any such obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter will be void
and any payment so made will be illegal. Such action may be the cause, at the discretion of the City Manager, or
the Council in reference to the City Manager, for the removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made
such payment or incurred such obligation. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making
or authorizing of payment, or the making of contracts for, payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that
such action is made or approved by an ordinance. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
9.23 Financial Reports
The City Manager shall submit to the Council a report of the financial condition of the City budget items for the
fiscal year to date, periodically as directed by the Council, but in no event less than quarterly. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
9.24 Independent Audit
At the close of each fiscal year, and at such times as it may be deemed necessary, the Council shall cause an
independent audit to be made of all accounts of the City by a Certified Public Accountant. The Certified Public
Accountant shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its
officers. Upon completion of the audit, the results thereof in a summary form shall be presented to the Council. A
copy of the Audit shall be made available to the public for inspection upon request. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted
2/16/16)
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
CHAPTER X - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES*
10.01 Inalienability of Control of Public Property
The sole right of control, easement, use, ownership of and title to the public streets, sidewalks, highways, bridges,
alleys, public places, and other real property of the City is hereby declared to be inalienable, except by ordinance
adopted by a majority of the City Council. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.02 Powers of the City
The City shall have the power to buy, sell, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public services and
utilities within and without the City limits, and to distribute and sell such utility services, including but not limited to
water, gas, electric, telephone, cable, waste management, recycling, and transportation services. The City shall
have such regulatory powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.03 Power to Grant Franchise
The Council shall have the power by ordinance, after public hearing, to grant, renew, and extend all franchises for
all utilities of every character operating within the City and, to amend the same, provided, however, that no
franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term, and that no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than
twenty (20) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension. Council action on all ordinances granting,
renewing, extending or amending a utility franchise shall comply with the applicable provisions set forth in Section
3.11 of this Charter. Notice of the public hearing relating to a franchise shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City and posted on the City's website at least ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing. All required publication costs shall be paid by the utility. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.04 Exclusiveness of Franchises
No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant
shall be exclusive. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.05 Transfer of Franchise
No utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance following
a public hearing. The term “transferable” as used herein, shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/435
franchise holder from pledging said franchise as security for a valid debt or mortgage. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
10.06 Right of Franchise
All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of utility franchises shall be subject to the following rights of the
City, whether or not specifically stated in the franchise ordinance:
(1) To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within
the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised
only after due notice and hearing.
(2) To require an adequate extension of plant and service as is necessary to provide adequate
service to the public, and maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of
efficiency.
(3) To require at any time compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of
Texas for use of public streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys and public places.
(4) To require the franchisee to restore at the franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a
condition equally as good as or better than before disturbed by construction, repair or removal.
(5) To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable time to the City, without cost to the City,
a general map, with updates outlining the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities
of such franchisee in, over, and under ground of property in the City and to provide detailed information
on request.
(6) To impose other reasonable regulations, requirements, and conditions as may be deemed
necessary to promote the health, safety, welfare, or accommodation of the public and to insure safe,
efficient and continuous service to the public.
(7) To require the franchisee to give notice to any subscriber to its services prior to permanent or
temporary discontinuance of such service by the franchisee, except in cases of emergency, and to
require that no officer, agent, servant or employee of the franchisee nor any vehicles under their control
shall make use of, go upon or cross any private property without first obtaining the permission of the
owner or occupant, except in cases of emergency, and to provide a penalty for the violation of such
requirements.
(8) To require every franchisee to indemnify and hold harmless the City against any liability, claims or
damages (including attorney's fees and expenses) for injury to persons, including death, or damages to
any property, arising out of any intentional or negligent act or omission of the franchisee, or any of its
officers, agents, or employees, in connection with the franchisee's construction, maintenance and
operation of the franchisee's facilities in the City.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.07 Regulation of Rates
The Council shall have full power after due notice and public hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges
and fares of all public utility franchise holders operating in the City as authorized by state and federal law.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.08 Records and Accounts; Annual Reports
(a) The Council shall require all franchise holders and public service companies operating within the City to file a
sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of the said business for the current year, how much thereof
was expended for betterments or improvements, the charges for services rendered to the public, and any other
facts or information that the Council may deem pertinent for its use. Said reports to be filed with the City Secretary.
Such reports shall be reviewed annually by the Council to determine the propriety of the rates being charged.
(b) Any franchise holder or public service company who shall for a thirty (30) day period willfully refuse or fail to
report in the manner provided by this Charter, or shall file any report, knowing that the same does not truly report
the facts about the matters mentioned therein, shall be subject to such penalties as may be prescribed by the
Council by ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/435
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.09 Municipal Owned Utilities
The Council shall have the right to:
(1) Set rates of city-owned public services; and
(2) Require any city-owned public services to keep accounts of financial operations. Accounts must
show actual cost of each service to the City, including costs of extensions and improvements and
source of funds extended for these purposes. Costs and revenues of services furnished to other cities
or government agencies must be included.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.10 Franchise Records
The City shall compile and maintain a public record of utility franchises. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.11 Extensions
All extensions of service of utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the utility,
shall operate as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and
in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original
grant and shall be terminable as provided in this Chapter. In case of extension of a utility operated under a
franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the
original grant. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
10.12 Franchises Granted Before Ratification of this Charter
All franchises granted before ratification of the Charter are recognized as contracts between the City and the
grantee, shall continue in full force and effect, and the contractual rights contained in any such franchise shall not
be impaired by the provisions of the Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER XI - TAXATION*
11.01 Power to Tax
The Council shall have the power to levy, assess and collect taxes on property within the territory of the City for
any municipal purpose. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Property taxes authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.001.
11.02 Tax Rate
The tax rate shall be calculated, publicized and adopted in accordance with State law. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
11.03 Tax Liens
(a) The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or encumbrance upon the property as of
January 1st of each year (or on a date otherwise established by State law), upon which the tax is due, which lien,
charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same,
and the lien, charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the State courts jurisdiction to enforce and
foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this State or person
whose residence is unknown, but also as against the unknown heirs of any person who owns the property upon
which the tax is due and also as against non-residents. All taxes upon real estate shall be a lien and a charge
upon the property upon which the taxes are due, and such lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction.
Such lien shall be, prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of
any kind, can ever defeat such lien.
(b) In addition to the lien herein provided, the owner of real and personal property subject to taxation by the City
shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The City shall have the power to sue for and
recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/435
judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the City
Assessment Rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the City shall have the right to plead a good description
of the property intended to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien
and/or personal judgment against the owner for such taxes.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Tax liens and personal liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32.
11.04 Other Rules and Regulations
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance
such rules, regulations and mode of procedure to enforce and facilitate the collection by and payment to the Tax
Assessor and Collector of all taxes due the City as it may deem expedient, and may provide such penalty and
interest as prescribed by State law for the failure to pay such taxes. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER XII - GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
12.01 Effect of Charter on Existing Law
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the City on the effective date of this Charter, and not in
conflict with this Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed. All taxes, assessments, liens,
encumbrances and demands, of or against the City, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or
establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established
either under the law in force at the time of beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this
Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.02 Continuation of Present Offices
All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the
performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of
such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office,
department or agency of the City by the laws of the State shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished
by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency
designated by the Council unless otherwise provided herein. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.03 Public Meetings
All meetings of the Council and all boards and commissions appointed by the Council shall be governed by the
provisions of the Open Meetings Act, and any amendments thereto. This section shall not be construed to require
any action or measure beyond that required by State law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
12.04 Public Records
Access to the records of every office, department or agency of the City shall be subject to public inspection as
provided by the Public Information Act, and any amendments thereto. This section shall not be construed to
require any action or measure beyond that required by State law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 201.009; public information, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, ch. 552.
12.05 Official Newspaper
The Council may designate by resolution one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City as the official
newspaper of the City, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matters which are
required to be published by this Charter, the ordinances of the City or the Constitution or laws of the State of
Texas. In addition to publication in the official newspaper, such notices shall be posted on the City's website during
the period of publication in the newspaper. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.06 Notice of Injury or Damage
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/435
Before the City shall be liable for any claim for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for
damages to property, the complainant or his authorized representative shall notify the City Secretary. The
notification shall be in writing and shall state specifically how, when and where the death, injury or damage
occurred; the amount of loss claimed; and the identity of any witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the
claim. The person giving notice under this section shall give the addresses of every place that he has resided
during the six (6) month period prior to the damage or injury and subscribe his name to the notice under oath that
the statements and facts contained in said notice are true and correct. The notification shall be filed within six (6)
months of the date of injury or damage or in the case of death, within six (6) months of the date of death.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law references–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101; notice procedures,
V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.101.
12.07 Bond or Security Not Required
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City is a party, for any bond, including
supersedeas bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said City in any of the
State courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings, the same shall be conducted in the same
manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted
2/16/16)
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
12.08 Judicial Notice
This Charter shall be deemed a public act and shall have the force and effect of a general law; may be read in
evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places without further
proof. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.09 Continuance of Contracts
All contracts entered into by the City or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full
force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or ordinances
existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of
such existing laws or ordinances. All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures and all other rights, claims, and demands,
which have accrued under the laws, heretofore in force governing the City shall belong to and be vested in and
shall be prosecuted by and for the use and benefit of the City, and shall not in any way be diminished, affected or
prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect of this Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.10 Continuance of Present Governing Body
All members of the Council, including the Mayor, holding office at the time of passage of this Charter shall continue
to hold their respective place and office until their respective term of office for which they were elected expires, in
accordance with Chapter 2 of this Charter. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.11 Indemnification of Officers
The Council shall by appropriate ordinance, provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers and
employees of the City, including members of the Council, or any board, commission, or committee, including
volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorneys' fees, to the extent allowed by
law, arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or
omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of
his office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the City, or in any other case where the
City is directed or authorized by law to do so, provided however, that such indemnification will not be provided for
any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance [or] arising out of any
conduct determined by final judgment to be act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or
defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member or volunteer, or for the gross
negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission of such officer, employee, member or
volunteer. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.12 Property Not Subject to Execution
No property owned or held by the City shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/435
State law reference–Authority relating to property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.076.
12.13 Garnishment
No funds of the City shall be subject to garnishment and the City shall never be required to answer in any
garnishment proceedings. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 101.023.
12.14 Persons Serving on Boards
Persons serving on any board at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue to serve on the board to
which they were appointed until their terms shall have expired or until their successors shall have qualified.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.15 Assignment of Wages
The City shall never be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee of said City, whether
earned or unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the City such assignment shall be
absolutely void. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.16 When General Law Applicable
The general laws of the State of Texas and ordinances of the Council shall furnish the authority for the power and
exercise thereof and control all matters to the extent not specifically and completely covered by this Charter.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.17 Severability Clause
If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so
held invalid may appear except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected
in meaning and effect with the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply. (Ordinance 2016-05
adopted 2/16/16)
12.18 Meaning of Words
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends thereof.
Unless some other meaning is manifest the word “CITY” shall be construed to mean the “CITY OF
BRIDGEPORT”, the words in the present tense include future tense, except when a more restricted meaning is
manifest, and singular may mean plural. Throughout this Charter, words used in expressing masculine gender
shall be construed to include the feminine. The word “CITY SECRETARY” refers to the person performing the
duties of City Secretary. The word “COUNCIL” shall be construed to mean the “CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
BRIDGEPORT.” All references to State law or the laws of the State of Texas, however expressed in this Charter,
shall mean “as presently enacted or hereafter amended.” (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
12.19 Amendment of Charter
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by
State law, as now or hereafter enacted or amended. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
12.20 Submission of Charter to Voters
The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter concludes that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so
as to permit a vote of “yes” or “no” on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to
enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the
Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the
qualified voters of the City at an election to be held for that purpose on Saturday, May 7, 2016. Not less than thirty
days prior to such election, the Council shall cause the City Secretary to mail a copy of this Charter to each
qualified voter of the City as appears from the latest certified list of registered voters. If a majority of the qualified
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/435
voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall immediately become the
governing law of the City, until amended or repealed. (Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 2/16/16)
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.101; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Bridgeport, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting 2001
Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.102; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles,
divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.103; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city administrator,”
“city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the
city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department,
respectively, of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before
any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of the
City of Bridgeport, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/435
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Wise, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
State law reference–“Preceding” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/435
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys,
avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.104; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of any
such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001
Code, sec. 1.105; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.106;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article
and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such
ordinances. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.107; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Charter reference–Form of ordinances, sec. 3.10.
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/435
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded
from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of
the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code
and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,”
“this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.108; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or
public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) A person convicted of an offense under title 7, subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act Regulating
Traffic on Highways) for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus such other penalties and costs as may be provided
by such subtitle C.
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state,
and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated
in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws
of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/435
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.109; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C
misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Issuance of citations
In addition to certified peace officers, any city animal control officer, code enforcement officer or code compliance
officer, building inspector, or fire marshal or fire investigator/inspector may issue a citation for a violation of a city
ordinance or a code adopted pursuant to a city ordinance. The authority of the above officers and assistants, other
than peace officers, shall extend to the issuance of citations only for violations of an ordinance or a code that the
officer is charged with inspecting, overseeing, or enforcing. (Ordinance 03-07 adopted 3/18/03; 2001 Code, sec.
1.110)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Returned check processing fee
Any person who passes any check or draft for payment to the city for any sum, which is subsequently returned for
lack of funds or insufficient funds, or because there is no account on which the check was drawn or the account
has been closed, or because such check or draft was returned because of a stop payment order placed in bad
faith on the check or draft, shall pay to the city a processing fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 6/5/12; 2001 Code, art. 1.1800)
Sec. 1.02.002 Indemnification of city officers, employees and volunteers
(a) It is the purpose of this section to encourage public service to the city by indemnifying those who act in good
faith on the city's behalf against damages incurred as a result of that service to the extent permitted by law, and by
providing them with a legal defense to certain actions arising out of that service.
(b) The council shall provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers and employees of the city,
including members of the city council, or any board, commission, or committee, including volunteers, against any
loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorneys' fees, to the extent allowed by law, arising out of any
claim, suit, or judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or omission of such officer,
employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office, employment,
membership, or assigned voluntary position with the city, or in any other case where the city is directed or
authorized by law to do so; provided, however, that such indemnification will not be provided for any act arising out
of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance [or] arising out of any conduct determined
by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or defraud, or for any
personal or private business of such officer, employee, member or volunteer, or for gross negligence or official
misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission of such officer, employee, member or volunteer.
(Ordinance 06-01 adopted 2/7/06; 2001 Code, secs. 1.1301, 1.1302)
Secs. 1.02.003–1.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.041 Notice required
(a) The city shall never be liable for any such claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such
personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the
event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of
such death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days for good cause shown from the date the damage was received,
give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property
was at the time when the injury was received.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/435
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date it is
presented.
(7) In case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the
knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and
the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the
damage or any part thereof.
(b) No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein
shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for
redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
council refused.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1101)
Sec. 1.02.042 Filing of notice
All notices required by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following
location: 900 Thompson Street, Bridgeport, Texas 76426, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually
received in the office of the person named above. (Ordinance 2011-10 adopted 3/22/11; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1102)
Sec. 1.02.043 Waiver of notice requirements
(a) The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or
property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge
unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to
investigate and/or settle claims against the city.
(b) Notice requirements shall likewise be waived in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause or
civil rights violations.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1103)
Sec. 1.02.044 Notice to be sworn
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or
by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not
render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a
factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1104)
ARTICLE 1.03 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission†
Sec. 1.03.031 Created
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/435
This is hereby created a planning and zoning commission of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 15-1; 2001 Code, sec.
14.101)
Sec. 1.03.032 Membership; terms
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be residents of the city, three (3)
of whom shall initially be appointed for one-year (1) terms, and two (2) for two-year (2) terms, and their successors
shall be appointed for two-year (2) terms. Members shall serve until the first meeting after regular city council
elections or until their successors are duly elected and qualified. (1976 Code, sec. 15-2; 2001 Code, sec. 14.102)
Sec. 1.03.033 Election of officers; adoption of procedural rules
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its own membership and shall
adopt such procedural rules as it may deem necessary so long as such rules or regulations do not contravene the
ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. (1976 Code, sec. 15-3; 2001 Code, sec. 14.103)
Sec. 1.03.034 Power to make rules, regulations and bylaws
The planning and zoning commission shall also have the power to make rules, regulations, and bylaws for its own
government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and the same shall
be subject to approval by the council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(1) Regular and special meetings, open to the public;
(2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public;
(3) Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually; and
(4) The holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
(1976 Code, sec. 15-4; 2001 Code, sec. 14.104)
Sec. 1.03.035 Powers and duties generally
The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on any proposed
change to zoning ordinances or to a zoning district before the city council may act thereon. The commission shall
hold hearings and make recommendations on comprehensive plans prepared for the city and shall perform such
other duties as provided by general law for such planning and zoning commission [and] shall also exercise those
powers delegated to the planning and zoning commission by section 1.03.034 of this division. (1976 Code, sec.
15-5; 2001 Code, sec. 14.105)
Secs. 1.03.036–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Main Street Advisory Board
Sec. 1.03.061 Created; purpose
There is hereby created the city Main Street advisory board, hereinafter referred to as the “Main Street board.” The
board shall operate in the general public interest, serving the community as a whole. It shall serve no special
interests. The board is responsible to and shall act as an advisory body to the council and shall perform such
duties and exercise such additional powers as may be described by ordinances of the council. (Ordinance 07-10
adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1501)
Sec. 1.03.062 Membership; terms
(a) Number of members. The Main Street board is to be composed of eleven (11) members appointed by the
city council.
(b) Qualifications of members; terms. All board members shall be residents of the county, and shall be
appointed for three-year staggered terms ending on May 31st. Individuals appointed to places 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11
must also be either a resident of the city or own property abutting that portion of Halsell Street between 13th Street
and SH 114. The initial appointments to the board shall be as follows:
(1) Place 1, for a term expiring May 31, 2007.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/435
(2) Place 2, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(3) Place 3, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(4) Place 4, for a term expiring May 31, 2007.
(5) Place 5, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(6) Place 6, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(7) Place 7, for a term expiring May 31, 2007.
(8) Place 8, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(9) Place 9, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(10) Place 10, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(11) Place 11, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(c) Appointment and removal of members. The council shall make appointments to the Main Street board at its
first regular meeting after the May general election, or as soon thereafter as possible, with board members serving
until their successors are appointed. The council may remove a member at any time, with or without cause.
(d) Absence from meetings. Any board member who is absent from four or more meetings in a one-year period
without being excused shall be considered no longer active and the position vacant, and a new board member
shall be appointed to fill the vacancy.
(Ordinance 07-10 adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1502)
Sec. 1.03.063 Officers
At its first meeting, or as soon thereafter as possible, the board shall select from among its members a chair, vicechair
and secretary who shall hold office until May 31st. Subsequently, during the first meeting of June, and each
following June, the chair or vice-chair from the previous year shall preside over elections for chair, vice-chair and
secretary. The officers shall not serve as an officer for more than two consecutive terms. (Ordinance 07-10
adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1503)
Sec. 1.03.064 Meetings, quorum and voting
The board shall hold an official meeting at least monthly and may hold special meetings upon the request of the
chair, or the request of four (4) or more board members. A majority of the total members of the board constitutes a
quorum for meetings. Provided a quorum is present, an item must be approved by a simple majority of the board
members present at the meeting at which the item is posted for action and discussed. (Ordinance 07-10 adopted
3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1504)
Sec. 1.03.065 Bylaws
The board shall establish such bylaws for its governance and procedures as it may deem proper and necessary,
provided such bylaws are not in conflict herewith. In the event of such a conflict, the provisions of this division shall
be controlling. (Ordinance 07-10 adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1505)
Sec. 1.03.066 Powers and duties
The Main Street board shall be specifically responsible for, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Advise the city council and staff on policy matters, activities, and changes pertaining to city
downtown revitalization before being acted upon.
(2) Review plans and policies, either existing or being developed, that affect downtown revitalization
in the city, and advocate the stimulation of the general development of the downtown business district.
(3) Engage in such public outreach, education and advocacy, to the extent permitted by law, as the
board determines necessary or advisable in order to provide a forum for public discussion and decision7/
13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/435
making about downtown revitalization issues.
(4) Review and approve an annual report to the city council which shall summarize the board's
activities during the year and which shall identify the major issues facing the city's downtown
revitalization and the board's recommendations for addressing them in the coming year.
(5) The Main Street board shall encourage connections with other local, regional and national
organizations working for the benefit of historic preservation and economic revitalization.
(Ordinance 07-10 adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1506)
Sec. 1.03.067 Compensation
Members of the Main Street board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses
reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the Main Street board, when
authorized by the city council. (Ordinance 07-10 adopted 3/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1507)
Sec. 1.03.068 Departmental support
The city Main Street manager shall provide administrative support for the board. (Ordinance 07-10 adopted 3/6/07;
2001 Code, sec. 1.1508)
Secs. 1.03.069–1.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Stagecoach Committee
Sec. 1.03.091 Created; purpose
There is hereby created the stagecoach committee, hereinafter referred to as the “committee.” The purpose of the
committee is to manage the operation and use of the authentic reproduction Concord Stagecoach (the
“stagecoach”) obtained in March 2008, which is jointly owned by the city and the city chamber of commerce. The
committee shall operate in the general public interest serving the community as a whole. It shall serve no special
interests. The committee is responsible to and shall act as an advisory body to the council and the chamber of
commerce and shall perform such duties and exercise such additional powers as may be described by ordinances
of the council and the bylaws of the committee, which shall be approved by the council and the chamber of
commerce. (Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1701)
Sec. 1.03.092 Membership; terms
(a) Composition. The committee is to be composed of ten (10) members. The following city organizations or
committees shall appoint two (2) members each to the stagecoach committee:
(1) The city;
(2) The Bridgeport Chamber of Commerce;
(3) The Bridgeport Lions Club;
(4) The Bridgeport Historical Society; and
(5) The city Main Street advisory board.
(b) Appointment and removal of members; qualifications; terms. All committee members shall be residents of
the county, and shall be appointed annually to a one-year term by the organization they represent. There shall be
no limit on the number of terms any one person can serve. Each organization responsible for making an
appointment to the committee may remove a member it appointed at any time, with or without cause.
(Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1702)
Sec. 1.03.093 Officers; duties of city manager
(a) The city manager shall serve as the ongoing chairman of the committee, and shall be a nonvoting member of
the committee except to break a tie vote. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall perform all administrative
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/435
functions of the committee, including calling the meetings, preparing the meeting agendas and preparing meeting
minutes.
(b) At its first meeting each year, or as soon thereafter as possible, the committee shall select from among its
members a vice-chair and secretary. The secretary shall assist the city manager with the administrative functions
of the committee.
(Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1703; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.03.094 Meetings, quorum and voting
The committee shall hold an official meeting at least quarterly and may hold special meetings upon the request of
the chair, or upon the request of three (3) or more committee members. A majority of the total members of the
committee constitutes a quorum for meetings. Provided a quorum is present, an item must be approved by a
simple majority of the committee members present at the meeting at which the item is posted for action and
discussed. (Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1704)
Sec. 1.03.095 Bylaws; establishment of policies for use of stagecoach
The committee shall establish such bylaws for its governance, and such procedures, policies and rules relating to
the use of the stagecoach, as it may deem proper and necessary, all subject to the approval of the city council. In
the event of a conflict between such bylaws or rules and this division, the provisions of this division shall be
controlling. (Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1705)
Sec. 1.03.096 Powers and duties
The stagecoach committee shall be specifically responsible for, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The committee shall advise the city council and the chamber of commerce board on policy
matters, activities and uses of the stagecoach.
(2) The committee shall ensure that the stagecoach be utilized as an official symbol of the city and its
honored history, that it be used and displayed in a manner that demonstrates historic value and the
significant contributions made by the people of the city in order to acquire it, and that it continues to be
of value as an integral part of the city.
(3) The activities and business of the committee shall be reported quarterly to the city council and the
board of the chamber of commerce.
(4) The objective of having the stagecoach is to promote the city, to preserve the heritage of the city,
and to educate the public on the heritage of the city. Use of the stagecoach in any event or function
must meet these objectives.
(5) The stagecoach shall only be used in a manner that will preserve it for many generations to
come. Any activity, function or use of the stagecoach that will result in damage or long-term
depreciation to the stagecoach is strongly discouraged and should not be undertaken unless it is a onetime
event and is a good opportunity to meet the above objectives.
(6) The stagecoach shall only be used and displayed in a sober and dignified manner. There will be
no use of alcohol by anyone in contact with the stagecoach. There shall be no hold-ups or other nonhistorical
play associated with the stagecoach.
(7) The committee shall prepare and approve an annual budget, which shall include all expenses
expected for the upcoming year. The committee shall not budget more in expenses than what is
expected to be received in funding from the chamber of commerce or from fundraisers. The budget
shall be presented annually to the chamber of commerce board for approval.
(8) The committee shall maintain a separate checking account under the name of the chamber of
commerce from which all expenses will be paid and all fundraiser proceeds and other chamber of
commerce subsidies will be deposited.
(9) All costs incurred by the committee in operating, maintaining, displaying and promoting the
stagecoach shall be the burden of the committee via funding from the combination of fundraisers and
the chamber of commerce.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/435
(10) The stagecoach shall be stored in a structure provided by the city at the city's cost. The structure
shall be relatively dust-free and a dry environment to preserve the condition of the stagecoach.
(11) When the stagecoach is in use, a cover shall be kept on board for rain protection.
(Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1706)
Sec. 1.03.097 Compensation
Members of the committee shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses
reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the committee, when authorized by
the chamber of commerce board. (Ordinance 08-67 adopted 9/16/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1707)
ARTICLE 1.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.04.001 National Incident Management System adopted
The National Incident Management System (NIMS), dated March 1, 2004, is hereby adopted as the standard for
incident management by the city. (Ordinance 06-06 adopted 3/7/06; 2001 Code, sec. 1.851)
Secs. 1.04.002–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.04.031 Organization
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within
the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as
organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among
such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.801)
Sec. 1.04.032 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within
the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of
measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and
shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for
a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity
and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/435
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as
the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency
management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency
management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to
aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be
used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (Texas Gov't. Code chapter
418).
(Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.802)
Sec. 1.04.033 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities,
tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this division. As
provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of
emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all
departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in
a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to
this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code,
sec. 1.803)
Sec. 1.04.034 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge in the formation of an emergency management
council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect
the city. (Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.804)
Sec. 1.04.035 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.805)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/435
Sec. 1.04.036 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this division, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning
or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or
privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real
estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or
natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death
of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code,
sec. 1.806)
Sec. 1.04.037 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to
bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (Ordinance 91-3 adopted
5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.807)
Sec. 1.04.038 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule of regulation issued pursuant to this division, or to do any
act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means
of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as the simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this division.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180
days.
(Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/7/91; 2001 Code, sec. 1.808)
ARTICLE 1.05 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.05.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless
of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by city or any of
its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the
records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this
article or procedures authorized hereby and in no other manner. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code,
sec. 1.2001)
Sec. 1.05.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city
that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an
emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/435
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.05.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.05.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2002)
Sec. 1.05.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.05.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use
of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2003)
Sec. 1.05.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the
creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition,
consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Governments Records Act and accepted records management
practice. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2004)
Sec. 1.05.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and
librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2005)
Sec. 1.05.006 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the
city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those
records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments,
divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be
created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article
and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for
refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/435
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2006)
Sec. 1.05.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for
each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
city [records] is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules,
the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as
the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including the summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2007)
Sec. 1.05.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, if department heads are designated, they shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/435
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction,
or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2008)
Sec. 1.05.009 Designation of records liaison officers
If department heads are assigned, each shall be the records liaison officer for the department. If the records
management officer determines that, in the best interests of the records management program, more than one
records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of
records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers
shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full
access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement,
dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the
department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00;
2001 Code, sec. 1.2009)
Sec. 1.05.010 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, if records liaison officers are assigned, each shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2010)
Sec. 1.05.011 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare a records control schedule for the city. This schedule will include a department-by-department listing of all
records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules
shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of public city records as the records
management plan may require.
(b) The records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and
that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2011)
Sec. 1.05.012 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.05.006
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of
the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/435
the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer.
(Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2012)
Sec. 1.05.013 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2013)
Sec. 1.05.014 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all
microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The
records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including
policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of
local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also
establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a
microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review
by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with
commission rules. (Ordinance 00-15 adopted 7/25/00; 2001 Code, sec. 1.2014)
ARTICLE 1.06 LIBRARY
Sec. 1.06.001 Library department created
Pursuant to the law of the city, a department is hereby created within the framework of the governmental
organization of the city, which shall be known as the library department, and it shall function according to the laws
of the state, the laws of the city, and the provisions of this article. (1976 Code of Ordinances, sec. 1-71; 2001
Code, sec. 1.601)
Sec. 1.06.002 Gifts and donations
The city hereby accepts all gifts and donations of books and equipment heretofore made for the Bridgeport Public
Library, with grateful thanks to the donors both of books and time, and it is ordained that such books and
equipment, together with such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the books
and equipment of the public library. (1976 Code, sec. 1-72; 2001 Code, sec. 1.602)
Sec. 1.06.003 Library a function of the city; employees
The library shall be a function of the city, and all employees thereof shall be employees of the city, and shall be
subject to all administrative rules and regulations of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 1-73; 2001 Code, sec. 1.603)
Sec. 1.06.004 Library board
The library board shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever. Its finances shall be handled
in the same manner as any division of the city government. Members of the library board are not employees of the
city by reason of their appointment thereto, and the board is deemed an advisory board to the city. The board shall
consist of seven (7) members, two of whom will hold office one year from time of passage, two of whom will hold
office two years from time of passage, and three of whom will hold office three years from time of passage. All
subsequent appointments will be for terms of three years. (1976 Code, sec. 1-74; 2001 Code, sec. 1.604)
Sec. 1.06.005 Defacing or detaining library materials
Whoever willfully detains any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, manuscript, audiovisual material,
videocassette, game, microcomputer, or other property belonging to the public library, by writing, marking, tearing,
breaking, or otherwise mutilating, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1976 Code, sec. 1-75; 2001 Code, sec. 1.605)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/435
Sec. 1.06.006 Fees
The city council hereby establishes fees for overdue, lost or damaged library materials and for the rental of the
library meeting room as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 01-22 adopted
7/10/01; 2001 Code, sec. 1.606)
ARTICLE 1.07 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.07.001 Park pavilion rental
(a) The city council hereby establishes a rental rate as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of
this code for rental of the park pavilion.
(b) A deposit as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code shall be charged, with said
deposit being returned to the renter upon leaving the facilities in an appropriate condition, to include but not be
limited to all trash picked up, lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(Ordinance 99-13 adopted 9/21/99; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1001)
Sec. 1.07.002 Park hours; entering closed or restricted area
(a) All public parks within the corporate limits of the city shall be open to the public daily between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted by the director of parks and recreation. Signs shall be posted at
each public park with hours of operation, prohibiting entering or remaining when the park is closed.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any portion of a city park or recreation area which is designated
as restricted or closed, or to enter any public park during the hours of the day when such area is not open to the
public, or to use the public park facilities in a wasteful or damaging manner.
(c) Special permission may be granted by the director of parks and recreation for organized sports or special
events which last past closing time as may be deemed appropriate.
(Ordinance 08-32 adopted 5/6/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1002)
Secs. 1.07.003–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Board
Sec. 1.07.031 Creation; purpose
There is hereby created the parks and recreation board, hereinafter referred to as the “parks board.” Parks and
recreation is an increasingly important part of life of the community of Bridgeport. The board shall operate in the
general public interest serving the community as a whole. It shall serve no special interests. The board is
responsible to and shall act as an advisory body to the council and shall perform such duties and exercise such
additional powers as may be described by ordinances of the council. (Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001
Code, sec. 1.1031)
Sec. 1.07.032 Membership; terms
(a) Composition. The parks board is to be composed of seven (7) members. One (1) member shall be an
authorized representative of the Bridgeport School District. Five (5) of the members shall represent a broad
spectrum of citizens. One (1) member shall be a representative of the Bridgeport Youth Association.
(b) Qualifications of members; terms. All board members shall be residents of the county and shall be appointed
for two-year staggered terms ending on May 31. Individuals appointed to places 4, 5, 6, and 7 must be residents of
the city. The initial appointments to the board shall be as follows:
(1) Place 1, Bridgeport Independent School District representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(2) Place 2, Bridgeport Youth Association representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/435
(3) Place 3, citizen representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(4) Place 4, citizen representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(5) Place 5, citizen representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(6) Place 6, citizen representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2008.
(7) Place 7, citizen representative, for a term expiring May 31, 2009.
(c) Appointment and removal of members. The council shall make appointments to the parks board at its first
regular meeting after the May general election, or as soon thereafter as possible, with board members serving until
their successors are appointed. The council may remove a member at any time, with or without cause.
(d) Absence from meetings. Any board member who is absent from four or more meetings in a one-year period
without being excused shall be considered no longer active and the position vacant, and a new board member
shall be appointed to fill the vacancy.
(Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1032)
Sec. 1.07.033 Officers
At its first meeting, or as soon thereafter as possible, the board shall select from among its members a chair, vicechair
and secretary who shall hold office until May 31. Subsequently, during the first meeting of June, and each
following June, the chair or vice-chair from the previous year shall preside over elections for chair, vice-chair and
secretary. The officers shall not serve as an officer for more than two consecutive terms. (Ordinance 07-03
adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1033)
Sec. 1.07.034 Meetings, quorum and voting
The board shall hold an official meeting at least monthly and may hold special meetings upon request of the chair,
or the request of four (4) or more board members. A majority of the total members of the board constitutes a
quorum for meetings. Provided a quorum is present, an item must be approved by a simple majority of the board
members present at the meeting at which the item is posted for action and discussed. (Ordinance 07-03 adopted
2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1034)
Sec. 1.07.035 Bylaws
The board shall establish such bylaws for its governance and procedures as it may deem proper and necessary,
provided such bylaws are not in conflict herewith. In the event of such a conflict, the provisions of this division shall
be controlling. (Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1035)
Sec. 1.07.036 Powers and duties
The parks and recreation board shall be specifically responsible for, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The parks board shall ensure that parks and recreation continue to be of value as an integral part
of the city.
(2) The parks board in its first year will propose to the city council a set of guidelines and standards
by which it will review all future projects, staying consistent with all existing codes, guidelines and
policies.
(3) The parks board will seek to improve the communication and organization of the activities in the
city.
(4) The parks board shall promote parks and recreation in the city to enrich the lives of its citizens
through education and demonstration.
(5) The parks board may assist the city council and the planning and zoning commission in using
parks and recreation to enhance existing development in public parks and other public lands and in
public structures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/435
(6) The parks board shall encourage connections with other local, regional and national
organizations working for the benefit of parks and recreation.
(Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1036)
Sec. 1.07.037 Compensation
Members of the parks and recreation board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual
expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the parks and recreation
board, when authorized by the city council. (Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1037)
Sec. 1.07.038 Departmental support
The city manager shall assign a city staff member to provide administrative support for the parks and recreation
board and to take minutes of meetings. The parks board shall have no authority in the choice or assignment of
employees assigned to support the board. (Ordinance 07-03 adopted 2/6/07; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1038; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 1.07.039–1.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Youth Services Standards of Care Policy
Sec. 1.07.061 Purpose
The standards of care are intended to be minimum standards by which the city parks and recreation department
will operate the city's youth programs. The programs operated by the city are recreational in nature and are not
day care programs.
Sec. 1.07.062 General administration
(a) Organization.
(1) The governing body of all city youth programs is the city council.
(2) Implementation of the youth programs standards of care is the responsibility of the parks and
recreation department director and department employees.
(3) Youth programs to which these standards of care will apply are the summer kids camps, the afterschool
program, spring break camps, and other youth camps established by the city in the future.
(4) Each youth program site will have available for public and staff review a current copy of the
standards of care.
(5) Parents of participants will be provided a current copy of the standards of care during the
registration process.
(6) Criminal background checks will be conducted on prospective staff. No person with a conviction
or who is under indictment for, or is the subject of an official criminal complaint alleging violation of any
of the crimes listed in the state department of protective and regulatory service's day-care center
minimum standards and guidelines appendix II, as same may be amended, or a felony violation of the
Texas Controlled Substance Act, may be present while children are in attendance.
(b) Definitions.
City. The City of Bridgeport.
City council. The city council of the City of Bridgeport.
Department. The parks and recreation department of the city.
Director. The city parks and recreation department director or his or her designee.
Employee(s). A term used to describe people who have been hired to work for the city and have assigned
responsibility for managing, administering, or implementing some portion of the city's youth programs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/435
Parent(s). This term will be used to represent one or both parent(s), legal guardian(s), or adult(s) who have legal
custody and authority to enroll their child(ren)/teen(s) in city youth programs.
Participant. A youth whose parent(s) have completed all required registration procedures and determined to be
eligible for a city youth program.
Program manual. A notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, and organizational and programming
information relevant to the city program.
Recreation superintendent. The city parks and recreation department full-time programmer who has been
assigned administrative responsibility for a city youth program.
Youth programs or program. City youth programs consisting of the summer kids camps and after-school program.
(c) Inspections/monitoring/enforcement. A complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care will be
directed to the recreation superintendent. The recreation superintendent will be responsible to take the necessary
steps to resolve each problem. The recreation coordinator will record complaints regarding enforcement of the
standards of care and their resolution. The director will. address serious complaints regarding enforcement of the
standards of care and the complaint and resolution will be noted.
(d) Enrollment. Before a child can be enrolled, a parent must sign registration forms that contain the child's:
(1) Name, address and home telephone number;
(2) Name and address of parents and telephone number during program hours;
(3) The names and telephone numbers of people to whom the child can be released;
(4) A statement of the child's special problems or needs;
(5) Emergency medical authorization;
(6) Proof of residency when appropriate; and
(7) A liability waiver.
(e) Suspected abuse. Program employees will report suspected child abuse or neglect in accordance with the
Texas Family Code.
Sec. 1.07.063 Operations
(a) Staff-participant ratio. In a city youth program, the standard ratio of participants to leaders will not exceed 20
to 1. In the event a leader is unable to report to the program site, a replacement will be assigned.
(b) Discipline.
(1) Program employees will implement discipline and guidance in a consistent manner based on the
best interests of program participants.
(2) There must be no cruel or harsh punishment or treatment.
(3) Program employees may use brief, supervised separation from the group if necessary.
(4) As necessary, program employees will initiate discipline reports to the parent(s) of participants.
Parents will be asked to sign discipline reports to indicate they have been advised about specific
problems or incidents.
(5) A sufficient number and/or severe nature of discipline reports as detailed in the program manual
may result in participant being suspended from the program.
(6) In instances where there is a danger to participants or staff, offending participants will be removed
from the program site immediately.
(c) Programming.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/435
(1) Program employees will attempt to provide activities for each group according to the participants'
ages, interests, and abilities. The activities must be appropriate to participants' health, safety, and wellbeing.
The activities also must be flexible and promote the participants' emotional, social, and mental
growth.
(2) Program employees will attempt to provide that indoor and outdoor times include:
(A) Alternating active and passive activities;
(B) Opportunity for individual and group activities; and
(C) Outdoor time each day weather permits.
(3) Program employees will be attentive and considerate of the participants' safety on field trips and
during any transportation provided by the program.
(A) During trips, program employees supervising participants must have immediate access to
emergency medical forms and emergency contact information for each participant.
(B) Program employees must have a written list of the participants in the group and must check
the roll frequently.
(C) Program employees must have first aid supplies and a guide to first aid and emergency
care available on field trips.
(d) Communication.
(1) Each program site will have access to a telephone for use in making emergency calls.
(2) The recreation superintendent will post the following telephone numbers adjacent to a telephone
accessible to all program employees at each site:
(A) City ambulance or emergency medical services;
(B) City police department;
(C) City fire department;
(D) Numbers at which parents may be reached; and
(E) The telephone number for the site itself.
(e) Transportation.
(1) First-aid supplies and a first aid and emergency care guide will be available in all program
vehicles that transport children.
(2) All program vehicles used for transporting participants must have available a 6- BC portable fire
extinguisher which will be installed in the passenger compartment of the vehicle and must be
accessible to the adult occupants.
Sec. 1.07.064 Facility standards
(a) Safety.
(1) Buildings, grounds, and equipment on the program site will be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and
maintained to protect the health of the participants.
(2) Program equipment and supplies must be safe for the participants' use.
(3) Program employees must have first-aid supplies readily available at each site, during
transportation to an off-site activity, and for the duration of any off-site activity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/435
(4) Air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters must be mounted out of participants' reach or have
safeguards that keep participants from being injured.
(5) All swing seats at program sites must be constructed of durable, lightweight, relatively pliable
material.
(6) Program employees must have first aid supplies readily available to staff in a designated location.
Program employees must have an immediately accessible guide to first aid and emergency care.
(b) Fire. In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or other emergency, program employee's first priority is to
evacuate the participants to a designated safe area.
(c) Health.
(1) Illness or injury.
(A) A participant who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or
employees will not be admitted to the program.
(B) Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner to protect the health of all participants and
employees.
(C) Program employees will follow plans to provide emergency care for injured participants with
symptoms of an acute illness as specified in the program manual.
(D) Program employees will follow the recommendation of the Texas Department of Health
concerning the admission or readmission of any participant after a communicable disease.
(2) Medication. Program employees will administer medication only if:
(A) Parent(s) complete and sign a medication form that provides authorization for staff to
dispense medication with details as to time and dosages. The form will include a hold harmless
clause to protect the city.
(B) Prescription medications are in the original containers labeled with the child's name, a date,
directions, and the physician's name. Program employees will administer the medication only as
stated on the label. Program employees will not administer medication after the expired date.
(C) Nonprescription medications are labeled with the child's name and the date the medication
was brought to the program. Nonprescription medication must be in the original container.
Program employees will administer it only according to label direction.
(D) Medication dispensed will be limited to routine oral ingestion not requiring special
knowledge or skills on the part of program employees. No injections will be administered by the
program employees.
(E) Program employees must ensure medications are inaccessible to participants or, if it is
necessary to keep medications in the refrigerator (when available), medications will be kept
separate from food.
(3) Toilet facilities.
(A) The program site will have inside toilets located and equipped so children can use them
independently and program staff can supervise as needed.
(B) An appropriate and adequate number of lavatories will be provided.
(4) Sanitation.
(A) The program facilities must have adequate light, ventilation, and heat.
(B) The program must have an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the Texas
Department of Health for drinking water and ensure that it will be supplied to the participants in a
safe and sanitary manner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/435
(C) Program employees must see that garbage is removed from buildings daily.
(d) Program staff.
(1) Youth program site directors qualifications and responsibilities.
(A) Site directors will be part-time or temporary employees who are at least eighteen (18) years
of age.
(B) Site directors must have experience supervising children.
(C) Site directors administer the daily operations of the program in compliance with the adopted
standards of care.
(D) Site directors recommend for hire, supervise and evaluate counselors.
(E) Site directors plan, implement, and evaluate the daily activities of the programs.
(F) Site directors will investigate allegations or concerns regarding suspected child abuse and
will report suspected child abuse or neglect in accordance with the Texas Family Code.
(G) Site directors must have successfully completed a course in first aid and cardio pulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross
standards.
(H) Site directors must ensure that participants are released only to a parent or an adult
designated by the parent.
(2) Program counselor qualifications and responsibilities.
(A) Program counselors will be part-time or temporary employees who are at least fifteen (15)
years of age.
(B) Program counselors must be able to consistently exhibit competence, good judgment, and
self-control when working with children.
(C) Program counselors must relate to children with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience.
(D) Program counselors will provide participants with an environment in which they can feel
safe, can enjoy wholesome recreation activities, and can participate in appropriate social
opportunities with their peers.
(E) Program counselors will be responsible to know and follow all city, departmental, and
program standards, policies and procedures that apply to city programs.
(F) Program counselors must ensure that participants are released only to a parent or an adult
designated by the parent.
(Ordinance 2018-15 adopted 7/9/18)
Secs. 1.07.065–1.07.090 Reserved
Division 4. Northwest Park
Sec. 1.07.091 Hours
No person shall use Northwest Park at times other than the hours of operation posted by the director of parks and
recreation. Summer hours of operation are 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Winter hours are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(Ordinance 09-58 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1901)
Sec. 1.07.092 Fees
The city council has established fees for the use of Northwest Park as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 09-58 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1902)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/435
Sec. 1.07.093 Use regulations
The following rules and regulations apply with regard to the use of Northwest Park and the off-highway vehicle
trails:
(1) Anyone under the age of 18 must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(2) Do not enter any oil or gas pad site.
(3) Do not tamper with any oil or gas pipeline or industrial equipment.
(4) Everyone must leave the park at the designated closing time.
(5) Obey speed limit and warning signs.
(6) All firearms (rifles, shotguns, and handguns) are prohibited except for concealed handguns with
the required concealed handgun license.
(7) Fireworks, BB guns, air rifles and paintball markers are not permitted.
(8) No hunting.
(9) All pets must be leashed.
(10) No glass containers are allowed.
(11) No alcoholic beverages or drugs are allowed.
(12) Do not harass the wildlife.
(13) Overnight camping is not permitted.
(14) Pick up all trash and debris from your area upon leaving.
(15) Park and ride only in designated areas.
(16) Helmets must be worn at all times by ATV/UTV/motorcycle riders.
(17) Dangerous operation of any vehicle will not be tolerated.
(18) Follow all trail markings within the trail system.
(19) Do not make new trails.
(20) Respect the other riders and pass with caution.
(Ordinance 09-58 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1903)
Sec. 1.07.094 Violations; enforcement; penalty
(a) Any person violating any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) The director of parks and recreation or other authorized personnel shall have the authority to eject from the
park any person acting in violation of this division, including permanent expulsion for flagrant or continued violation
of this division.
(Ordinance 09-58 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1904)
Secs. 1.07.095–1.07.120 Reserved
Division 5. Lawdwin Ball Field
Sec. 1.07.121 Use regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/435
The following rules and regulations shall apply with regard to the use of the Lawdwin Ball Field facilities:
(1) No pets are allowed, except for service animals.
(2) No alcoholic beverages or drugs are allowed.
(3) Smoking of any tobacco product (including cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other lighted tobacco
product in any form) is prohibited.
(Ordinance 2014-05 adopted 3/18/14; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1003)
ARTICLE 1.08 CEMETERIES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.08.001–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. East Side Cemetery
Sec. 1.08.031 Definitions
As used in this division:
Cemetery. A place owned by the city that is dedicated and used for interment.
Custodian. A city employee or contractor having responsibilities for the operation of the cemetery.
Director. The director of parks and recreation of the city.
Double casket interment. A process for the entombment or burial of the remains of two persons to be placed
horizontally with one on top of the other.
Grave site, lot or space. The area normally designated for interment.
Interment. The entombment or burial of the remains of a deceased person.
Lot. A plot of ground, specifically subdivided of a block in the cemetery for the purpose of establishing individual
grave sites.
Mausoleum. An above-ground building or structure, usually of stone, for entombment of a deceased person.
Memorial or monument. Any marker, headstone, or structure placed or intended to be placed in or on a grave for
identification or in memory of a deceased person.
Owner. A person who holds a conveyance or certificate of ownership of the right of interment in a particular grave
site in the cemetery.
(Ordinance 08-15 adopted 3/4/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.901; Ordinance 2015-08 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.08.032 Sale of lots
(a) General.
(1) Lots are sold for cash in the amount as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code, in advance, as arranged with the city only. Lots in the city cemetery are sold by deed by the city
solely for cemetery purposes and are subject to the rules and regulations contained in this division. The
city retains ownership of the land and only burial rights shall be conveyed.
(2) Names of gravesite purchases will be kept on file. Documents or certificates identifying lot spaces
allow the owner(s) the right and license to burial and placement of memorials only, and are subject to
law and these rules and regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/435
(3) Gravesite lots will only be sold Monday through Friday, except on holidays, during normal
business hours.
(4) Gravesite lots which have been sold shall not be re-purchased by the city, but the owner may
donate a purchased lot back to the city if they so desire.
(5) When purchasing a gravesite, the purchaser will determine at the time of purchase, whether there
is to be one (1) burial or two (2) including cremains at the gravesite.
(6) By purchasing a plot in the East Side Cemetery; the plot owner and all heirs of the decedent
hereby agree to follow all the rules and regulations as set forth by this section and any future revisions
to the East Side Cemetery Rules.
(b) Transfers.
(1) Transfer or any gravesite lot or interest therein, shall be valid only with written consent of all
interested parties and all documentation must be presented to the city for approval.
(2) The original deed must be provided to city staff at city hall. A new deed will be prepared by the
city secretary.
(3) If the original deed or certificate of title cannot be produced, legal proof of ownership shall be
provided to the city, together with a notarized affidavit indemnifying the city from any claim associated
with said transfer.
(Ordinance 2018-16, sec. 1, adopted 7/23/18)
Sec. 1.08.033 Rules and regulations
(a) Access. The city has the right to ingress and egress over plots and grave sites for the purpose of
maintenance, preservation and normal cemetery operations. The city may remove any object from the cemetery
that has been placed there contrary to the provisions of this division.
(b) Hours of operation. The city shall determine the hours of operation of the cemetery and may close the
cemetery on a temporary basis at any time.
(c) Location of graves. Interments are allowed only in areas designated by the city for grave sites as defined on
official cemetery maps.
(d) Modifications. The city may:
(1) Add land to the cemetery;
(2) Remove or regrade roads, drives and walkways in the cemetery;
(3) Lay, maintain, modify and operate pipelines or gutters for water sprinkling and drainage in the
cemetery; and
(4) Use cemetery property, not sold to individual owners, for cemetery purposes.
(e) Easements. No easement shall be granted to an owner by the city in any road, drive or walkway within the
cemetery. Roads, drives and walkways may be used as a means of access to the cemetery and its buildings so
long as they are devoted to that purpose by the city.
(f) Liability. The city is not liable for any loss or damage occurring within the cemetery caused by the elements,
acts of God, war, thieves, vandals, or other occurrences not within the reasonable control of the city. The
statements of an employee of the city or its contractor are not binding upon the city.
(g) Other matters. In all matters not covered by this division, the city may take those actions which in its
judgment are reasonable to accomplish the purposes of the cemetery, and owners are bound by these actions.
(h) Official records. The city shall hold and maintain the official records of the Bridgeport East Side Cemetery.
(Ordinance 08-15 adopted 3/4/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.903; Ordinance 2015-08 adopted 6/2/15)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/435
(i) Interments, disinterments and reinterments.
(1) Only funeral directors licensed by the state may perform interments, disinterments, or
reinterments. Interment will be scheduled only after presentment of the original deed or certificate of
title and after all fees and costs have been paid for the gravesite. If the original deed or certificate of
title, cannot be produced, legal proof of ownership shall be provided to the office of the city secretary,
together with a notarized affidavit indemnifying the city from any claim associated with said interment;
(2) Funeral directors shall provide at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the city secretary prior to
the interment or other excavation within the cemetery. Notification must be made during normal
business hours;
(3) The city is not liable for the accuracy of the information received through a funeral director nor for
the identity of the person to be interred; and
(4) Any disinterment or reinterment in the cemetery must be in accordance with state law. Only a cityapproved
funeral home may open a gravesite for burial purposes. Disinterment may occur only under
special circumstances (ie, criminal investigations or family request for removal to another plot or
cemetery). Said circumstances must be presented to the city secretary for approval. Reasonable
approval may not be withheld.
(Ordinance 2018-16, sec. 2, adopted 7/23/18)
(j) Upkeep of monuments and memorials. Maintenance and upkeep of monuments or memorials shall be the
responsibility of the owner and heirs and shall not be the responsibility of the city. Any individually owned structure
or item on a grave site, including a memorial marker, may be removed by the city as it becomes dilapidated,
unsightly or dangerous to the safety of persons in the cemetery.
(k) Double casket interment. Double casket interment in one grave site space will be permitted providing the
following requirements:
(1) The grave space has not been previously utilized as single space and remains unoccupied;
(2) The excavation will be a minimum of eight feet in depth;
(3) A concrete burial vault designed for the pressure of this type of burial is required for the first or
lower burial. A concrete burial liner shall not be allowed for this type of interment in the lower space;
and
(4) An additional fee shall apply to previously purchased but unoccupied single lots if the owner
desires to utilize such lot as a double casket interment lot.
(l) Vaults. Burial vaults must not protrude either partially or entirely above the ground. Mausoleums are
prohibited.
(m) Work cleanup. Funeral directors are prohibited from scattering materials over adjoining grave sites, blocking
roads or walkways, or leaving their materials on the ground longer than necessary. Damage to grave sites,
walkways, roads, trees, shrubs or other property in the cemetery caused by a funeral director shall be repaired at
the funeral director's expense to the satisfaction of the director.
(n) Funeral director's responsibility. When acting on behalf of an owner or family, a funeral director shall be
responsible for adherence to these regulations.
(o) Director's authority. If a funeral director does not comply with the requirements of this division or fails to
correct any violation, the director may suspend the funeral director from work in the cemetery after giving notice
and a reasonable time to comply or correct the violation.
(p) Operation of vehicles. A person shall not drive a vehicle through the grounds at a speed greater than fifteen
miles per hour. Vehicles must be kept on the paved roads in the cemetery unless the person driving the vehicle is
installing a marker, performing maintenance, or performing other related work; however, temporary driving or
parking on the shoulder or edge of the paved roads shall be permitted as necessary to avoid other traffic and to
leave a free lane of travel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/435
(q) Standards for memorials or monuments. All graves must be marked, within one year, by a durable
monument of any size. Perishable headstones such as wood or tin are forbidden. There will be only one upright
monument and one footstone allowed per grave site and only one statue or bench per family plot. Corner markers
are allowed and must be flush with ground. Monuments shall not be installed until the site has been located and
marked by the city or the custodian.
(Ordinance 08-15 adopted 3/4/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.903; Ordinance 2015-08 adopted 6/2/15)
(r) Surface obstructions; curbing.
(1) No gravel, rock or artificial carpeting is allowed in or around cemetery lots, blocks, or spaces in
any section. The placement of any decorative items such as lights, toys, chimes, carpet, cement, glass
containers, pottery containers, wood crosses or flagpoles which might impede mowing of the grounds is
prohibited.
(2) Curbing shall be permitted only with approval from the city. All curbing shall have six (6) inch wide
sides and twelve (12) to fourteen (14) inch headers and footers. All curbing shall be flush with the
ground, and shall not exceed the boundary limit of an individual lot.
(Ordinance 2011-15 adopted 5/3/11)
(s) Flowers. Cut or artificial flowers may be used in the cemetery at any time. They shall be placed in a durable
receptacle; however, no glass containers are permitted in the cemetery. Faded or unsightly flowers, fresh or
artificial, will be removed by the custodian. No plantings of any kind except grass are permitted.
(t) Damages. Any damages incurred during the opening or closing of graves, such as (but not limited to) ruts,
headstone damage, or fence damage, will be the responsibility of the funeral home conducting the service. This
responsibility will include repairs and/or cost of damaged property.
(Ordinance 08-15 adopted 3/4/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.903; Ordinance 2015-08 adopted 6/2/15)
ARTICLE 1.09 AIRPORT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.09.001–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Airport Advisory Board
Sec. 1.09.031 Created; membership; terms
(a) There is hereby created the airport advisory board of the city, to be composed of five (5) members, plus two
alternates, who shall serve in the absence of a board member. All members shall be resident citizens of the
county, and except for the first members of such advisory board, shall be appointed for two-year terms, and until
their successors are appointed by the city council.
(b) A minimum of three (3) members plus one (1) alternate shall own aircraft and own or rent hangars or land at
the airport for such air parking and storage. These appointees must be in good standing as to contractual
agreement, current on all fees due to the city and utility providers and satisfy the city as to insurance requirements.
(c) The mayor and city council shall appoint the first airport advisory board and alternate members as soon as
practicable following the adoption of this division, and thereafter appointments shall be made in August of each
year.
(d) Tenure of the five (5) members plus the two (2) alternate members shall be determined by lot. Two (2)
members and one (1) alternate of the first airport advisory board shall serve until the first regular meeting in August
2000, and three (3) members and one (1) alternate shall serve until the first regular meeting in August in 2001, so
that thereafter the terms of two (2) members and one (1) alternate shall expire in the even-numbered years and
three (3) members and one (1) alternate shall expire on odd-numbered years.
(e) Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two
(2) years except as provided in subsection (d) above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/435
(f) Members and alternates can be appointed to succeed themselves.
(g) Members can be removed from the board by majority vote of city council.
(Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.701)
Sec. 1.09.032 Officers; rules and regulations
The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall
adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it may
deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. The advisory
board shall select a secretary, who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary shall keep a
record of all transactions of the board. The manager of the airport or city staff shall provide the advisory board with
all information necessary for a performance of its duties. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec.
9.702)
Sec. 1.09.033 Duties
The airport advisory board shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvements of the
airport and the advancement of the city as an air transportation center and from time to time make such general
studies of airport construction and operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and
adequate for the needs of the city and of the air transportation industry; it shall create rules and regulations to
promote good aviation practices and the use of airport property for city council consideration and adoption. It shall
make recommendations to the city council in respect to construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and
operation of such airport. It shall call the manager's attention to any failure by personnel, renters, tenants or
subtenants of the airport to carry out any orders, policies, rules, and regulations, contracts or agreements adopted
by the city council. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.703)
Sec. 1.09.034 Conflict of interest
No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air (employee or stockholder excluded) or in
any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the
premises of the municipal airport shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. (Ordinance 99-14
adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.704)
Sec. 1.09.035 Compensation
All members of the airport advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all
expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when
authorized by the city council. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.705)
Sec. 1.09.036 Joint airport zoning board abolished
This division shall supersede and replace any previous ordinances establishing or governing the duties and
operations of the previous Lake Bridgeport Joint Airport Zoning Board. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001
Code, sec. 9.706)
Sec. 1.09.037 Dual service as airport zoning board of adjustment
The members of the airport advisory board established by this division shall also serve, when called upon, as the
board of adjustment of the “Bridgeport Municipal [Airport] Zoning Ordinance,” as the same is more fully described
and established in chapter 14 [chapter 14, exhibit B] of the city Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted
10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.707)
Sec. 1.09.038 Ex officio members
The mayor or his designee, the city manager or his designee and the city airport manager shall be ex officio
members of the airport advisory board. (Ordinance 99-14 adopted 10/26/99; 2001 Code, sec. 9.708; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Secs. 1.09.039–1.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Use Regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/435
Sec. 1.09.061 Purpose
This division provides rules and regulations for the efficient and safe operation of the Bridgeport Municipal Airport
(hereinafter referred to as the “airport”): providing that no person shall use the airport for the conduct of
commercial activities, for instruction in aviation, for sale of any commodities, etc., unless approved in writing by the
city council; providing general rules and regulations for use of the airport; regulating air and ground traffic;
regulating the use of aircraft; providing for fire regulations; regulating student training and practice flying; and
providing penalties for violations, all as authorized by the Municipal Airports Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
chapter 22. (Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1201)
Sec. 1.09.062 Use of airport restricted
No person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the airport for
any commercial activity, unless approved by a written permit from the city council or its duly authorized agent.
Note: Individual aircraft owners may contract/hire maintenance personnel to come onto the airport for the purpose
of maintaining/repairing their specific owned aircraft and may contract/hire certified flight instructors for the purpose
of receiving flight instruction in their specific owned aircraft. (Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; 2001 Code, sec.
1.1202)
Sec. 1.09.063 General rules and regulations
The following rules and regulations shall be observed in the use, operation, and conduct of the airport:
(1) Rule 1. Federal rules adopted. Federal air traffic rules of the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) for aircraft operated within the United States, as presently or hereafter effective, are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though full set forth and incorporated herein.
(2) Rule 2. Safeguarding of persons and property. The city manager or airport manager shall at all
times have authority to take necessary and legal actions to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment,
or property at the airport.
(3) Rule 3. Lease of hangars and other buildings. Hangars and other buildings or structures owned
by the city may be leased to private individuals, companies, or corporations on a monthly or yearly
basis for the storage of aircraft and ancillary equipment or to conduct a commercial fixed base
operation (FBO).
(4) Rule 4. Lease of airport property. The city may lease property within the building area or other
portions of the airport for the construction of hangars, buildings, lean-tos, aprons, taxiways, and auto
parking lots in accordance with an approved airport master plan/airport layout plan. Aviation-related use
must be given priority in the use of all leased or privately owned property, buildings, or structures. If the
aviation needs of the airport are sufficiently met, the city may consider authorizing non-aviation use of
any portion of the airport or any building on the airport on a case-by-case basis. Application for such
non-aviation use shall be made to the airport advisory board and they in turn shall make
recommendations to the city council; the city also must request and receive approval from the TxDOT
aviation division prior to granting authorization for non-aviation use.
(A) No leases will be written for a primary period in excess of thirty (30) years without the
written approval of the city council and then only for the length of a mortgage in excess of thirty
(30) years obtained from a lending institution by the mortgagee/FBO to construct such building(s)
or hangar(s) on the airport for which the mortgage was obtained.
(B) Any privately owned structure or hangar not in use for aviation purposes for a period in
excess of ninety (90) days or not available for lease or sublease for aviation purposes, unless so
authorized for non-aviation uses by the city council, must be removed after due notice to the
owner in writing or the city council will consider such structures or hangars abandoned and will
seek title to such structure or hangar.
(C) Leased land from which any building, hangar, or structure is removed, after due notice or
expiration of the lease, will be cleared, cleaned, and put back in its original or acceptable
condition.
(D) Leased property on the airport may be subleased by the lessee only with written approval of
the city council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/435
(E) No hangar or structure may be erected within the building restriction line or in conflict with
the approved airport layout plan.
(F) All construction must be authorized by the city council and must be of a compatible standard
capable of withstanding wind of 110 mph with doors open or closed and 30-year paint to buildings.
Furthermore, all structures must comply with any and all city building codes, and applicable airport
compatible land use or zoning ordinances, and the approved airport layout plan.
(G) Through the fence operations prohibited. No private individual, partnership, FBO, company,
corporation, or body politic shall be permitted direct ground access to the airport by their aircraft,
customers' aircraft, or private vehicle from property adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of the
airport. Furthermore, no private individual, partnership, company, corporation, body politic, or
customer's aircraft or vehicle shall be permitted direct ground access to property from the airport -
a practice commonly known as “through the fence operation.” Under extenuating circumstances,
the city council may request approval from TxDOT aviation division for certain through the fence
operations on a case-by-case basis.
(H) Per the state department of transportation guidelines, hangar owners must not use the
hangar address as a primary residence, or reside therein overnight more than 180 days in a
calendar year. In addition, the hangar must be used for aeronautical activity equivalent to 85% of
the hangar's square footage.
(5) Rule 5. Lien for charges. To enforce the payment of any charge made for repairs, improvements,
storage, or care of any personal property made or furnished by the city or its agents in connection with
the operation of the airport, the city may have a lien upon such personal property, which shall be
enforceable as provided by law. Said lien may contain proper administrative cost also as permitted by
law.
(6) Rule 6. Lien possessory right. To enforce the payment of any such charge, the city manager or
airport manager may retain possession of such personal property until all reasonable, customary, and
usual compensation has been paid in full.
(7) Rule 7. Unauthorized signs and equipment. No signs, non-aeronautical equipment, portable
buildings, or trailers may be erected, moved in, or installed on airport property, except as may be
specifically authorized by the city manager or airport manager.
(8) Rule 8. Surreptitious activities. Any person observing suspicious, unauthorized or criminal
activities should report such activities immediately to the city manager or airport manager, local police,
officers of the state department of public safety, or other police officers.
(9) Rule 9. Wrecked or disabled aircraft. Every aircraft owner, his/her pilot, or agents, shall be
responsible for notifying the FAA and promptly removing a disabled or wrecked aircraft from the
operational areas of the airport, under the direction of the city manager or airport manager. Should the
responsible party fail to remove debris after initial investigation, the airport manager shall reserve the
right to remove said aircraft and/or debris from the runway area, at the owner's expense.
(10) Rule 10. Repairs to aircraft. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing or takeoff
area. All outside repairs shall be made only at places designated by the city manager or airport
manager for such purpose. Major engine, airframe, or avionics repairs shall be conducted by a properly
licensed, paid mechanic within a hangar or building rented, leased, or owned for such commercial
purposes. Any preventative maintenance authorized by FAR part 43 may be made by the owner or
operator of any aircraft, but only within a hangar leased or owned by that aircraft owner or operator or
at places designated by the city manager or airport manager for such purpose.
(11) Rule 11. Agricultural spraying operations. Agricultural (Ag) spraying operations will be conducted
in accordance with procedures approved by the city manager or airport manager and made known to all
persons conducting agricultural spraying operations. Said operations shall be conducted only on the
designated airport areas, and shall not include reckless flying or careless chemical handling. Chemicals
used in agricultural operations shall be dispersed, maintained, and stored and the dispensing area shall
be cleaned with all empty chemical containers stored and promptly disposed of in accordance with label
directions. Washing of Ag aircraft and flushing of Ag aircraft spray tanks or hoppers will be
accomplished in accordance with the standards of the Environmental Protection Agency and the state
commission on environmental quality in an area so designated by the city manager or airport manager.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/435
Each Ag operator shall carry general liability insurance with a carrier acceptable to the city in the
amount of $1,000,000.00, naming the city as an additional insured, which insurance shall also provide
coverage for the cleanup of any hazardous chemical spills on airport property caused by the Ag
operator. A certificate of such insurance shall be provided to and approved by the city before any Ag
spraying operations are conducted. Ag aircraft operators shall not exceed the maximum gross hopper
weight stamped on the Ag aircraft's hopper by the manufacturer or listed in the aircraft's specifications.
Ag aircraft shall not take off or land on the dirt or grass between the runway lights and the property line
fence(s), nor take off or land downwind. Takeoff and landing procedures in accordance with section
1.09.065 (takeoff and landing rules) contained herein will be observed at all times. Note: because of the
hazard of such agricultural spraying operations, the city council may require each agricultural spray
operator to post a bond, the amount to be determined by the city council considering the financial risk to
which the city could be exposed by an Ag operator accident resulting in environmental damage, the
number of Ag aircraft owned or leased and used by the Ag operator, etc.
(12) Rule 12. Damage to airport. Any person, individual, or corporation or the owner of any aircraft
causing damage of any kind to the airport, whether through violation of any of these rules, through
vandalism, or any act of negligence, shall be liable therefor to the city.
(13) Rule 13. Injury to persons or property; liability of city; compliance with regulations. Persons
entering upon any portion of the airport property by automobile, other vehicular conveyance, or
pedestrian traffic (does not include persons in an aircraft using approved air side facilities) do so at their
own risk and agree to hold harmless, defend, and release the city, its officers, agents, servants and
employees from any and all liability, claims, demands, or suits for property damage or loss and/or
personal injury, including death, sustained in connection with use of the airport and any of its
equipment. Further, any person desiring to use the airport shall observe and obey all valid laws,
ordinances, resolutions, orders, rules, and regulations promulgated and enforced by the city or by any
other authority having jurisdiction over the conduct and operation of the airport.
(14) Rule 14. Licensed pilots. Only properly registered aircraft including current airworthiness
certification and persons holding current airman and medical certificates issued by the FAA shall be
authorized to operate aircraft upon the airport, except as otherwise provided in this division. This
limitation shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government or of a state, territory, or political
subdivision thereof, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign government with which the United States has a
reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. Note: Any use of the airport by
ultralight aircraft shall be subject to approval by the city council and shall be in accordance with FAR
part 13 and any other rules established by the city.
(15) Rule 15. Registration. Each person owning an aircraft based at the airport, employed, or
receiving instruction at the airport shall register at the office of the city manager or airport manager their
name, address, telephone number, aircraft model, aircraft registration “N” number, and the name,
address, and telephone number of their next of kin or person to be notified in case of an accident or
emergency. Registration shall also require demonstrated proof of a current airman's certification where
applicable.
(16) Rule 16. Alcohol, intoxicants and narcotics prohibited. No person under the influence of alcohol,
or any intoxicant, narcotic, or other illicit drug, shall operate or fly in any aircraft to or from the airport.
Such prohibition shall not apply to a passenger under the care of a medical doctor and accompanied by
a doctor, nurse or caretaker.
(17) Rule 17. Foreign objects. No foreign objects, including bottles, cans, scrap, nuts, bolts, nails, or
any object that may cause damage to an aircraft, shall be left upon the floor of any building or upon any
part of the surface area of the airport. Individuals are encouraged to pick up such foreign objects when
observed and place them in a trash receptacle.
(Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; Ordinance 2012-04, secs. 1, 2, adopted 5/15/12; Ordinance 2013-12 adopted
8/6/13; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1203)
Sec. 1.09.064 Ground operations
(a) Rule 18. Air and ground traffic/vehicular traffic. All vehicular traffic on the airport shall be confined to streets,
roads, and avenues of passage designated and provided for that purpose and shall not be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour. Official vehicles only will be driven on the landing area. Such official vehicles will have
a ground-to-air radio transceiver tuned to the local UNICOM frequency or Common Traffic Advisory Frequency
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/435
(CTAF) and a flashing beacon light mounted on the roof of the car or a checkered orange and white flag mounted
on the front bumper of the vehicle. Special use vehicles such as an ambulance, hearse, or delivery van may be
driven on the apron with the permission of the city manager or airport manager. An aircraft owner who rents,
leases, or owns his/her private hangar may park his/her automobile in the hangar while on a trip in his/her aircraft.
(b) Rule 19. Fueling of aircraft.
(1) Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed
place, except that an Ag spray aircraft on a fast turnaround may be fueled and loaded with chemicals
with the aircraft engine idling if the city manager or airport manager has provided written authority to the
Ag operator, the pilot remains at the controls, the aircraft's wheels are chocked, there are at least two
20B fire extinguishers within fifty (50) feet of the aircraft being serviced, and a qualified ground crew
member is present during the fueling operation.
(2) Prior to making any fueling connection to an aircraft, the fueling equipment (fuel pump, hydrant
servicer, fuel truck) shall be bonded to the aircraft by use of a cable suitable for that purpose and
approved by the local fire marshal. The bond shall be made prior to fueling and maintained until fueling
is completed and fuel connections have been removed. In addition, when fueling overwing, the fueling
nozzle shall be bonded with a nozzle bond cable having a clip or a male plug to a metallic component
of the aircraft that is metallically connected to the aircraft fuel tank filler port or a female receptacle
designed to accommodate the male plug. If there is no plug receptacle or means for attaching a clip,
the operator shall touch the filler cap with the nozzle spout before removing the cap so as to equalize
the static electrical potential between the nozzle and the filler port. The nozzle spout shall be kept in
contact with the filler neck until the fueling is completed. When a funnel is used in aircraft fueling, it shall
be kept in contact with the filler neck as well as the fuel spout or fuel supply container to avoid the
possibility of a spark at the fill opening. Only metal funnels shall be used for fueling. Bonding and
fueling connections shall be disconnected in the reverse order of connection after fueling is completed.
(3) All aircraft shall be fueled clear of all hangars, other buildings, and aircraft by at least fifty (50)
feet.
(4) No aircraft shall be allowed to remain parked at a fuel island once fueling has been completed.
The aircraft shall be moved to a designated tie-down or parking area.
(5) Fueling trucks shall not be parked within any building or hangar or within fifty (50) feet of any
building, hangar, or parked aircraft. Fuel trucks shall be parked with at least ten (10) feet separation
between vehicles.
(6) Aircraft fuel storage tanks for below-ground or above-ground use will be constructed and
installed, registered as required, monitored for leakage, operated, and maintained in accordance with
federal and state statutes, rules, and regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
and the state commission on environmental quality.
(7) Aviation or auto fuels shall not be stored within a hangar or building except in small quantities and
in approved containers manufactured and marked for such purpose and only with the approval of the
local fire marshal.
(8) Persons or businesses wishing to supply or dispense aviation fuel for use in their privately owned
aircraft shall not be denied; however, they must meet all requirements the city places on other fuel
suppliers, public or private. Private fueling facilities located on leased or private property must be
installed and the fuel dispensed in accordance with all rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire
safety contained herein.
(9) Public sale of automobile gas for use in aircraft will not be permitted on the airport without written
approval of the city manager or airport manager. Aircraft authorized by the FAA to use auto gas may be
privately fueled by the owner in a location designated by the city manager or airport manager in
accordance with all rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire safety contained herein.
(10) All aviation fuel storage tanks, aviation fuel pumps, hydrant fuel services, and aircraft fuel
service vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned, shall have the type of aviation fuel dispensed
printed in large block letters, including octane if aviation gasoline, plus the fuel I.D. number, and “No
Smoking” signs. This information shall be printed on all sides of the fueling tanks, pumps, etc., so the
information is visible from any direction on the ground.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/435
(11) All aircraft fueling, fuel equipment, and procedures will be in accordance with Manual 407,
Standard for Aircraft Fuel Servicing, 2001 edition (or as may be revised) published by the National Fire
Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy MA 02269-9101, 800-344-3555.
(c) Rule 20. Tie-down of aircraft.
(1) All aircraft not hangared shall be tied down and the wheels chocked at night and during inclement
weather.
(2) All aircraft owners or their agents are responsible for the tie-down or security of their aircraft at all
times and particularly during inclement weather.
(3) Aircraft parked overnight on the transient apron shall pay a tie-down fee as found in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code for each night, except that such fee may be waived by the city
manager or airport manager upon purchase of fuel or services.
(d) Rule 21. Running aircraft engines.
(1) Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes shall not be started until the wheels have been set
with chocks attached to ropes or other suitable means of removing them.
(2) No aircraft shall be hand-propped, started, or left running without a qualified person at the
controls.
(3) No aircraft engine shall be started or run inside any building or hangar.
(4) No engine shall be started, run up, or warmed up until and unless the aircraft is in such position
that the propeller stream or jet blast will clear all buildings, other aircraft, and groups of people.
(e) Rule 22. Damage to runway lights. Any person damaging any runway or taxiway light or fixture by operation
of aircraft or otherwise shall immediately report such damage to the city manager or airport manager. Persons
causing damage to runway and taxiway lights as a result of negligent operation of an aircraft or willful acts will be
liable for replacement cost of the light(s) and/or fixture(s) and may be charged with a misdemeanor as provided in
section 1.09.069.
(f) Rule 23. Taxiing aircraft.
(1) No person shall taxi an aircraft until he/she has reasonably ascertained there will be no danger of
collision with any person or object in the immediate area.
(2) Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed and in such manner as to be under the control
of the pilot at all times.
(3) Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes will not be taxied near buildings or parked aircraft
unless an attendant (wing-walker) is at a wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot.
(4) Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and taxiway area if there is an aircraft
approaching to land or on the ground in takeoff position. Aircraft waiting on the taxiway for another
aircraft to take off or land will remain behind the runway holding position markings.
(5) Aircraft shall not be taxied by engine power into or out of a hangar or T-hangar.
(g) Rule 24. Parking aircraft.
(1) Unoccupied aircraft shall not be parked or tied down within any protected area (object free area,
runway safety area, etc.) as described in FAA AC 150/5300-13 and all aircraft not hangared shall be
parked in the areas designated by the city manager or airport manager for that purpose.
(2) Aircraft shall not be parked within fifty (50) feet of an aircraft fuel pump or fuel service truck
parking area.
(3) Aircraft shall not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the normal movement of other aircraft
and traffic unless specifically authorized by the city manager or airport manager as an emergency
measure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/435
(4) It is the responsibility of the pilot when leaving a parked aircraft unattended to see that the brakes
are set and/or it is properly chocked and/or tied down.
(h) Rule 25. Loading/unloading aircraft. Pilots are prohibited from loading or unloading aircraft with the engine
running, except as stated in Rule 19, subsection (b)(1) above.
(Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1204; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.09.065 Takeoff and landing rules
(a) Rule 26. Authority to suspend operations. The city manager or airport manager may suspend or restrict any
or all operations whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety, provided operations under
instrument meteorological conditions may be continued by properly instrument-rated pilots following appropriate
flight rules.
(b) Rule 27. Active runway. If the winds are calm or at a ninety (90) degree crosswind to Runway 18/36, take off
and land on Runway 18.
(c) Rule 28. Clearing street, structures, etc. No aircraft shall land or take off in such manner as to clear any
public street or highway at an altitude of less than fifteen (15) feet, or seventeen (17) feet over an interstate
highway, nor land or take off on the taxiway or over hangars or other structures, automobile parking areas, or
groups of spectators.
(d) Rule 29. UNICOM. All aircraft based at the airport are required to have radio equipment and shall call on the
local UNICOM frequency 123.0 to determine the active runway and to announce their position and intentions for
takeoff or landing. All other pilots with radio-equipped aircraft are expected to comply also.
(e) Rule 30. Emergency locator transmitter (ELT).
(1) Immediately after takeoff and after landing prior to engine shutdown, pilots should tune their
aircraft radios to the emergency frequency (121.5 or 243.0) and listen to determine if their aircraft's
emergency locator transmitter (ELT) is transmitting. If the ELT turned on and transmitted after a takeoff
or landing, as soon as possible after turning it off, advise the FAA Automated Flight Service Station for
the area at telephone number 800-WX-BRIEF (800-992-7433) that your ELT accidentally turned on at
the approximate time and coordinates, if known, and the time and coordinates it was turned off.
(2) If a pilot lands an aircraft at the airport, parks and locks or hangars the aircraft with the ELT
transmitting and the city manager or airport manager determines such has occurred, the city manager
or airport manager shall take immediate action to telephone and/or locate the pilot of the aircraft, advise
him/her of the situation, and request that the pilot return to the airport immediately and turn off the ELT.
Should the city manager or airport manager be unable to locate the pilot or if the pilot is unable to return
to the airport within a reasonable time to turn off the ELT, the city manager or airport manager,
accompanied by a local peace officer, a civil air patrol officer, or an FAA representative, shall take the
necessary action to turn off the ELT, provided the action does not result in damage to the aircraft. The
aircraft owner shall be responsible for all charges associated with turning off the ELT.
(f) Rule 31. Takeoffs on apron or taxiways. Takeoffs or landings shall not be made on the apron, parking ramp,
or taxiway by any aircraft, including ultralight aircraft, except by special permission of the city manager or airport
manager.
(g) Rule 32. Takeoffs allowed. Touch and go landings may be made at the discretion of the pilot. Pilots
remaining in the pattern making touch and go landings should broadcast on the UNICOM or Common Traffic
Advisory Frequency (CTAF) their pattern turns and their touch and go intentions after turning final. All aircraft shall
clear for landing and takeoff traffic before taxiing into takeoff position.
(h) Rule 33. Traffic patterns and altitude. All aircraft operating in and around the airport shall adhere to a lefthand
traffic pattern. Traffic pattern elevation at the airport is 650 feet above ground level (AGL) for small aircraft,
which is 1500 feet above mean sea level (MSL) elevation. Traffic pattern elevation at the airport is 1000 feet above
ground level (AGL) for large aircraft, which is 1850 feet above mean sea level (MSL) elevation. Test flying,
aerobatics or other activities that do not adhere to the left-hand traffic pattern shall not be conducted within the 5-
mile radius jurisdiction of the airport unless given specific written consent of the city council, city manager or airport
manager with concurrence from the airport advisory board.
(i) Rule 34. Student training and practice flying.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/435
(1) Flight instructors shall inform students and themselves of all rules and regulations in effect at the
airport.
(2) By notices posted in his/her office, the city manager or airport manager may designate limited
areas of the airport and local areas approved by the FAA for practice flying and training of students.
(3) Aircraft shall not be permitted to remain on the landing or takeoff areas for the purpose of
instruction.
(j) Rule 35. Special procedures.
(1) The city manager or airport manager may, in the interest of safety, designate special traffic
procedures for certain operations, such as helicopters, air shows, agricultural operations, gliders,
ultralights, etc. Any such change from standard procedures shall be published in the FAA's
airport/facility directory if of a permanent nature or the city manager or airport manager shall issue a
Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) if such change is if a temporary nature.
(2) Parachute jumping onto the airport property shall not be permitted without the recommendation of
the airport advisory board and the written approval of the city council.
(k) Rule 36. Flying of model airplanes. Engine-powered model airplanes, cable or radio controlled, or model
gliders shall not be permitted to operate, take off or be launched from, flown over, flown in the terminal area of, or
land at the airport.
(Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; Ordinance 2012-04, sec. 3, adopted 5/15/12; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1205;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.09.066 Fire regulations
(a) Rule 37. Applicable rules.
(1) Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities in any manner shall exercise the
greatest care and caution to avoid and prevent fire.
(2) Smoking or open flame within fifty (50) feet of any fuel tank, fuel pump, or fuel truck is prohibited.
(3) Compressed flammable gas shall not be kept or stored upon the airport, except at such place as
may be designated by the city manager or airport manager.
(4) No flammable substance shall be used for the cleaning of any aircraft part or other thing inside a
hangar, T-hangar, or other building upon the airport.
(5) No one shall smoke or ignite a match or lighter in any building or hangar, except in posted
“designated smoking areas” identified by the city manager or airport manager.
(6) Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. Occupants of “open T” hangars shall be
responsible for mowing inside the hangar and around their aircraft.
(7) The floors in all buildings shall be kept clean and free of oil. Volatile, flammable substances shall
not be used for cleaning the floors.
(8) No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper, tall grass, weeds, unusable airplane parts or wreckage,
scrap wood or metal, discarded airplane or automobile tires, trash, or other litter shall be permitted to
accumulate in or about a hangar, building, or other leased space. If such trash and litter is permitted to
accumulate around a private owned, rented, or leased hangar/building, the city manager or airport
manager shall notify the hangar/building owner, renter or lessee by registered letter to remove the
offending litter. If within ten (10) workdays after receipt of the letter the hangar/building owner, renter, or
lessee has not removed the trash and litter as directed, the city manager or airport manager may have
the area cleaned and the cost for such cleaning shall be charged to the hangar/building owner, renter,
or lessee.
(9) Prior to the fueling of any aircraft, the aircraft shall be bonded to the fuel pump or hydrant
service/fuel truck to equalize the static electrical potential between the fueler and the aircraft. Bonding
shall be accomplished in the interest of fire safety as described in Rule 19, section 1.09.064(b)(2).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/435
(10) A sufficient number, rating, and size of fire extinguishers shall be available whenever aircraft are
being refueled.
(11) Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have a minimum of two 20B fire extinguishers located at the rear
of and on each side of such truck.
(12) Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have an “emergency cut-off” valve, which shall be clearly
identified and painted red.
(13) All aviation fuel nozzles shall have “dead man” controls, which will shut off the fuel flow when the
nozzle hand control is released. Nozzles with mechanical hold open devices will not be permitted for
fueling aircraft.
(14) The pilot and passengers will exit the aircraft and the aircraft will be unoccupied during fueling
operations, except as provided in Rule 19, section 1.09.064(b)(1).
(15) In all matters related to aircraft fueling safety, the provisions of Manual 407, Standard for Aircraft
Fuel Servicing, 2001 edition (or as revised) published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1
Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy MA 02269-9101, 800-344-3555, shall prevail.
(Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; Ordinance 2012-04, sec. 4, adopted 5/15/12; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1206;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.09.067 Knowledge of rules implied
By publication and adoption of the ordinance codified in this division, all persons shall be deemed to have
knowledge of its contents. However, the city manager or airport manager is directed to have copies of the
ordinance printed or reproduced in pamphlet format and posted where appropriate. Copies shall be available at all
times in the city manager's or airport manager's office, and copies or pamphlets shall be furnished to all owners
and operators of aircraft based at the airport. (Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1207;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.09.068 Conflict of rules and regulations
If and where there are conflicts in the rules and regulations prescribed herein and the FAA's Federal Aviation
Regulations (FAR), the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. If and where there exists
a conflict between any of the rules or regulations prescribed herein and any other city rules applicable to the same
area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04;
2001 Code, sec. 1.1208)
Sec. 1.09.069 Enforcement; penalty
The city manager or airport manager may deny use of the airport for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for
any person violating or refusing to comply with any of the rules or regulations prescribed herein pending a hearing
by the city council. Upon such hearing, such person may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its
facilities for a period of time as may appear necessary for the protection of life and property. Any violation of this
division shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state, and local laws,
rules, regulations, ordinances, and orders. Citation for violation or issuance of a violation ticket of any of the rules
and regulations prescribed herein may be made by any authorized police officer. The city council, city manager or
airport manager may request authorized police officers to investigate any suspected violation of these rules.
(Ordinance 04-28 adopted 5/18/04; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1209; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 1.10 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.10.001–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/435
Sec. 1.10.031 Declaration of policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the
opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each
individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap,
or familial status and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on these protected classes
is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or
deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to
prevent.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1601)
Sec. 1.10.032 Definitions
As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
Director. The city manager or authorized assistant.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act which is unlawful under this division.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy
as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction
or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. A single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
Physical or mental handicap. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life
activities.
Physical or mental impairment. Includes:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one
or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory
including speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic,
skin, and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
Senior adult. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1602; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.10.033 Interpretation and effect
This division shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially
equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them
pursuant to title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In
construing this division, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/435
interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity
Act, where appropriate. (Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1603)
Sec. 1.10.034 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by [this division] it shall be unlawful to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(3) Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) Represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such
dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) Induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding
the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1604)
Sec. 1.10.035 Discrimination in housing financing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial
assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other
terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of such person or such persons associated therewith or
because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of the
present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given. (Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1605)
Sec. 1.10.036 Discrimination in providing brokerage service
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in or participation in any multiple
listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of
selling and renting dwellings, or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap,
or familial status. (Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1606)
Sec. 1.10.037 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this division or has
exercised in good faith rights under this division, or has enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because such
individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in
any manner in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. (Ordinance
08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1607)
Sec. 1.10.038 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) Nothing in this division shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/435
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at any
one time;
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only
with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period;
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or
reserved on such person's behalf, under any express [or] voluntary agreement, title to or any right
to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such singlefamily
houses at any one time;
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent
of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement
or written notice in violation of this division; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting
dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of
his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or
more families.
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution
or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to a person of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, or familial status.
(d) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
(e) Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which
rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing
accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this division shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap or familial status.
(g) Nothing in this division shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located
on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings
for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that said reserved
area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/435
to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent
or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this division.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1608)
Sec. 1.10.039 Violations
No person shall violate any provision of this division, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this division.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1609)
Sec. 1.10.040 Enforcement; penalty
(a) Generally. The city manager, as director, shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this
division. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city
employees.
(b) Complaints.
(1) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes
that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter
referred to as the “charging party”) may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in
writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a
discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory
housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge
to any person, upon request.
(2) The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney
General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII,
Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same
manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this subsection.
(3) All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an
alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall
provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein
(hereinafter referred to as the “respondent”) who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an
alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint.
(4) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to
administer oaths.
(5) If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable
cause to believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to
which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint
upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same
manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
(c) Investigation and conciliation.
(1) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a
prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any
charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have
personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have
determined that said charge comes within the provisions of this division. In the event such review
results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this division,
the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not.
(2) If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged
discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with
respect to that alleged offense.
(3) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the
director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/435
discriminatory housing practice, and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with
provisions of this division. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the
respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding, without the written consent of all
persons concerned.
(4) Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a
discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the
respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city
must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to
other agencies as appropriate. With such recommendation of the director and the referral of the human
relations commission, the director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall,
after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint
in municipal court.
(d) Penalty. If a discriminatory housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred
to municipal court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code per violation.
(Ordinance 08-55 adopted 7/15/08; 2001 Code, sec. 1.1610; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abuse. To mistreat through intent or neglect any animal, fowl, livestock, or wildlife in a manner that causes or is
likely to cause stress or physical injury, as provided in V.T.C.A., Penal Code, section 42.11 [42.09 et seq.], or as
otherwise stated in this chapter.
Adjacent. A property that has a common border with the animal owner's property.
Animal. Any live domestic creature, other than livestock and fowl, unless indicated otherwise. When used in this
chapter, the term “animal” includes, but is not limited to, dogs and cats.
Animal services department. The city's public animal services department.
Animal services shelter. The animal services shelter or other facility designated by the city council as the facility to
be used for the impoundment of animals, fowl, livestock, and wildlife taken up by the city's animal services officers
and their assistants.
Animal services supervisor. The individual in charge of the animal services department.
Animal unit. A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated as follows:
(1) Brood cows and slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0.
(2) Milking dairy cows multiplied by 1.4.
(3) Young dairy stock multiplied by 0.6.
(4) Swine weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by 0.4.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/435
(5) Swine weighing under 55 pounds multiplied by 0.3.
(6) Sheep, lambs, or goats multiplied by 0.1.
(7) Horses multiplied by 2.0.
At large. Any animal, including fowl or livestock, not restrained by some physical means to the premises of its
owner or harborer. However, an animal, fowl or livestock shall not be considered at large when held and controlled
by some person by means of a leash or chain of proper strength and length to control the actions of the animal,
fowl or livestock or while confined within a non-open-bed vehicle or secured by a rope, leash or chain in any openbed
vehicle. Further, a licensed cat shall not be considered at large when on the owner's premises, is physically
held or under the direct supervision of and controlled by a person, or is restrained by means of a rope, leash, or
chain.
Authorized veterinary clinic. A clinic that has been preapproved by the animal services department to offer for sale
animal license tags to their clients.
Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for the public.
Collar. Any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used for a dog.
“Properly fitted collar” means, with respect to a collar, a collar that measures the circumference of a dog's neck
plus at least one inch.
Commercial animal establishment. Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school, stable, zoological park,
circus, and performing animal exhibition or kennel, but does not include rodeos.
Curtilage. Any land or building immediately adjacent to a dwelling that is directly and intimately connected with the
habitation.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in
a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to a person or
another animal.
Distance between structures. A straight line from the nearest point of the shed, barn, pen, enclosure, fence, or
area in which the animal is contained to the nearest point of such actual residence or building used for human
habitation.
Enclosure. An area sectioned off by a fence or wall, capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal.
(See also “Securely enclosed or confined.”)
Fowl. Includes chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peafowl and other domestic feathered
creatures. “Fowl” does not include parakeets, canaries, or similar small-size birds, or any exotic birds, such as
parrots (provided that they are continuously confined within the residence or business of the owner/harborer), and
nondomestic feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex.
Grooming shop. A commercial business establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise
groomed.
Harbor. To feed, shelter or maintain any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife for three days or more.
In season. During the stage of estrus or heat.
Kennel (dog/cat). Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises wherein seven or more dogs, seven or more
cats, or seven or more dogs and cats in the aggregate, four months of age or older, are trained, boarded, kept or
maintained, whether for profit or for pleasure. Veterinary hospitals and pet shops are excluded from this definition
unless the pet shop keeps or maintains ten or more dogs and/or cats four months of age or older.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/435
Livestock. Includes, regardless of age, sex or breed, horses, consisting of all equine species including mules,
donkeys, and jackasses; cows, consisting of all bovine species; sheep, consisting of all ovine species; llamas;
goats, consisting of all caprine species; and pigs, consisting of all swine species.
Local rabies control authority. The person duly appointed by the city council members.
Neutered. Any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred; castration in the male,
spaying or ovariectomy in the female.
Official notice. Written notice personally delivered by an animal services officer or mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the recipient.
Owner. Any person who owns, keeps, possesses, shelters, maintains, feeds, harbors or has temporary or
permanent custody of a domestic or prohibited animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife, or who provides premises to
which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. An animal shall be deemed to be owned by a person who
harbored it, fed it or sheltered it for three or more consecutive days.
Performing animals. Any spectacle, display, act or event in which animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife perform.
Pet shop. Any person, partnership, company or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with
another business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of animal,
including dogs or cats, and fowl.
Public nuisance.
(1) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that accosts, chases, or attacks passersby or passing vehicles;
(2) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that accosts, chases, or attacks other animals;
(3) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that trespasses on school grounds;
(4) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that is repeatedly at large (e.g., three or more times per 12-month
period);
(5) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that damages private or public property;
(6) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that barks, whines, howls, crows or makes noise in an
unreasonable, excessive, continuous or untimely fashion;
(7) Any animal which tears, punctures, or otherwise opens refuse containers, causing their contents
to be emptied or exposed to the elements;
(8) Any animal, fowl, or livestock that is a vicious animal not confined as required by this chapter;
(9) Fecal matter or other animal wastes deposited, stored, discharged, or exposed in such a way as
to be a potential instrument or medium in disease transmission, or which cause foul or offensive odors
which create annoyance or discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibilities in close proximity to the
premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
(10) Any animal, fowl, or livestock which soils, defiles, urinates, or defecates on private property
other than the owner's;
(11) The slaughter of any cattle, sheep, goats, domestic fowl, or swine, whether for human
consumption or otherwise, at any location other than a properly permitted and licensed slaughterhouse,
butcher shop or similar facility licensed through the state.
Residence. Any place of human habitation at any time, day or night, including but not limited to any residence,
church, school, convalescent center or nursing home.
Restrained. Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife secured by a leash or lead or confined in an enclosure within the
property limits of its owner or harborer.
Restraint. A chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches a dog to a stationary object or trolley
system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/435
Riding school and stable. Any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction any horse,
pony, donkey, mule or burro.
Secure enclosure. A fence or structure of at least six (6) feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to
prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures
which may be taken by the owner. Such enclosure shall be secured, locked and designed with secure sides, top
and bottom to prevent the animal(s) from escaping from the enclosure. The enclosure shall be posted with signs
on all sides in four-inch letters warning of presence of a dangerous animal and shall include a symbol of a
dangerous animal understandable by young children.
Securely enclosed or confined.
(1) An area that is completely surrounded by a substantial fence or enclosure of sufficient strength,
height, construction, materials, and design as to prevent any animal from escaping from the area and
that will isolate the animal from the public and other animals except for animals owned or under control
of the owner.
(2) Securely enclosed or confined does not mean enclosure or confinement by an invisible or
electronic fence.
(3) Such fence or enclosure shall comply with the appropriate zoning regulations of this code.
Vaccination. An injection of a rabies vaccine which is approved to use in that species by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Veterinary Biologics Division, state veterinarian, and administered by a licensed veterinarian.
Veterinarian. Any person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state board of veterinary medical
examiners.
Veterinary hospital. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis
and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife.
Vicious animal. Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife that, because of its behavior, would constitute a physical
threat to human beings or other animals, fowl or livestock. A dog or cat that has, without provocation, attacked or
bitten a human being or attacked another animal or livestock shall be considered vicious.
Wild animal (wildlife). Any nondomestic creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl) which is of a species that is
wild by nature and which can normally be found in the wild state and which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of
a wild nature or disposition; or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics, would constitute
a danger to human life or property, if not kept or maintained in a safe and secure manner. Such creatures include
but are not limited to all forms of poisonous reptiles and poisonous or nonpoisonous snakes which will exceed a
length of six feet when mature, and nonhuman primates. Excluded from this definition are hamsters, gerbils,
ferrets, domesticated breeds of rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, mice, newts, salamanders, turtles and parrots.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.101)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty; revocation of permit or license
Any person violating any prohibition, requirement, duty or provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine as assigned by the municipal court. If any violation is continuing, each day's violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. If any person is found guilty of cruelty to any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock under
municipal, state or federal law, his permit to own, keep, harbor or have custody of such animal, fowl, wildlife or
livestock shall be deemed automatically revoked, and no new permit or license may be issued. (Ordinance 2012-
08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.117)
Sec. 2.01.003 Responsibility for enforcement; police powers
(a) The local rabies control authority, the animal services officers, and other authorized employees of the animal
services department shall have all of the powers and authority of peace officers to the extent only, and no further,
of enforcing state statutes and regulations, this chapter and other city ordinances relating to animals, fowl,
livestock and wildlife. No person shall interfere in any manner or give false information to the above-stated
employees in the performance of their duties.
(b) If persons keeping animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife within the city, after request of the animal services
department, refuse to permit access to the areas or places of keeping of such animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/435
the animal services officials shall seek the necessary court authorization to enter the premises.
(c) If the animal services officer determines that the life of the animal is in imminent danger, the animal services
officer may enter the curtilage of the premises for the purpose of correcting the threat to the animal's life as long as
damage to property can be averted.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.102)
Sec. 2.01.004 Parental responsibility
(a) If an animal is owned or purported to be owned by an individual who is younger than seventeen (17) years of
age, responsibility and liability for compliance with this chapter with respect to such an animal shall be imposed on
the parent, legal guardian, or other person who has the duty of control and reasonable discipline of the minor
individual, regardless of whether the parent, legal guardian, or other person otherwise meets the definition of
“owner” with respect to the animal at issue.
(b) Financial liability imposed under subsection (a) above shall not exceed limits imposed by state law.
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to imposition of responsibility and liability under subsection (a) above that
the parent, legal guardian, or other person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a
reasonable good faith effort to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.103)
Sec. 2.01.005 Authority to kill, impound or destroy animals
The animal services officer shall have the authority to do the following:
(1) Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property and a real or apparent
necessity exists for the destruction of the animal.
(2) Impound an animal which is diseased and endangers the health and welfare of another animal or
person.
(3) Destroy an impounded animal if the animal services officer determines that recovery of the animal
is doubtful due to injury or disease.
(4) Any animal observed by a police officer or animal services officer to be in immediate danger may
be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available.
(5) Impound any animal that is not properly restrained inside the city limits.
(6) Destroy any impounded wild animal, unless there is reason to believe it has an owner. If not
redeemed within three days of its capture and impoundment, any impounded wild animal and any
impounded dog or cat may be destroyed in a humane manner.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.104)
Sec. 2.01.006 Authority to carry tranquilizer guns
When acting in the course and scope of his employment, the animal services officer shall be and is hereby
authorized to carry on his person or in his city vehicle loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the chief of police and
not in violation of any provision of the Texas Penal Code or any other applicable state law. (Ordinance 2012-08,
sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.105)
Sec. 2.01.007 Keeping poisonous reptiles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to breed, raise, keep or have in his possession any poisonous reptile
within the corporate city limits, except a poisonous reptile kept by an educational or a scientific institution. These
institutions will be subject to initial approval and periodic inspections by the animal services supervisor or under his
direction.
(b) Any person breeding, raising, or keeping poisonous reptiles and any person having in his possession or
having on or about his premises any poisonous reptile, with the intent to keep, possess, raise, or breed the reptile
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/435
within the corporate city limits, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined as assigned by the municipal court.
(c) The intent to commit the offense set out in this section is presumed whenever the means used is such as
would ordinarily result in the commission of the forbidden act.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.106)
Sec. 2.01.008 Disposal of unwanted animals; disposal of dead livestock
(a) Disposal of dead livestock. No property owner, tenant, or possessor of any dead livestock shall fail to lawfully
dispose of the dead livestock within 24 hours of its discovery by the responsible party.
(b) Surrender of unwanted animal to animal services department. Any owner wishing to relinquish an unwanted
animal to an animal services officer or other authorized employees of the animal services department will be
charged a transportation and disposal fee. This transportation fee does not apply to citizens holding a loose animal
for the animal services officers to pick up.
(c) Abandoning animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or turn any animal loose within the city
limits.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.107)
Sec. 2.01.009 Noise
No person shall harbor any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife of any kind that makes an unreasonable disturbance
to the peace of occupants of adjacent premises or premises in the vicinity thereof, including the making of unusual
noises by howling, barking, whining, bawling, crowing or otherwise making noise. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1,
adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.108)
Sec. 2.01.010 Removal of waste
It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of any animal to permit his animal to discharge such animal's feces
upon any public or private property within the city, other than the property of the owner of such animal, if such
owner, keeper or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up such animal's feces from the public
or private property. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.109)
Sec. 2.01.011 Shooting or catching wild birds
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or attempt to shoot or kill with an air rifle, bow and arrow,
slingshot, firearm or other means any wild bird within the city limits, except for the protection of his private property,
so long as no laws are violated, and except where hunting is permitted by law.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to ensnare or catch or attempt to ensnare or catch, by any means
whatsoever, any wild bird within the city unless such ensnaring or catching is first approved by the local health
authority.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.110)
State law reference–Protection of nongame birds, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, sec. 64.002.
Sec. 2.01.012 Care of animals
(a) It shall be unlawful to fail to provide for adequate and humane care and shelter for animals. No owner shall
fail to provide his animals with proper nutrition (food and water), wind- and moisture-proof shelter consisting of a
three-sided structure with a cover or roof, shade, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with
humane care and treatment.
(b) Abusing animals or instigating animal fights is prohibited. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment,
overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight,
or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
(c) Abandoning animals is prohibited. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/435
(d) It shall be unlawful to torture, cruelly beat, mutilate, club, shoot, or attempt to shoot with any air rifle, bow and
arrow, slingshot, or firearm, or by any other means needlessly kill or injure, any animal, wild or owned, within the
limits of the city.
(e) It shall be unlawful to carry or transport an animal in any vehicle or conveyance in a cruel, inhumane, or
unsafe manner, fail to effectively restrain such animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being
accidentally thrown from the vehicle during normal operation of the vehicle, or fail to restrain the animal so as to
prevent infliction of bodily harm to a passerby.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.111)
State law references–Cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09; Cruelty to nonlivestock animals,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092.
Sec. 2.01.013 Unlawful restraint or tethering of animal
(a) In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint:
(1) Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the dog;
(2) Is a length shorter than the greater of:
(A) Five times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of
the dog's tail; or
(B) 10 feet;
(3) Is in an unsafe condition; or
(4) Causes injury to the dog.
(b) No unattended animal shall be tethered by any means on any public property such as city parks or utility
easements, or on public access private property such as undeveloped lots or unfenced yards, or on any other plot
or tract where the public has unrestricted access.
(c) Any tethered animal in a restricted access enclosure shall have continuous access to shade and water, and
have unrestricted access to a wind- and moisture-proof shelter.
(d) Any tethered animal shall be arranged so that the tethering device cannot become tangled around trees,
poles or other obstacles or prevent the access to shade, water and shelter.
(e) No animal shall be tethered in a manner whereby the animal is subject to harassment, stings or bites from
outdoor insects, or attacks by other animals, or in a manner which creates an unsafe condition or causes injury to
the animal.
(f) Exceptions to the unlawful restraint of animals shall be governed by the provisions of Texas Health and
Safety Code, section 821.078.
(g) Penalties for the unlawful restraint of animals shall be governed by the provisions of Texas Health and Safety
Code, section 821.079.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.112)
State law reference–Unlawful restraint of dog, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.076 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.014 Restraint of dogs required; control of cats
An unattended dog must be securely enclosed or confined to its owner's yard by a physical fence in a manner that
will isolate the animal from the public and from other animals. An unattended dog properly tethered with a chain,
rope or leash is not considered legally restrained if it is not also confined by a secure fence. A cat must remain
within the boundaries of its owner's property. When a dog is being walked or is with its owner off its property, the
dog must be on a leash and accompanied by the owner at all times. If the dog is without a leash or not
accompanied by the owner, it is considered unrestrained and is in violation of this chapter. (Ordinance 2012-08,
sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.113)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/435
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
826.033.
Sec. 2.01.015 Leaving animal in motor vehicle
No person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's
health, safety, or welfare. An animal services officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force to
remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety, or welfare is or will be
endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be taken to
the shelter or to a veterinarian, if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of the officer removing
the animal, a telephone number where the officer can be contacted, and the location where the animal may be
claimed by the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall bear the full cost and
expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment cost, and disposal of such animal,
including the removal from the vehicle. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.114)
Sec. 2.01.016 Trapping or poisoning animals
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, including antifreeze, whether mixed with food or not, so
that such poisonous substance shall be liable to be consumed by any domestic animal or person. This section is
not intended to prohibit the proper use of herbicides, insecticides, or rodent control materials. No person shall
expose an open trap of a metal jaw type that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or person; however, this
shall not preclude use of humane box traps. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.115)
Sec. 2.01.017 Confinement of female dogs and cats during estrus
Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a
house, building or secure enclosure, and such area or enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat
from outside such enclosure may gain access to the confined animal. Owners not complying may be ordered by
animal services officer to remove the animal in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or animal shelter. All
expenses incurred as a result of such confinement shall be the responsibility of the owner. Failure to comply with
the removal order of an animal services officer shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat may be
impounded as prescribed in this chapter. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.116)
ARTICLE 2.02 VACCINATION AND LICENSING
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets required
(a) No person shall own, possess or harbor any dog, cat or ferret four months of age or older, unless it has been
vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian or approved antirabies clinic in accordance with this section.
(b) Any unvaccinated dog or cat redeemed from the animal services shelter must be vaccinated against rabies
when the age of the animal permits.
(c) A valid vaccination tag must be worn on a collar or harness at all times. Failure to be wearing the tag is prima
facie evidence that no vaccination has been given.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.201)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Secs. 2.02.002–2.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Licensing of Dogs and Cats*
Sec. 2.02.031 Required; limitation on number of dogs and cats
(a) No person shall own, possess or harbor a dog or cat four months of age or over without obtaining a license
for each animal, except where specifically exempt in this chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/435
(b) No person shall keep more than four in the aggregate of either dogs or cats over the age of four months
within the city.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.231)
Sec. 2.02.032 Exemption from license fee
No license fee shall be required for dogs trained to assist the physically handicapped or governmental agency
police dogs. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.232)
Sec. 2.02.033 Application, fee and certificate of rabies vaccination required
A completed application form obtained from the animal services department, the license fee and a valid certificate
of rabies vaccination must be presented to obtain a license for a dog or cat. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.233)
Sec. 2.02.034 Right to inspect animal and premises
A condition for issuing and maintaining a dog or cat license is permission for the animal services department, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the dog or cat and premises of the dog or cat, when ordered by the
supervisor of the animal services department and their designee. The purpose of this inspection is to ensure
compliance with this chapter. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.234)
Sec. 2.02.035 Fee schedule; transfer; replacement tag; term
The fee for a license shall be set by the animal services department and approved by the city council; the fee
schedule can be found in appendix A of this code. Animal license tags are not transferable from one animal to
another and it shall be unlawful to alter or to issue one without a current rabies vaccination. If a tag is lost, a
duplicate tag may be issued by the animal services department and a replacement fee charged. The animal
license shall run concurrently with the rabies vaccination. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001
Code, sec. 2.235)
Sec. 2.02.036 Denial
(a) No dog or cat license may be issued if the applicant falsifies information, or fails to comply with any section
of this chapter.
(b) No dog or cat license shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of inhumane or cruel treatment to
animals or has three or more convictions for violating a section of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.236)
Sec. 2.02.037 Issuance; records
Upon approval of the application for a dog or cat license, a certificate and license tag will be issued. The tag, of
durable material, designed to be easily fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness, shall bear a number
corresponding to the number on the certificate, showing the month and year of expiration. The department shall
maintain a record of identifying numbers, which shall be available to the public. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1,
adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.237)
Sec. 2.02.038 Wearing of tag
Failure of a dog or cat to wear the license tag at all times shall be prima facie evidence that no license has been
issued and constitutes a violation of this article. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec.
2.238)
ARTICLE 2.03 PERMITS
Sec. 2.03.001 Enforcement
This article shall be enforced by the animal services department, under the direction of the chief of police.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.301)
Sec. 2.03.002 Exemptions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/435
(a) Veterinary hospitals, clinics and related practices of veterinary medicine shall be exempt from this article.
(b) Stock shows, pet fairs including sanctioned animal shows, slaughterhouses, rodeo arenas, governmental
agencies including public schools, laboratories, animal shelters and research facilities approved by the animal
services department may be exempt from this article.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.302)
Sec. 2.03.003 Inspection prerequisite to issuance of permit
It shall be required that an animal services officer inspect the premises prior to issuing a permit required by this
article. The animal services department has the right to inspect the premises, including animals, livestock and fowl,
at any time during normal business hours. Inspection shall be repeated annually. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1,
adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.303)
Sec. 2.03.004 Issuance; term; application for renewal
(a) After inspection, approval of the application, and receiving the fee, a permit required by this article shall be
issued, which shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises. Unless suspended or revoked, the permit
shall remain in effect for one calendar year from the date of issuance.
(b) Application for renewal of a permit may be made from one month prior to one month after the permit
expiration date, but the effective date of the permit shall coincide with the expiring permit date, and the fee will be
for a full year from that date.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.304)
Sec. 2.03.005 Reclassification and fee adjustment
Any person who has a change of category under which a permit was issued pursuant to this article shall be subject
to reclassification, and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee will be made. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.305)
Sec. 2.03.006 Denial
No permit required by this article shall be issued if the applicant has:
(1) Withheld or falsified information on the application;
(2) Failed to comply with any section of this article;
(3) Been convicted three or more times for violating any section or combination of sections of this
chapter; or
(4) Been convicted of inhumane or cruel treatment to animals.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.306)
Sec. 2.03.007 Reapplication upon denial
If a permit required by this article is denied, reapplication cannot be made for at least 60 days. Each reapplication
shall be accompanied by a fee, in addition to the permit fee. The fee is not refundable. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1,
adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.307)
Sec. 2.03.008 Suspension
(a) The animal services department, under authority of the chief of police, may upon official notice suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this article for the following reasons:
(1) Animals being deprived of necessary food, care or shelter.
(2) Animals being cruelly confined or treated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/435
(3) Unsanitary conditions existing to such an extent to create a possible medium for the transmission
of disease to the animals kept there or to human beings.
(4) Noncompliance with any section of this chapter.
(b) The animal services department has the right to take photographs and gather evidence on the premises to
document any of the reasons for suspension.
(c) After suspension, no animal shall be housed or placed on the premises, unless the suspension has been
lifted and the permit has been reinstated.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.308)
Sec. 2.03.009 Reinstatement after suspension
If all violations and unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected within 21 days, the animal services department,
after reinspection, may reinstate the suspended permit issued pursuant to this article. A reinspection shall be made
as soon as practical and not longer than five business days after receiving a written request for such inspection by
the person to whom the permit was issued. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.309)
Sec. 2.03.010 Revocation
After 21 days from suspension of a permit issued pursuant to this article, if no written request for reinspection has
been received or if satisfactory corrections have not been made, the animal services department shall give official
notice that the permit is revoked. The city is not liable to refund any part of the permit fee. (Ordinance 2012-08,
sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.310)
Sec. 2.03.011 Reinstatement after revocation
(a) No person who has had a permit issued pursuant to this article revoked may apply for a new permit for at
least one year from the date of revocation. No permit shall be issued if the person has been convicted of abuse to
animals. If the proper fee, the acceptable application and satisfactory assurance is given that previous violations
will not recur and there will be compliance with all sections of this chapter, a new permit may be issued.
(b) If another owner applies for a permit at the same location where a permit was revoked less than one year
after revocation, the person whose name appears on the revoked permit may in no way be associated with the
new operation, including any financial interest, or such permit will be denied.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.311)
ARTICLE 2.04 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 2.04.001 Permit required
No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment without first obtaining the necessary permit in
compliance with this article. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.401)
Sec. 2.04.002 Categories of permits
(a) The commercial animal establishment permit shall be for persons owning the following types of facilities, as
defined in section 2.01.001:
(1) Pet shop.
(2) Grooming shop.
(3) Auction.
(4) Riding school or stable.
(5) Zoological park.
(6) Circus.
(7) Performing animal exhibition, does not include rodeos.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/435
(8) Recreational rides, including but not limited to horses, camels, donkeys, elephants, and cows.
(b) The annual fee for these permits shall be set by the animal services department and approved by the city
council; the fee schedule can be found in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.402)
Sec. 2.04.003 Each establishment considered separate enterprise; change of location or ownership
Each commercial animal establishment, even though owned by the same person or group, is considered a
separate enterprise, and each must possess a permit. If the establishment moves to another location or if there is
a change of ownership, another application and fee for the permit is required. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.403)
Sec. 2.04.004 Additional requirements for sale of animals
(a) Pet shops. The following are requirements for pet shops in shopping centers or malls:
(1) The pet shop shall be in an enclosed area separated by walls from adjoining stores.
(2) The pet shop cannot be located closer than 50 feet to any eating or drinking establishment.
(3) Air conditioner ducts removing air from the pet shop must be directed outward and not directly
into another shop or the mall.
(4) Any creature sold in the pet shop must be carried from the shop in a box, crate or appropriate
container.
(b) Flea markets. The following requirements apply to all dogs, cats, and/or ferrets offered for sale at flea
markets:
(1) The seller must provide a valid rabies certificate for each dog, cat, or ferret four months of age or
older.
(2) All dogs, cats, or ferrets must be restrained in a manner so as to prevent animal bite exposure to
humans and/or other animals.
(c) Selling or giving away animals in other places. It shall be illegal to sell or give away animals in parking lots,
or at temporary events or in places where the public generally gathers, without previous written approval from the
animal services department. It shall be the responsibility of the seller to clean the area where animals are being
kept and supply animals with adequate water and food during the duration of the event. Written requests shall be
submitted to the animal services department at least one (1) week prior to the event and shall include the
following:
(1) Owner's name, residential address, and contact phone number.
(2) Type of animal.
(3) Location, time, and type of event.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.404)
ARTICLE 2.05 ANIMALS AT LARGE*
Sec. 2.05.001 Running at large prohibited
(a) General prohibition. The running at large of animals, including fowl or livestock, within the city is prohibited.
No owner, possessor or harborer shall allow any animal, fowl, or livestock to run at large. All animals, including
fowl or livestock, must be restrained by some physical means; however, a dog shall not be considered at large
when held and controlled by some person by means of a rope, leash, or chain or as defined under the term “at
large” in section 2.01.001.
(b) Cats. The prohibition against an animal running at large shall not apply to an owned, licensed, and neutered
cat that is on private property with the property owner's consent and not on public property. The cat must be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/435
wearing the required license tag. If no tag is found, the cat may be impounded according to section 2.01.005. If the
cat has been declared a public nuisance, as defined by section 2.01.001, it may be restricted to the owner's
property by the animal services department. Failure to follow any of these restrictions constitutes a violation of this
section.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.501)
Sec. 2.05.002 Public nuisances
Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife which creates a public nuisance, as defined in section 2.01.001, is in violation
of this chapter and is subject to impoundment and citation. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001
Code, sec. 2.502)
ARTICLE 2.06 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Sec. 2.06.001 Declaration of nuisance
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other person harbors, keeps, or maintains a
dangerous dog in the city unless the owner complies with the requirements of this article and state statutes
regulating dangerous dogs. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.601)
Sec. 2.06.002 Investigations
The animal services officer shall investigate all reports of attacks by dogs. The animal services officer shall accept
sworn statements from all victims and witnesses to the attack. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001
Code, sec. 2.602)
Sec. 2.06.003 Reporting of incident; hearing
The following section is adopted pursuant to section 822.0422 of the Health and Safety Code.
(1) Reporting of incident; delivery of dog. A person may report an incident to the municipal court
through the animal services officer. The owner of the dog shall deliver the dog to the animal services
officer not later than the fifth (5th) day after the date on which the owner receives notice that a report
has been filed in municipal court.
(2) Seizure of dog. If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by subsection (1) above, the court
shall order the animal services officer to seize the dog and the court shall issue a warrant authorizing
the seizure. The animal services officer shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the
impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the
dog. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the dog. The court shall determine, after notice
and hearing, whether the dog is a dangerous dog.
(3) Hearing.
(A) The municipal court, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog, shall set a time for a
hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the owner of the dog has
complied with the requirements for owning a dangerous dog as set forth in this article. The
hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or
delivered. The municipal court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to:
(i) The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and
(ii) The person who made the complaint.
(B) Any interested party is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. The owner or person
filing the complaint may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the manner provided for the
appeal of cases from the municipal court.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.603)
Sec. 2.06.004 Registration
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/435
The animal services officer shall register all dangerous dogs as provided for by state law. In addition to the
requirements of state law, the owner of a dangerous dog must obtain a license from the city as provided below. An
owner of a dangerous dog must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. If the animal is sold, is given away, or
changes residences, the owner or harborer shall notify the animal services department within fourteen (14) days.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.604)
Sec. 2.06.005 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person
shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the animal services officer for the city;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure;
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous
dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or
financial responsibility to the animal services officer;
(4) Secure the dangerous dog with a muzzle in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the
dangerous dog is taken off the property of the owner for any reason;
(5) Provide the dangerous dog with a fluorescent yellow collar visible at fifty (50) feet in normal
daylight so that the animal can be identified;
(6) Sterilize the dangerous dog; and
(7) Microchip the dangerous dog for its life with a national registry, and present proof to the animal
services officer. The owner shall have the microchip identification device implanted on the dog
immediately after a municipal court has ruled in a hearing that such dog is dangerous. The cost of the
service shall be at the owner's expense.
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) above shall deliver the dog to the
animal services officer not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is dangerous.
(c) If, on application of any person, the municipal court finds, after notice and hearing, that the owner of a
dangerous dog has failed to comply with subsections (a) or (b) above, the court shall order the animal services
officer or his or her designee to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal
services officer or his or her designee shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the
impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions.
(d) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, impoundment, and
destruction of the dog as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(e) The court shall order the animal services officer to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied
with subsection (a) above before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal
services officer. The court shall order the animal services officer to return the dog to the owner if the owner
complies with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the
animal services officer.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.605)
Sec. 2.06.006 Exemptions
(a) No dog shall be deemed dangerous if the bite, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time
was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or harborer of the dog or by a person
who has tormented or abused the dog.
(b) Dogs under control of the police department or other proper governmental agency are exempt from this
article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/435
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.606)
Sec. 2.06.007 License required
Any person owning a dangerous dog must obtain a license. Written application for such license shall be made to
the animal services department and shall include the applicant's name and address, a description of the animal,
proof of current rabies vaccination, and the payment of a fee set by the animal services department and approved
by the city council. The fee schedule can be found in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The expiration
date of the license shall coincide with the current rabies tag. Before the license is issued, the owner shall have the
animal microchipped by a licensed veterinarian. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec.
2.607)
Sec. 2.06.008 Voluntary declaration of dangerous dog
The owner or harborer may voluntarily declare that he has a dangerous dog and register and apply for a
dangerous dog license as provided in this article. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec.
2.608)
Sec. 2.06.009 Confinement
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or harborer of a dangerous dog to securely confine such animal. A
dangerous dog shall be confined in a secure enclosure as described in section 2.01.001.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a dangerous dog to be outside the dwelling of the owner or outside the enclosure
unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the dangerous dog or to sell or give away the
dangerous dog or to comply with directions of the animal services department. In such event, the dangerous dog
shall be securely restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding
three feet in length and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or harborer or humanely
caged. Unless confined or restrained under conditions stated in this subsection, the dangerous dog shall be
considered at large and subject to the penalties of this chapter.
(c) Other than as specified immediately above, a dangerous dog may not be chained to any object outside the
dwelling or locked enclosure either on or off the property of the owner.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.609)
Sec. 2.06.010 Warning sign
The owner or harborer of a dangerous dog shall display a clearly visible written warning sign that there is a
dangerous dog on the property with a conspicuous warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a
dangerous dog. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. (Ordinance
2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.610)
Sec. 2.06.011 Inspections
An inspection of the premises of the dangerous dog and the dangerous dog shall be made twice a year and at any
other time deemed necessary by the animal services department. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12;
2001 Code, sec. 2.611)
ARTICLE 2.07 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.07.001 Facilities authorized
The city council shall select and establish a suitable animal services shelter for impounding all animals, fowl,
livestock and wildlife by the animal services department. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code,
sec. 2.701)
Sec. 2.07.002 Records
Animal services officers shall keep records giving the following:
(1) The description of all animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife impounded by the animal services
department;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/435
(2) The date of impounding;
(3) Whether the animal has been vaccinated, and if so, the date of the animal's vaccination;
(4) Whether the animal has been spayed or neutered;
(5) The date of reclaim;
(6) The date of euthanasia or transfer for adoption;
(7) The amount realized for the sale or reclaim of each such animal, fowl or livestock; and
(8) The name of the purchaser.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.702)
Sec. 2.07.003 Citations
Any and all animals, fowl or livestock at large are subject to impoundment. In addition to or in lieu of impounding
an animal, fowl or livestock at large, an animal services officer may issue to the known owner of such at-large
animal, fowl or livestock a citation which will constitute a notice of violation. The citation shall be forwarded to the
city municipal court for prosecution. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.703)
Sec. 2.07.004 Right of entry on private property
If an animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife is observed at large on private property, the animal services officer and duly
appointed assistants may enter the property in accordance with applicable law for the purpose of emergency
impoundment; seizure of the animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife; or issuance of a citation or both. (Ordinance 2012-
08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.704)
Sec. 2.07.005 Redemption generally
The owner of any animal, fowl or livestock impounded in accordance with this article shall have the right to reclaim
the animal, fowl or livestock upon showing satisfactory proof of ownership and paying to the city the appropriate
impoundment fee set by the animal services department and approved by the city council; the fee schedule can be
found in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.705)
Sec. 2.07.006 Vaccination and license required for dogs and cats
The owner of any impounded dog or cat four months of age or older shall, at the time of redemption, show proof of
current rabies vaccination or, if unable to show such proof, shall be required to purchase a voucher that may be
taken to a veterinarian of their choice for the procedure to be performed within fourteen (14) days of release from
the animal shelter. The owner must also at this time purchase a city license if unable to show proof of a current
license. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.706)
Sec. 2.07.007 Redemption of wildlife
No wildlife shall be subject to redemption from impoundment without the approval of the animal services
department. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.707)
Sec. 2.07.008 Detention time
It shall be the duty of the animal services officer to keep all tagged animals for a period of five working days from
the date of impoundment and all untagged animals for a period of three working days from the date of
impoundment. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.708)
Sec. 2.07.009 Livestock
(a) Impoundment of animals running at large. The animal services officer shall take up and cause to be
impounded any livestock found to be running at large within the city limits.
(b) Redemption. The owner of any livestock impounded as provided in subsection (a) of this section may reclaim
the livestock before sale by providing proof of ownership and paying all expenses, including the roper's fee,
boarding fee, impounding fee, and the miscellaneous expenses and costs of advertising.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/435
(c) Sale or disposal. The animal services supervisor shall proceed to sell any unclaimed livestock, if not
redeemed within six days (6) from date of impoundment, at public auction for cash, first giving three days' notice in
the city's daily official newspaper describing the livestock impounded and stating that the livestock will be sold to
defray costs, if not reclaimed before the date of the sale. If not reclaimed by such date, the animal services
supervisor shall, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on such date, sell such livestock at public auction.
The animal services supervisor shall have the right to refuse all bids and arrange for other disposition. If any atlarge
livestock impounded by animal services department is diseased or afflicted in any manner, such livestock
may be euthanized after obtaining a statement from a veterinarian. Any money received from the sale of such
animal in excess of city-incurred fees for sale of the animal shall be given to the owner of the animal if he submits
a written claim to the city secretary within three (3) months after the sale of the animal.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.709)
Sec. 2.07.010 Fowl
No owner, possessor or harborer of chickens, turkeys or other fowl shall allow the fowl to run at large within the city
limits. The fowl running at large shall be impounded by the animal services department. The owner of any fowl
impounded may redeem such by paying the appropriate impounding and boarding fees during the three working
days' impoundment period. Antwerp messenger or homing pigeons are exempt from this section. (Ordinance
2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.710)
Sec. 2.07.011 Trapping
(a) Any animal services officer is authorized to employ the use of humane cage traps (e.g., Have-a-Heart,
Tomahawk Brand) for the purpose of capturing animals, fowl or wildlife at large.
(b) Residents of the city wishing to trap unwanted animals may do so with the use of humane cage traps. Traps
may be rented from the animal services department.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.711)
Sec. 2.07.012 Euthanasia
(a) Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife impounded or found at large within the city may be destroyed upon
determination by the animal services officer or a local veterinarian that it has been injured or is sick and in such
state that its recovery is seriously in doubt or that it is sick and endangers the health of other animals or persons.
(b) Any impounded wild animal, unless there is reason to believe it has an owner, may be immediately destroyed
in a humane manner. If not redeemed within three days of its capture and impoundment, any impounded wild
animal and any impounded dog or cat may be destroyed in a humane manner.
(c) If not redeemed within five (5) business days from the date of impoundment, any impounded tagged animal,
including a dog or cat, may be destroyed in a humane manner.
(d) If not redeemed within three (3) business days from the date of impoundment, any impounded untagged
animal, including a dog or cat, may be destroyed in a humane manner.
(e) All euthanasia shall be done humanely, by injection of a lethal drug or necessary means as approved by
state law.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.712)
ARTICLE 2.08 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.08.001 Reporting of rabid animals, livestock and wildlife
It shall be the duty of every animal or livestock owner or harborer, veterinarian, physician or any person to report to
the animal services department all cases of rabies with which he comes in contact or to which his attention has
been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of a case of rabies. (Ordinance
2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.801)
Sec. 2.08.002 Reporting of rabies exposure
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/435
A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual or of an animal that the person suspects is
rabid shall report the incident or animal to the animal services department. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.802)
Sec. 2.08.003 Quarantine of animal or livestock exhibiting symptoms of rabies
Any animal or livestock that has symptoms of rabies as verified by a veterinarian shall at once be placed under
rabies quarantine by the animal services officer in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 826.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.803)
Sec. 2.08.004 Quarantine of animal, fowl or livestock attacking person
(a) If any person alleges that any animal, fowl or livestock has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any
person within the city in a manner which caused a break in the skin of the person, he may report the incident to the
animal services department and sign an animal bite complaint form. It shall be the duty of the animal services
officer, as soon as feasible, to impound such animal, fowl, or livestock for quarantine purposes.
(b) If a disagreement should occur or questions arise as to whether or not a wound is the result of an animal,
fowl, or livestock bite or scratch, the complainant shall be required to sign a notarized affidavit before the
impoundment and quarantine will be instituted. This quarantine shall take place at the animal services shelter or at
a local veterinary hospital for a period of at least ten days (240 hours from the time of the incident).
(c) Impoundment at any approved facility for rabies quarantine purposes shall be at the expense of the owner of
the impounded animal, fowl, or livestock. If a harborer of a quarantined animal cannot be identified and located
within a reasonable length of time, the complainant, at his option, may elect to have the animal examined by a
veterinarian or to have the tissue submitted for laboratory examination, and the costs so incurred shall be borne by
the complainant. No animal, fowl, or livestock confined for quarantine purposes under this article shall be released
to any person until all vaccinations required by this chapter have been given.
(d) Should any owner or harborer of any animal or livestock which has bitten or scratched a person within the
city fail to turn over the animal for quarantine, or refuse to allow the quarantine of such animal or livestock,
pursuant to this section, or attempt to interfere with such impoundment, that person shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine under the provisions of this article.
(e) Unvaccinated animals should not be vaccinated against rabies during the 10-day (240 hours) observation
period; however, animals may be treated for unrelated medical problems diagnosed by a veterinarian.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.804)
Sec. 2.08.005 Seizure warrant
If the harborer of an attacking animal refuses to release for quarantine such animal, it shall be the duty of the
animal services supervisor to obtain a seizure warrant for the seizure and quarantine of the animal in question.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.805)
Sec. 2.08.006 City-wide quarantine
(a) Animals in public restricted. During any period of city-wide quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to
allow any animal to be taken, whether restrained or not, to the streets or any other public place.
(b) Conditions warranting quarantine. A city-wide quarantine may be invoked for a period of 30 days by the city
council upon request by the animal services department after an investigation if it has been determined that there
is an immediate threat of rabies.
(c) Extension of time. If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the 30-day period of the
city-wide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional reasonable period of time.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.806)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
Sec. 2.08.007 Destruction or quarantine of animal or livestock bitten by suspected rabid animal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/435
Every unvaccinated animal or livestock bitten or attacked by another animal or wildlife suspected of being rabid
shall be destroyed or quarantined for a period determined by state law, at the owner's expense. Vaccinated
animals or livestock must be destroyed or quarantined for a period determined by state law from the date of
exposure. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.807)
ARTICLE 2.09 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.09.001 Animal care
No owner shall fail to provide his animals, fowl or livestock with sufficient good and wholesome food and water,
adequate shelter and protection from the weather, adequate space and humane care and treatment and
reasonable veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. All persons owning, possessing or harboring such
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Shelter. Shelter shall be provided as follows:
(A) Animals. Animals shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry and
protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be enclosed fully on three sides, shall be roofed,
and shall have a solid floor. The entrance to the shelter shall be flexible to allow the animal's entry
and exit and sturdy enough to block entry of wind or rain. The shelter shall be small enough to
retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow the animal to stand and turn comfortably.
The enclosure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Bedding shall be provided. Either
natural or artificial shade shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight. If shade is
provided by the enclosure, allowance shall be made for adequate ventilation. A suitable method
shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from the shelter area.
(B) Livestock. Livestock shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry
during rain and snow and protected from severe chill factor. Such shelter shall have three sides
and a roof. It shall be structurally sound and in good repair to protect the livestock from injury.
Such shelter will provide minimum space to accommodate all livestock confined within the
compound as provided in section 2.10.005.
(2) Shade; drainage. Either natural or artificial shade shall be provided to protect livestock from direct
sunlight. If shade is provided by the enclosure, allowance shall be made for adequate ventilation. A
suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from the shelter area.
(3) Mobility and space requirements. Any animal or livestock kept on a chain or rope shall be placed
so that it cannot become entangled with the restraints of other animals or livestock or with any other
objects. The chain or rope shall be of sufficient length to allow the animal or livestock complete access
to shelter at all times. The chain shall be attached in a manner so as not to cause injury or discomfort to
the animal or livestock. For dogs, the chain or rope shall be at least three times the length of the dog as
measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail. Cats shall not be staked outside on a leash,
rope, chain or similar apparatus. For animals and livestock not confined by a chain or rope, the
enclosure shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space for normal movement
and to prevent overcrowding and physical discomfort as provided in sections 2.10.001(3) and
2.10.005(a).
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.901)
Sec. 2.09.002 Inhumane treatment
(a) Generally. No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overdrive, overwork, kill,
torture, mutilate, maim or perform, cause to be performed or permit to be performed any other act of cruelty upon
any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock. No person other than a licensed veterinarian shall crop the ears or tail or
perform any surgery on any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock, excluding livestock castration and dehorning. It shall
be an affirmative defense under this section that such action was reasonably necessary to protect the health and
safety of a human or an animal.
(b) Restraint of dog. An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that
unreasonably limits the dog's movement:
(1) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/435
(2) Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; or
(3) In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which:
(A) The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit;
(B) A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction; or
(C) A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the
National Weather Service.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.902)
Sec. 2.09.003 Abandonment of animal; release of wildlife
No person having custody of any animal, fowl or livestock, as owner or otherwise, shall abandon such animal, fowl
or livestock. No person having custody of any wildlife shall abandon or release any such wildlife that is incapable
of surviving on its own in the environment into which it is to be released. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.903)
Sec. 2.09.004 Giving animals as prize or inducement; artificially colored animals; sale of young fowl
(a) No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock or wildlife as a prize for or inducement to
enter any contest, game, or other competition; as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an incentive
to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade.
(b) No chick, duckling, gosling, rabbit or hamster that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially shall be
kept or displayed in the city.
(c) No chickens, chicks, ducklings, goslings or similar fowl younger than eight weeks of age shall be sold in
quantities of less than 12 to a single purchaser. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering such for sale in
quantities of 12 or more shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to
maintain the chicks, ducklings or goslings in good health and shall keep adequate food and water available to such
fowl at all times.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.904)
Sec. 2.09.005 Duties of operator of motor vehicle striking animal, fowl or livestock
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle within the city, strikes any animal, fowl or livestock shall stop at
once, render such assistance as may be practicable, and report the accident to an appropriate law enforcement
agency or the animal services department. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.905)
Sec. 2.09.006 Exposing poisonous substances or traps
(a) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poison
shall be liable to be eaten by an animal, fowl, livestock, wildlife or person. This subsection is not intended to
prohibit the prudent use on one's own property of herbicides, insecticides or common rodent control materials
(e.g., rat poisons) mixed only with a vegetable substance.
(b) No person shall expose an open-jaw-type trap, leg hold trap, snare trap or any type trap able or liable to
cause physical harm or injury to any animal, fowl, livestock, wildlife or person.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.906)
Sec. 2.09.007 Performing animal exhibitions
All performing animal exhibitions (circuses, zoos, petting farms/zoos, animal acts, wildlife parks, and some
sanctuaries) must be licensed through the United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS) and must follow the American Welfare Act guidelines. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1,
adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.907)
Sec. 2.09.008 Confining animal in motor vehicle
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/435
(a) No animal shall be confined within a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as may endanger
the health or well-being of the animal, including but not limited to dangerous temperature, lack of food, water or
attention, or confinement with a dangerous animal.
(b) Any animal services or peace officer is authorized to remove any animal from a motor vehicle at any location
when he reasonably believes it is confined in violation of subsection (a) of this section. Any animal so removed
shall be delivered to the animal services shelter, after the removing officer leaves written notice of such removal
and delivery, including his name, in a conspicuous, secure location on or within the vehicle.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.908)
ARTICLE 2.10 CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
Sec. 2.10.001 Sanitation; odor and vector control; cage sizes
Every owner, possessor or harborer of animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife shall comply with the following
regulations and sanitation requirements:
(1) Disposal of animal wastes. Approved procedures for disposing of animal wastes shall be provided
and utilized on a daily basis.
(2) Odor and vector control. All persons keeping animals within the city shall keep the premises upon
which such animals are kept clean and free from noxious and unpleasant odors and shall use spray or
other chemical control at reasonable intervals so as to keep such premises free from flies, mosquitoes,
ticks, fleas and other vectors.
(3) Minimum cage size. Shall be as follows and overcrowding shall be prohibited:
(A) Every keeper of an animal shall confine the animal in an enclosure sufficient to prevent its
running at large. Such enclosure shall also be of sufficient size and consist of at least a threesided
structure with a cover or roof to maintain the animal comfortably and in good health. The
following shall be the minimum standard for cage size:
(i) Large breeds, over 50 pounds: Four feet by six feet, or 25 square feet.
(ii) Medium breeds, 36 to 50 pounds: Four feet by five feet, or 20 square feet.
(iii) Small breeds, 10 to 35 pounds: Three feet by four feet, or 12 square feet.
(iv) No more than two large, two medium, or three small breed animals shall be permitted
per five-foot by ten-foot cage, nor shall overcrowding occur in cages of any size.
(B) In addition, all permitted facilities will conform to this subsection except for the following
allowances for pet shop cages:
(i) Two feet by two feet by two feet for two pups not over five pounds each or four kittens.
(ii) Two and one-half feet by 2-1/2 feet by 2-1/2 feet for two pups not over ten pounds
each.
(iii) Three feet by three feet by 2-1/2 feet for one small dog ten to 20 pounds.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1001)
Sec. 2.10.002 Keeping rabbits
No person shall own, possess or harbor rabbits in any enclosure which is less than 50 feet, shortest measured
distance, from any residence, except the residence of the harborer. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12;
2001 Code, sec. 2.1002)
Sec. 2.10.003 Keeping fowl
(a) Generally. No person shall:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/435
(1) Harbor any fowl with less than 10 square feet of floor or ground area for each. Permitted pet
shops shall be exempt from this subsection.
(2) Keep any fowl within any structure in the city without thoroughly cleaning the area at least once
each day and so maintaining such structure that no offensive odors are emitted therefrom.
(3) Keep any fowl within any structure, the interior of which is not treated with an approved
disinfectant at least once every six months to discourage insects, fleas, ticks, mites, mosquitoes and
flies.
(4) Place the coop, pen, housing or enclosure nearer than 100 feet to any residence, excluding the
residence of the harborer of the fowl. Permitted pet shops shall be exempt from this subsection.
(5) Keep any fowl at any location other than inside the approved structure. All fowl shall be kept in an
enclosure or pen constructed of material designed to prevent fowl from escaping the enclosure or pen.
(6) Keep more than 10 adult fowl within the corporate city limits.
(7) Keep any fowl in violation of any other section of this chapter.
(b) Breeding or keeping pigeons; prohibited fowl. Standards for the breeding or keeping of certain pigeons shall
be as follows:
(1) Restrictions. No person shall keep, breed or raise pigeons within the corporate city limits except
the Antwerp messenger or homing pigeons, commonly called carrier pigeons, when the keeper
complies with this section. No person shall keep, breed or raise roosters or peacocks within the
corporate city limits.
(2) Identification of pigeons. The Antwerp messenger pigeon shall have the name of the owner
stamped upon its wing or tail or a leg band or ring with the name or initials of its owner or an
identification or registration number stamped thereon when permitted to race or to fly for necessary
exercise and training.
(3) Cleanliness and odor control; setback from residences. The enclosure shall be kept clean and
free of offensive odors, and the nearest point of the enclosure shall not be less than 100 feet from the
nearest point of any residence on another's property.
(4) Trespassing by pigeons. It shall be unlawful to maintain any Antwerp messenger pigeon in such a
manner that constitutes a nuisance because of repeated trespasses on public property or private
property, other than that of the owner of such pigeons.
(c) Keeping guineas or peacocks prohibited. No person shall keep or maintain within the city limits any guinea
fowl or peacocks.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1003)
Sec. 2.10.004 Keeping fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs or ferrets for commercial purposes
No owner, possessor or harborer of any domestic fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs or ferrets, where such fowl or animals
are kept for sale or for any purpose, shall allow such fowl or animals to roam in open pens on the ground.
However, such harborer may keep such fowl or animals for sale or commercial purposes, provided he keeps such
fowl or animals in batteries or coops, arranged inside of buildings and kept in a sanitary condition, removing all
droppings from such buildings, batteries or coops at least once each day and disinfecting and deodorizing such
buildings, batteries or coops at least once each day. Any such building must be at least 50 feet from any residence
other than the harborer's. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1004)
Sec. 2.10.005 Keeping livestock
(a) Setback from residences; minimum space. No livestock shall be kept or [sic] at a distance closer than 200
feet from any residence located on another's property. All such livestock shall be maintained on a properly fenced
parcel of land, providing a minimum of 5,000 square feet of area for each head of livestock. If livestock is taken
outside of the fenced parcel of land for any reason it shall be attended by owner at all times and shall not be tied to
a tree, fence or any other fixed object that was not made for such use. All such livestock shall have provided by
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/435
their owner a shed of reasonable size for the number of livestock to be protected as provided in section
2.09.001(1)(B).
(b) Number of livestock allowed. No person shall have more than 2 animal units of livestock per acre with a
maximum of 6 animal units of livestock for each 5 acres of land.
(c) Odor, vector and pest control. The place of keeping livestock shall be kept free of offensive odors, flies,
rodents and other pests.
(d) Manure container required; disposal of manure. Each and every enclosure in or on which any livestock are
kept shall have a suitable manure container, into which all manure shall be placed daily. Each container shall be
securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, rodents and other vermin and shall be cleaned out and
disinfected at least once a week. Manure from containers shall not be left in open stacks, but shall be removed or
buried.
(e) Swine, jacks, bulls and stallions. Shall not [be permitted] to be kept within the city limits. With the exception
of swine that will be kept for a school project and is required to meet section 2.10.009.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1005)
Sec. 2.10.006 Keeping wild or exotic animals
No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild/exotic animal. This section shall not be
construed to apply to approved zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, animals kept for
treatment in a facility operated by a veterinarian or animals used for research or teaching purposes by a licensed
hospital or nonprofit university or college providing a degree program. (Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted
6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1006)
Sec. 2.10.007 Disposal of litter and droppings
Every harborer of animals, livestock or fowl shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be disposed of daily in
a sanitary manner, such that the creation of odors and the breeding of flies, rodents and other vermin are
minimized. The method employed must meet with the approval of the animal services department. (Ordinance
2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1007)
Sec. 2.10.008 Storage of feed
All feed provided for animals, livestock or fowl shall be kept in a ratproof, flyproof container. (Ordinance 2012-08,
sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1008)
Sec. 2.10.009 Keeping of project animals, livestock or fowl by schoolchildren
(a) School-age children enrolled in a public or private school which offers FFA/4-H programs, in which the class
participants are required or allowed to raise project animals, livestock or fowl for show or profit purposes, may
apply for a permit to keep certain prohibited animals, livestock or fowl for the school project, even though the
property may not be fully in compliance with the setback requirements of this article. Those students are required
to:
(1) Apply for an annual FFA/4-H project animal/livestock/fowl permit.
(2) Pay the annual permit fee.
(3) Show proof of enrollment in one of the listed school programs.
(4) Agree to comply with the cleanliness and sanitation requirements of this article and the state
Health and Safety Code.
(5) Obtain the approval, in writing, of all immediately adjacent property owners.
(6) Allow inspection by the animal services staff of the animal, livestock or fowl, pens, facilities, and
property before issuance of the permit.
(b) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section will disallow the issuance of the necessary
permit. Permits are nontransferable and are revoked upon either graduation from high school, dropping the class,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/435
or nonattendance by the student.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1009)
ARTICLE 2.11 DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.11.001 Prohibited animals
A person commits an offense if the person imports, offers for sale, keeps, maintains, owns, possesses, harbors or
permits in the city any of the following animals:
(1) A lion;
(2) A tiger;
(3) An ocelot;
(4) A cougar;
(5) A leopard;
(6) A cheetah;
(7) A jaguar;
(8) A bobcat;
(9) A lynx;
(10) A serval;
(11) A caracal;
(12) A hyena;
(13) A bear;
(14) A coyote;
(15) A jackal;
(16) A baboon;
(17) A chimpanzee;
(18) An orangutan;
(19) A gorilla;
(20) A panther;
(21) A wolf;
(22) Any hybrid of an animal listed in this section; or
(23) Any other wild animal capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other
animals or fowl.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1101)
Sec. 2.11.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/435
(2) A bona fide research institute using animals for scientific research;
(3) A circus duly authorized to do business in the city; or
(4) An injured, orphaned or abandoned dangerous wild animal while being transported for care or
treatment or while being cared for by a licensed veterinarian.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, sec. 2.1102)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 3.02 CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS*
Sec. 3.02.001 Codes adopted; amendments
(a) Adoption. The 2012 International Building Code, the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings, the 2012 International Plumbing Code, the 2012 International Mechanical Code, the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code, the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code, the 2012 International Private
Sewage Disposal Code, the 2012 International Existing Building Code, and the 2011 National Electrical Code, as
revised, including all appendix chapters of said codes, published by the International Code Council and the
National Fire Protection Association respectively, are hereby adopted as the building code of the city for the
purpose of regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair,
moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupation, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings or structures in the city. These building codes are fully incorporated by reference as though copied into
this article in its entirety.
(b) Availability to public. The material contained in the International Codes and the National Electrical Code,
although fully adopted and incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the
building inspector. These exhibits shall be available for public inspection and copying during regular business
hours. The purpose of maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the
inclusion of detailed technical construction material, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably
lengthen the code.
(c) Amendments.
(1) The 2012 International Building Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as shown on exhibit
“A” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(2) The 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted herein is
hereby amended as shown on exhibit “B” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the
city secretary.
(3) The 2012 International Plumbing Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as shown on
exhibit “D” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(4) The 2012 International Mechanical Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as shown on
exhibit “E” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(5) The 2012 International Energy Conservation Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as
shown on exhibit “F” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/435
(6) The 2011 National Electrical Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as shown on exhibit “G”
attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(7) The 2012 International Fuel Gas Code as adopted herein is hereby amended as shown on exhibit
“H” attached to Ordinance 2015-20 and on file in the office of the city secretary.
(d) Additional modifications. The city may from time to time determine that additional local modifications to the
International Codes and the National Electrical Code are necessary and appropriate to meet the unique building
needs of the city. To effectuate modifications, the city council may enact individual ordinances amending this article
fully setting forth the change to be made in the building code.
(Ordinance 97-9-A adopted 12/2/97; Ordinance 04-32 adopted 7/20/04; Ordinance 05-42 adopted 12/6/05;
Ordinance 07-58 adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(a); Ordinance 2015-20 adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.02.002 Copies on file
These codes, manuals and supplements as defined in section 3.02.001 shall be maintained on file in the office of
the city secretary and the city secretary shall certify to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article.
(Ordinance 97-9-A adopted 12/2/97; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(b))
Sec. 3.02.003 Code enforcement official
There shall hereby be created the position of code enforcement official, who shall have the powers of law
enforcement officers for the purpose of enforcing the codes referenced above and any and all city ordinances
pertaining to civil law. (Ordinance 97-9-A adopted 12/2/97; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(c))
Sec. 3.02.004 Liability
All of the regulations provided in the codes, manuals and supplements adopted herein are declared to be
governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of the city council, and the city officials or
employees, administrative authority or other persons charged with the enforcement of the codes, acting in good
faith and without malice on behalf of the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself
personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. (Ordinance 97-9-A adopted
12/2/97; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(d))
Sec. 3.02.005 Trade registration and licensing; homestead work
(a) Any and all trade-related work that is performed as a commercial business, electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
concrete and irrigation, shall be performed by a person or persons holding appropriate licensing and/or registration
as required by federal, state or local laws.
(b) The following acts are exempt from the licenses as required in subsection (a) hereof:
(1) Any work done pursuant to Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, section 1301.051
et seq.
(2) Any work done pursuant to Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law, section
1302.052 et seq., provided that all other applicable state and/or federal regulations are met.
(3) All electrical work considered being normal maintenance and/or repair.
(4) Trade-related work done by anyone who is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance
man or maintenance engineer, incidental to and in connection with the business in which he is
employed or engaged, and who does not engage in the trade occupation for the general public.
(c) Property owners must obtain proper permits to perform work upon their property. All applicable federal and
state statutes, as well as city ordinances, must be followed. All work shall be inspected and adjudged as if a
person holding an appropriate license was performing said work.
(Ordinance 97-9-A adopted 12/2/97; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 6/6/00; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(e))
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/435
State law references–Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1301; Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Contractor License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1302; Texas Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, ch. 1305; irrigators, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1903.
Sec. 3.02.006 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or cause or permit anyone to violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each and every day that any violation of this article or any
part thereof shall occur shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such.
Furthermore, upon the discretion of the code enforcement official, any individual, firm or corporation who knowingly
or deliberately violates the codes adopted herein can be reported to the proper trade-related governing agency for
such violation(s). (Ordinance 97-9-A adopted 12/2/97; 2001 Code, art. 3.100(g))
ARTICLE 3.03 FIRE ZONE*
Sec. 3.03.001 Construction standards
A building of first-class construction shall have external and party walls of brick, stone, concrete, or other equally
substantial and incombustible material. Construction and supports of floors and roofs shall be either of metal or of
reinforced concrete, hard-burned terra-cotta, brick or concrete tile. Roofs and roof structures shall be of and
covered with incombustible material. Bays, cornices, gutters, belts, and similar projections shall be of
incombustible material. Subfloors and finished floors, window and door frames, sashes, doors, interior finish, rails
for stairs, and necessary isolated furrings and floor screeds may be of wood. Every metal structural member which
supports loads or resists stresses shall have a protection of fireproofing of brick, concrete, or terra-cotta. (1976
Code, sec. 4-1; 2001 Code, sec. 3.201)
Sec. 3.03.002 Boundaries
(a) The fire zone shall and is hereby declared to include all that area in the city within the following boundaries,
viz.: Beginning at the point of intersection of Ninth Street with the alley between Halsell and Cates; thence north
along Ninth Street to its intersection with the alley between Carpenter and Stevens; thence east along this alley to
its intersection with Eleventh Street; thence south along Eleventh Street to its intersection with the alley between
Stevens and Halsell; thence east along this alley to its intersection with Twelfth Street; thence south along Twelfth
Street to its intersection with the alley between Halsell and Cates; thence west along this alley to its intersection
with Ninth Street (the point of beginning).
(b) The mention of streets and alleys in this section means the centerlines of the streets and alleys.
(1976 Code, sec. 4-2; 2001 Code, sec. 3.202; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.03.003 “Structure” defined
“Structure,” as hereinafter used, includes the terms building, appurtenance, wall, platform, staging or flooring used
for standing or seating purposes, and shed. (1976 Code, sec. 4-3; 2001 Code, sec. 3.203)
Sec. 3.03.004 Building permit required
No person, firm, company, or corporation shall build any type of structure or do any work or repairs upon any
structure, building, or shed within the fire zone of the city without first obtaining an approved building permit from
the fire inspector and building inspector of the city. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 1, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec.
3.204)
Sec. 3.03.005 Application for building permit; issuance; revocation
(a) Application for permit. When any person, firm, company, or corporation shall be desirous of erecting,
repairing, changing, altering, or remodeling any building or structure within the fire zone of the city, he or they, or
their authorized agent, shall make application at the office of the development services department for a building
permit, and shall furnish a written statement, giving such information as desired by the fire inspector, upon a blank
form furnished by the development services department for that purpose, together with plans and specifications of
same, when required, which shall be delivered to the city secretary and shall remain in her custody a sufficient
length of time to allow the necessary examination to be made thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/435
(b) Review by fire inspector. Before a building permit is issued, the application, plans and specifications, and all
other information so obtained shall be submitted to the fire inspector, who shall pass on same in regard to fire
hazard and fireproofing requirements.
(c) Issuance. If such plans and specifications are in compliance with the provisions of this article and indicate
that the erection, reconstruction, repair, or remodeling is to be in accordance with this article, the fire inspector
shall approve the same, and the development services department shall thereafter issue a “certificate of approval,”
retaining one set of plans and specifications until the proposed work is completed, at which time the plans and
specifications shall be returned to the person who filed them.
(d) Denial. If such plans and specifications proposed do not comply with the provisions of this article, then the
fire inspector shall reject same, indicating in a written report his objections thereto. Such changes as may be
required shall be made before any permit is issued.
(e) Notice of violation. If a permit has been issued and the fire inspector be convinced that the work under any
permit is not proceeding according to the detailed statement, plans and specifications upon which such permit was
issued, but is proceeding in violation of the law or provisions of this article, it shall be his duty to notify the owner or
owners, or his or their agents, in writing, that the work is being constructed or installed in violation of the permit and
the provisions of this article and that the same must be immediately rectified to conform with same.
(f) Revocation of permit. If the owner or owners, or his or their agents, neglect to comply with this article or fail to
make corrections, it shall be the further duty of the fire inspector and the building inspector to revoke the permit,
and notice thereof in writing shall be immediately served upon the owner or owners, agents, superintendent, or
contractor in charge of his work. After such revocation of permit, any person, owner, agent, superintendent,
contractor, or workman performing any work in or about such structure, building, or premises shall be in violation of
the terms of this article.
(g) Review by city council. The issuance, revocation, or disapproval of any building permit or application therefor
by the fire inspector and building official shall be subject to the review of the city council.
(Ordinance 09-75, sec. 1, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.205; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.03.006 Penalty
Any person, firm, organization, corporation, or partnership violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and
each day a violation of this article shall exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1976 Code, sec. 4-6;
2001 Code, sec. 3.206)
ARTICLE 3.04 PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 3.04.001 Building permit fees
The building permit fees printed in the currently adopted International Building Code, shall be repealed and shall
read as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98; 2001
Code, sec. 3.401; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.002 Building valuation
For the purpose of establishing a consistent and standard cost per square foot based on occupancy and
construction type, the most current version of the “Building Valuation Table” as maintained by the International
Conference of Building Officials and adjusted by the appropriate regional modifier shall be adopted in order to
determine the building permit fee set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Said valuation table shall
be kept on file with the building official and can be requested from the city or obtained directly at
http://www.iccsafe.org/codes-tech-support/codes/code-development-process/building-valuation-data/. (Ordinance
01-37 adopted 10/16/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.402; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.003 Trade registration; electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits
(a) For all trade-related work, i.e., electrical, plumbing and mechanical, the individual holding a master license
shall render unto the city a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code to be registered
with the city. The city therefore accepts reciprocal license from other cities upon registration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/435
(b) For the purpose of establishing permit fees for each and every trade-related work to be performed on each
and every structure, construction, or reconstruction on any lot, block or address in the city, the tables titled
“Electrical Permit Fees” “Plumbing Permit Fees” and “Mechanical Permit Fees” shall be adopted and said tables
shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.403)
Sec. 3.04.004 Other inspections and fees
All other inspections and fees not afore-listed in this article and found in the table titled “Other Inspections and
Fees” are as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98;
2001 Code, sec. 3.404)
Sec. 3.04.005 Submission of plans; stake-out inspection
(a) In order to receive a permit for all new construction, two sets of plans, sealed by a registered engineer or
architect, and plot plans shall be submitted for approval. The corners of said structure shall be staked on the
ground of the lot or tract of land indicating the corners of such structure. For enlargements, [or] add-ons to existing
commercial structures the same shall be so adhered. Freestanding detached structures, porches, patios and addons
to single-family structures, a sketch of location on the lot, block or tract shall suffice but must be staked on the
ground prior to issuance of a permit. (This does not exempt trade work and permitting for same.) Four working
days must elapse between receipt of the permit application and issuance of the permit.
(b) Where work is being performed and permitted in the city, the address of such location of work shall be
provided on the lot, block or tract prior to stake-out inspection with numbers easily visible from the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.405)
Sec. 3.04.006 Commencing work prior to permit issuance
In the event work for which a permit is required by this article or article 3.02 should be started or proceeded prior to
obtaining permits, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve
any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the codes adopted by article 3.02 and this article in the
execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein or in article 3.02. (Ordinance 98-2 adopted
1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.406)
Sec. 3.04.007 Waiver of fees
Any and all fees, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, sign and other, can be waived by the mayor and city
council provided such fees are relevant to the construction and trade work performed in conjunction with city
contracted or subsidized projects in which public funds are utilized in such work. However, permit application, plan
review, inspections and the provisions set forth in article 3.02 or any other sections of this article shall not be
waived or omitted. (Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.407)
Sec. 3.04.008 Governmental function
All of the sections of this article and the fees referenced herein shall be declared to be governmental and for the
benefit of the general public and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary, and the city secretary
shall certify to the adoption of this article. (Ordinance 98-2 adopted 1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.408)
Sec. 3.04.009 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or cause or permit anyone to violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each and every day that any violation of this article or any
part thereof shall occur shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such. Save
and except the provisions referenced in section 3.04.006 of this article and also section 3.02.006. (Ordinance 98-2
adopted 1/6/98; 2001 Code, sec. 3.409)
ARTICLE 3.05 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.05.001 Findings, purpose and scope
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/435
(a) Findings. There exist in the city buildings used for residential and nonresidential purposes that are
substandard in structure and maintenance. Inadequate light and air, insufficient protection against fire, lack of
proper heating and unsanitary conditions constitute a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the city. The existence of such conditions will create slum and blighted areas requiring large-scale clearance if not
remedied. Furthermore, in the absence of corrective measures, areas will experience a deterioration of social
values, impairment of property values and a curtailment of investment and tax revenue.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the
city by establishing minimum standards applicable to residential and nonresidential buildings. Minimum standards
are established with respect to property, building structure, utilities and health, which are essential to make
buildings safe, sanitary and fit for human use and habitation. Demolition is provided as a last resort when
compliance with standards cannot reasonably be achieved.
(c) Scope. The provisions of this article apply to all buildings within the city whether in existence on the effective
date of this article or constructed afterward.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.301)
Sec. 3.05.002 Definitions
In this article:
Building means any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent, or other structure, and any
structure intended for human habitation or other occupancy, and includes, but is not limited to, a mobile home, a
manufactured home and a travel trailer.
Building code means the International Building Code as adopted by the city.
Building official means an employee of the city designated by the mayor to enforce the provisions of this article.
Electrical code means the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
Fire code means the International Fire Code as adopted by the city.
Manufactured home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when
erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.
Mechanical code means the International Mechanical Code as adopted by the city.
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected
on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.
Plumbing code means the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the city.
Travel trailer means a structure having no foundation other than a permanent chassis with wheels, which is 12
body feet or less in width, and is less than 40 body feet in length and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation. The term “travel trailer” includes folding, hardtop campers transported behind a
motor vehicle, truck-mounted campers attached to and transported behind a motor vehicle or pickup, recreational
vehicles, campers, converted buses, tent trailers, tents or similar devices used for temporary, portable housing or
similar types of temporary dwellings intended for short-term occupancy, travel and/or recreation.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.302)
Sec. 3.05.003 Enforcement
(a) Generally.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/435
(1) Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article.
(2) Inspections. The building official and the fire marshal or their designees are hereby authorized to
make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this
article.
(3) Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article,
or when the building official or his designee has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
building or upon premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which makes the
building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his designee may enter
the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this article,
provided that, if such building or premises be occupied, credentials be presented to the occupant and
entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official or his designee shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(b) Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in
accordance with the procedures specified in this article.
(c) Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct or use, occupy or
maintain any building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or permit the same to be done in violation
of this article.
(d) Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a
permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.303)
Sec. 3.05.004 Conditions constituting substandard building; declaration of nuisance
(a) For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of
the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard building and a nuisance:
(1) Any building that is dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Any building that, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or
other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used
by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children.
(3) Any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use
of the building in the manner described by subsection (a)(2) above.
(4) Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage,
inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or
heating apparatus or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard.
(5) Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public nuisance known to the common
law or in equity jurisprudence.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/435
(7) Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(8) Any building constructed and still existing in violation of any provision of the building code, fire
code, plumbing code, mechanical code or electrical code of the city to the extent that the life, health or
safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.
(b) For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of
the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or
welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard
building and a nuisance:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width
or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
(2) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
(3) Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live
loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(4) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other
cause to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(5) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or to become detached
or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place, so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted in the building code for such buildings.
(7) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
(8) Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary
for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation;
or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
(9) Whenever, for any reason, the building or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose
for which it is being used.
(10) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of
the base.
(11) Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 or more percent damage or deterioration of
its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(12) Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or other causes, or
has become so dilapidated or deteriorated, as to become: (i) an attractive nuisance to children; or (ii) a
harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons.
(13) Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific
requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations of this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/435
jurisdiction as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction
relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
(14) Whenever any building, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent, of the: (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a
newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
(15) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease for reasons including but not
limited to the following:
(A) Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging
house.
(B) Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests
in a hotel.
(C) Lack of or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(D) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
(E) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(F) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(G) Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.
(H) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code.
(I) Room and space dimensions less than required by this code [or] the building code.
(J) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(K) Dampness of habitable rooms.
(L) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
(M) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(N) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(O) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.304)
Sec. 3.05.005 Determination by building official
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that
the building is substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he or she deems
appropriate:
(1) Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired or
demolished;
(2) Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this article;
(3) Secure the building if permitted by section 3.05.012(a) below; or
(4) Recommend to the city council that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to section
3.05.006 below.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/435
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.305)
Sec. 3.05.006 Public hearing for abatement
(a) Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a
substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation of
occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building.
(b) Public hearing to be held. Except when the city council finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger
persons or property, a public hearing before the city council shall be held to determine whether a building complies
with the standards set out in section 3.05.004 above. If the city council determines that the building constitutes an
immediate danger, the procedures set forth in section 3.05.012(b) below shall be followed.
(c) Notice. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the hearing is set the building official shall issue
a notice of the public hearing directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees and lienholders.
The city shall use diligent efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of
the building through searching the county real property records of the county in which the building is located,
appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located, records of the secretary of state,
assumed name records of the county in which the building is located, tax records of the city, and utility records of
the city. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owner;
(2) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the
building is located;
(3) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous, with
a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or substandard
under the provisions of section 3.05.004 above;
(4) A statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing
proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take
to reasonably perform the work;
(5) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and
(6) A statement that, if the building is found to be in violation of this article, the city council may order
that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
(d) Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice mailed
pursuant to subsection (c) in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is
located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of any
abatement order issued by the city council at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the city.
(e) Burden of proof. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(f) Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building and all other interested persons
may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the city council. The
hearing may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote of the city council, in compliance with
the Open Meetings Act.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.306)
Sec. 3.05.007 Order of city council
(a) Findings of city council. If the city council by a majority vote finds upon evidence presented at the public
hearing that the building is in violation of standards set out in section 3.05.004, the city council may order that the
building be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished, secured, or the occupants relocated by the owner,
mortgagee or lienholder within a reasonable time as provided herein.
(b) Time allowed to complete work.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/435
(1) The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days:
(A) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
(B) Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(2) If the city council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair,
remove or demolish the building, the city council shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed,
as determined by the city council.
(3) The city council may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to
repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order
unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within ninety (90)
days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(4) If the city council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to
complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the city council shall
require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to
demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established
for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee appear before the city council or the building official to demonstrate compliance with the
time schedules.
(c) Contents of order. The order of the city council must contain at minimum:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property
on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that the owner may repair, if feasible,
or demolish or remove at his option;
(4) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the cost
to the property;
(5) If the city council has determined that the building will endanger persons or property and that the
building is a dwelling with 10 or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the building
and charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.307)
Sec. 3.05.008 Notice of order of city council
(a) Order shall be mailed. After the public hearing, the building official shall promptly mail by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified lienholder and
mortgagee of the building.
(b) Order shall be filed with city secretary. Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued by the city
council, the building official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary.
(c) Order shall be published. Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued by the city council, the
building official shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice containing:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/435
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(d) The order may be filed in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is
located.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.308)
Sec. 3.05.009 Enforcement of order of city council
(a) If order not complied with, city may take action. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense; provided, however:
(1) The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after the city council has found:
(A) That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of
the public or the occupants of the building is endangered; and
(B) The building is infeasible of repair; or
(C) There is no reasonable probability that the building will be repaired within a reasonable
period of time if additional time is given.
(2) The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the extent necessary to correct the
conditions which render the building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless:
(A) The city council has made a determination that the building is likely to endanger person or
property; and
(B) The building is a residential dwelling with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units.
(3) In the event there are mortgagors or lienholders, the city may only repair, remove or demolish the
building after allowing the lienholder or mortgagee on additional 30 days after the time prescribed in the
order has expired to complete the required work.
(b) Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the order
within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated. Notice to
vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant of the building and it shall be
posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
________________________
Building Official
City of Bridgeport
(c) Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work or securing of the building shall be accomplished and
the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of such
building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot, shall be paid
over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/435
(d) Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to section 3.05.007 is directed who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in
municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city provided herein.
(e) Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor
or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the building
which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of this article, or
with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever
such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in
such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing, removing
or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this article, or in performing any necessary act
preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article.
(f) Permits required. Any work, closure, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any lienholder or
mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the city. All permits
issued pursuant to an order of the city council shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance set forth in
the order.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.309)
Sec. 3.05.010 Performance of work by city
(a) Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city pursuant
to the provisions of any order of the city council, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by private
contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises and the lot
cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if removal or demolition
is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work.
(b) Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a
lien against such property to secure payment thereof together with ten percent (10%) interest on such amount from
the date on which the work is performed.
(c) Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building at its own expense and assess the
expenses on the land on which the building stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the
building into compliance with minimum standards.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.310)
Sec. 3.05.011 Recovery of city's costs; lien
(a) Itemized account and notice of lien. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses
incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and notice
of lien containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located;
(3) The type of work performed; and
(4) The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due.
(b) Notice filed in county records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the order of
abatement issued by the city council in the deed records of the county in which the premises are located.
(c) Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn account of
the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the
property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or property to
recover the costs incurred by the city.
(d) Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the deed records of the county, the lien
shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax liens and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/435
existing special assessment liens and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall continue until the
assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
(e) Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on
any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(f) Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building
official, have been fully paid with interest of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date the work was performed,
the building official shall execute a release of lien, which shall be filed in the deed records of the county.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.311)
Sec. 3.05.012 Additional authority to secure certain buildings; buildings creating immediate danger
(a) Securing of unoccupied substandard building. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city
may secure a building if the building official determines:
(1) That the building violates the minimum standards set forth in section 3.05.004 above; and
(2) That the building is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the right of
possession to the building.
(b) Building creating immediate danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the city council
finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property the city council may:
(1) Order the owner of the building, the owner's agent or the owner or occupant of the property on
which the structure is located to repair, remove or demolish the structure or the dangerous part of the
structure, within a specified time; or
(2) Repair, remove or demolish the structure or the dangerous part of the structure, at the expense of
the municipality, on behalf of the owner of the structure or the owner of the property on which the
structure is located, and assess the repair, removal or demolition expenses on the property on which
the structure was located.
(c) Service of notice. Before the eleventh (11th) day after the date the building is secured pursuant to subsection
(a) above, or action is ordered pursuant to subsection (b)(1) above, or the building is repaired, removed or
demolished pursuant to subsection (b)(2) above, the building official shall give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice; or
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office
address; or
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten (10) day period in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the building is located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the
owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained
and the owner's post office address is unknown; and
(5) In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lienholders and
mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of the
county clerk.
(d) Contents of notice. The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property
on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building, or that the
city has taken or will take the action ordered pursuant to subsection (b) of this section;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/435
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
city's securing, removing, demolishing or repairing of the building.
(e) Hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or
written information about any matter relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or demolishing of the
building if, within thirty (30) days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this
section, the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within twenty
(20) days after the date the request is filed.
(f) Recovery of costs. If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses incurred shall be a personal
obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as
provided by sections 3.05.010 and 3.05.011 of this article.
(g) Failure to comply with order. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this
section.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.312)
Sec. 3.05.013 Civil penalty
(a) Authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided for by law, the city council may, by order
at an administrative hearing, assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for herein for failure to
comply with an order issued by the city council pursuant to section 3.05.007 of this article.
(b) Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it shown at the administrative hearing that:
(1) The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to section 3.05.007
of this article; and
(2) The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action necessary
for compliance with the order.
(c) Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for each
violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed
$10.00 a day for each violation.
(d) Notice of administrative hearing. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the administrative
hearing is set, the property owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail/return receipt requested.
The notice shall contain:
(1) A copy of the order issued by the city council pursuant to section 3.05.007 of this article;
(2) A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act in
violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order;
(3) A statement that at the administrative hearing the city council may assess a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful
homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day for each violation; and
(4) Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
(e) Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with the
district clerk of the county in which the property is located a certified copy of the order assessing the civil penalty
stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
(f) Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
section is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit.
(Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.313)
Sec. 3.05.014 Authority not limited
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/435
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the
city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate
demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general welfare of the
people in the city. (Ordinance 01-26 adopted 9/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 3.314)
ARTICLE 3.06 SIGNS*
Sec. 3.06.001 Intent and purpose
Signs use private land near public rights-of-way to inform and persuade the general public by publishing a
message. This article provides standards for the erection and maintenance of private signs. All private signs not
exempt as provided herein shall be erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. These standards
are intended to be the minimum necessary and least burdensome to accomplish the purposes stated in this
section. The general objectives of these standards are to promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and
enjoyment of the public and, in part, to achieve the following:
(1) Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
(A) Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment;
(B) Do not obstruct firefighting or police surveillance; and
(C) Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing the
driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs.
(2) Communications efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of information in sign messages by
providing that:
(A) Businesses and services may identify themselves;
(B) Customers and other persons may locate a business or service;
(C) No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines from the public rights-ofway;
and
(D) Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented and
are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore said messages, according to the
observer's purpose.
(3) Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the appearance
and economic value of the cityscape, by providing that signs:
(A) Do not interfere with scenic views;
(B) Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
(C) Do not create a nuisance to occupy [occupants of] adjacent and contiguous property by
their illumination, size, height or movement; and
(D) Are not detrimental to land or property values.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.601)
Sec. 3.06.002 Administration
The requirements of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the city or his/her
designated representative. (Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.602)
Sec. 3.06.003 Applicability of building code
All signs permitted under this article shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the
currently adopted official building code of the city. In the event of a conflict between this article and the building
code, the provisions set forth in this article shall prevail. (Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.603;
Ordinance 2016-21, sec. 1, adopted 6/13/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/435
Sec. 3.06.004 Definitions
As used in this article:
Abandoned sign. A sign which:
(1) For at least 12 continuous months, does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, lessor,
service, owner, product or activity on the premises on which the sign is located; or
(2) If the premises are leased to a tenant and at least two years have elapsed since the date the
most recent tenant advertised on said sign ceased to operate on the premises.
Awning. A structure made of cloth, metal or other material possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted to a position
against the building.
Banner. A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind, excluding flags, emblems and insignia of political,
professional, religious, educational or corporate organizations.
Billboard. An off-premises sign containing at least one hundred twenty-eight square feet face area per face and
which is owned by a person, corporation or other entity that engages in the business of selling the advertising
space on the sign.
Building inspector. The building inspector of the city or his designated representative.
Canopy. A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material possessing characters, letters,
illustrations or ornamentations, with frames affixed to a building and carried by a frame, which is supported by the
ground.
Commercial message. A message which refers to the offer for sale or existence for sale of products, property,
accommodations, services or attractions or attracts attention to a business or to products, property,
accommodations, services, or activities that are offered or exist for hire.
Construction sign. A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in the design, construction, wrecking,
financing or development of premises where such sign is placed.
Developed property. A tract of land upon which a structure is located.
Dilapidated or deteriorated sign. A sign:
(1) Where the panel is visibly cracked, or the paint is cracked and peeling, or in the case of wood or
similar products, splintered, in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition or renders
the sign unsafe; or
(2) Where the sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was
originally erected (such as may result from being blown or the failure of a structural support).
Directional sign. A sign providing no advertisement of any kind, which provides direction or instruction to guide
persons to facilities, intended to serve the public (restrooms, parking, etc.).
Directory sign. A sign which indicates the names and/or addresses of the occupant(s), the address of the
premises, and/or identification of any lawful businesses or the occupations which may exist at the premises.
Electronic message sign. A sign or portion of a sign that utilizes changeable copy messages through internal
illumination through light emitting diodes (LEDs) or other light source to form a message in text form only, wherein
the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified. This
definition excludes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, holographic displays and other similar
media capable of providing moving pictures, video or images.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction. That unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the city and
that is located within the boundaries identified in section 42.021 of the Texas Local Government Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/435
Gross surface area. The area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shapes that will encompass the extreme
limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral
part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Gross
surface area includes such features as decorative or ornamental elements or features, borders, and trims, but not
including any supporting structure which is used solely for support of the sign, such as poles, columns and cables,
or a decorative fence, screening device or wall.
Inflatable advertisement. Any air- or gas-filled device located, attached, or tethered to the ground, site,
merchandise, or building and used for the purposes of signage, advertising, or attracting attention to the site where
they are being displayed.
Leasable space. The front and, if applicable, side walls which enclose a building or a portion thereof, and which
abut a public street.
Letter sign. Any individual letter or group of letters attached to a building shall constitute a sign. The area of such
sign shall be the smallest area encompassing the word in the form of a square, rectangle, triangle, circle or
combination thereof.
Marquee. A permanent structure extending from part of the roof or wall of a building but not supported by the
ground, and constructed of durable material such as metal, plastic or glass.
Monument sign. A sign permanently affixed to the ground, not elevated by any pole or structure and not attached
to or dependant upon any building for support.
Noncommercial message. Any message that is not a commercial message.
Nonconforming sign. A sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this article which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this article.
Nonresidential zoning district. Any of the following zoning districts identified in the official zoning map of the city: C
Business District, I Industrial District, or PD Planned Development District. It shall include any other nonresidential
zoning district.
Normal maintenance operations. The process of keeping a sign in good repair.
(1) Maintenance operations include:
(A) Cleaning;
(B) Painting;
(C) Repair of parts with like materials in a manner that does not alter the basic design or
structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all repairs performed during any consecutive 365-
day period is not more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the
same location; and
(D) Replacement of parts with like materials in a manner that does not alter the basic design or
structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all replacement of parts performed during any
consecutive 365-day period is not more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the
same type at the same location.
(2) Examples of actions that are not maintenance operations include, without limitation:
(A) Converting a sign from a multiple-pole structure to a monopole structure;
(B) Replacing wooden components with metal components;
(C) Increasing the area or height of a sign, except for increases in area permitted under
subsection (1) above;
(D) Adding illumination to a nonilluminated sign;
(E) Adding additional display faces; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/435
(F) Converting a sign to utilize animated display or movable copy technology.
Obscene. Material or performance defined in section 43 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
Off-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, activity, commodity, service, or other
event other than one conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or within the
building to which the sign is affixed.
Pole sign. A sign supported by one or more structures or supports placed upon the ground and not attached to or
dependent for support from any building.
Political sign. A temporary sign which addresses a political issue.
Portable sign. A sign which is mounted on portable or movable frames or structures, including signs posted on, but
not affixed or attached to, the ground, including sign walkers.
Premises. A single tract or platted lot. In addition, multiple adjoining tracts or platted lots under common ownership
will be deemed to be a single premises if they meet the following requirements: (i) lots or tracts are not separated
by intervening streets, alleys, utility or railroad rights-of-way or other interruption; (ii) the property contains a single
primary use; and (iii) the property is not used for one- or two-family dwelling purposes. Tracts or platted lots that
are at cross corners or that are connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency access
easements shall not be considered to be adjoining.
Public visibility easement. An imaginary triangle which has two sides beginning at the edge of pavement and the
meeting point of two intersecting streets, and extending along the edge of existing roadway surfaces a set
distance, as set forth in table A (below). The line connecting the end points of these two lines forms the third side
of the triangle. (When such an easement has not been granted via plat or other recorded document, a public
visibility easement is also known as a visibility triangle.)
Table A. Public Visibility Easement Dimensions
Collector A and B,
historical district
Collector C - Local
streets (residential and
nonresidential),
country lanes, and
commercial and
multifamily residential
driveways
Alley 1, 2, and 3
Collector A and B,
historical district
30' x 30' 30' x 20' 30' x 15'
Collector C - Local streets
(residential and
nonresidential), country
lanes, and commercial
and multifamily residential
driveways
20' x 30' 20' x 20' 20' x 15'
Alley 1, 2, and 3 15' x 30' 15' x 20' 15' x 15'
Real estate sign. A sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent, the premises or portions of the premises upon
which the sign is placed.
Residential zoning district. Any R-1, R-2 or R-3, or MHP zoning district or any other residential zoning district
identified in the official zoning map of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/435
Rigid banner sign. A sign or device that is usually made of flexible material attached to a freestanding rigid pole or
frame.
Sandwich board sign. A type of temporary sign consisting normally of two (2) opposing pieces of wood or plastic or
similar material, and normally displayed in front of a business during business hours.
Sign. Every sign, name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device,
display, banner, rigid banner, pennant, illustration, logo, balloon, inflatable advertisement, streamer, valance,
advertising display, poster, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or
indirectly to or upon any building, window, or outdoor structure or approved sign poles, or erected or maintained
upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, project, service, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, or business.
Sign walker. A person, visible from the public right-of-way, that is holding, twirling, or wearing a sign, lights or a
costume to draw attention to a business, project, place or event.
Streamers. Small flags or strips of various types of materials, usually reflective or brightly colored and displayed on
strings or ropes in various lengths, and used to attract attention to the site where they are being displayed.
Subdivision sign. A sign used to identify a particular subdivision.
Temporary real estate directional sign. A temporary off-premises sign used to direct traffic to a residential section
or subdivision or location in the city.
Temporary sign. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, wood, metal, or other like
materials, with or without frames, and any type of sign not permanently attached to the ground, wall, pole, or
building, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
Undeveloped property. A tract of land upon which no structure is located.
Wall sign. A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or dependant upon a building for support with the
exposed face of the sign located in a place substantially parallel to such exterior building wall to which the sign is
attached or supported by. It includes letters, words, and characters painted or attached directly to the roof. Awning,
canopy, marquee and letter signs shall be considered wall signs for purposes of calculating the minimum effective
area.
Warning sign. A sign containing no advertising material and warning the public of the existence of danger.
Window sign. A sign which is attached to the window, and includes window displays if within two feet of the
window, but does not include signs attached to windows which have been altered to prevent all light penetration.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; Ordinance 2014-16, sec. 1, adopted 8/12/14; 2001 Code, sec. 3.604; Ordinance
2016-21, sec. 2, adopted 6/13/16)
Sec. 3.06.005 Penalty
Any person, firm, governmental entity, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who shall resist the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code,
sec. 3.630)
Sec. 3.06.006 Appeals and variances
(a) Appeals. A person aggrieved by any decision rendered by the building inspector under this article may
appeal to the city council. The appeal must be received within 10 days after the placement of a letter of notification
from the building inspector in the U.S. mail addressed to the owner of the sign. The appeal shall be filed in writing
with the city (manager/secretary) and must specify the grounds on which the appeal is based. The city council
shall review the appeal at a city council meeting as soon as practical, but not later than 30 days from receipt of the
appeal. The decision by the city council is final.
(b) Variances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/435
(1) The city council may authorize a variance to any regulation established in this article, including
but not limited to the number, type, area, height, material, construction, or any other aspect involved in
the sign permitting process. In granting a variance, the city council shall consider the following:
(A) Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and are
not applicable to other lands, building, or structures in the same vicinity. The city may attach such
conditions to granting all or a portion of any variance necessary to achieve the purpose of this
article;
(B) The strict interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity under the terms of this article;
(C) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant
and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute monetary hardship or
inconvenience;
(D) Granting the variance will meet the objectives of this article and not injure the adjoining
property owners or be detrimental to the public welfare;
(E) The request will be the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the special hardship or
practical difficulties faced by the applicant in meeting the requirements of this article; and
(F) Granting the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this article.
(2) A person may request a variance from this article by filing a request with the building inspector. A
person wishing to request a variance shall submit a completed application form that includes:
(A) A description of the requested variance, and an explanation of why it should be granted;
(B) A description of how the variance is consistent with the goals and purposes of this article;
(C) If a location variance, a site plan of the property visually depicting the requested variance,
or if a design or size variance, a graphic depiction of the proposed sign; and
(D) A nonrefundable filing fee in accordance with the city fee schedule.
(3) Notice of the variance hearing shall be by posting on the agenda for the city council in compliance
with applicable law.
(4) In granting a variance, the city council may impose such conditions as will reasonably accomplish
the purposes of this article.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.628; Ordinance 2016-22 adopted 6/13/16; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.06.007 Fees
The fees to be charged under this article are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.629)
Sec. 3.06.008 General provisions; permits
(a) Applicability. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article apply to all signs within the
city limits and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(b) Permit required. A person commits an offense if the person erects, constructs or relocates within the city a
sign upon any property within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city, except as otherwise provided in
this article. A person who erects, constructs or relocates a sign in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction shall not be
required to obtain a permit from the city.
(c) Permit application. A person shall file an application with the building inspector on forms provided by the city.
An application for a sign permit shall include a drawing, to scale, of the proposed sign and all existing signs
maintained on the premises and visible from the right-of-way, a drawing of the lot plan or building facade indicating
the proposed location of the sign(s), and sign specifications.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/435
(d) Permit fees. Fees for a permit to erect, construct, or relocate a sign shall be as established by the fee
schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(e) Permit issuance or denial. The building inspector shall, within ten working days of the date of receipt of the
application, either approve or deny the application or refer the application back to the applicant in any instance
where insufficient information has been furnished. The building inspector shall deny an application if it does not
comply with the requirements of this article. A denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on the
application, and the applicant shall be notified of the denial by notice mailed to the applicant at the address shown
on the application or the last known address.
(f) Maintenance and repairs. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all
building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this article, at all times. No permit shall be required to
perform normal maintenance operations or changing of parts or copy of a sign, provided that the maintenance or
change of parts does not alter the gross surface area, height or otherwise render the sign nonconforming with the
requirements of this article.
(g) Public visibility easement. To assure visibility at all street intersections, no structure, object, plant or sign of
any type may obstruct vision from a height of twenty-four (24) inches to a height of eleven (11) feet above the
crown of the road, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in
the public visibility easement as shown on the plat, with the exception of one utility pole, one street sign, or one fire
hydrant. The easement will remain in effect until vacated by an order issued by the city's development services
department and the property is replatted.
(h) Measurement of sign area.
(1) Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or
constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be measured as the area contained within the
outside dimensions of the background panel or surface.
(2) Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall, fence, screening device,
awning or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered
to provide a distinctive background of the sign copy shall be measured as the area enclosed by each
individual word or graphic.
(3) For three-dimensional signs such as spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other non-planar signs,
the area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shape or combination of shapes which would fully
contain all portions of the sign when rotated horizontally around the sign shall be measured to
determine size.
(i) Sign illumination. A sign may be lighted by internal lighting from a light source entirely within the sign or by a
lighting source located a distance away from the sign and projecting light onto the sign, subject to the following:
(1) The light source shall be continuous and uninterrupted so as not to be flashing.
(2) Lighting shall be in a manner so as not to interfere with traffic safety or to pose other safety
hazards.
(3) All electrical wiring shall conform to the electrical codes of the city.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.605)
Sec. 3.06.009 Prohibited signs
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Illuminates a sign to an intensity that causes glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute
a hazard or nuisance. Moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing color, scrolling, strobe lights,
rotating beacons, revolving, static or moving digital/video display, or similarly constructed signs are
prohibited without approval by the city council;
(2) Displays on a sign gestures or words which are obscene as defined in this article;
(3) Paints a sign, other than a nameplate and address showing the street number, to a fence, railing
or wall which is not a structural part of the building in or facing a residential zoning district, whether or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/435
not on the property line;
(4) Displays or erects a billboard;
(5) Attaches a sign, paper or material, or paints, stencils or writes any name or number (except
house or street address numbers) or otherwise marks on any public sidewalk, curb, gutter or street.
The city council may grant an exception for special events. The city's infrastructure services department
and police department are exempt from this subsection; or
(6) Displays a sign advertising or depicting alcohol in any window or in any other manner which is
visible from the public right-of-way; provided, however, the generic words “beer,” “ale,” “wine,” “liquor”
and “spirits” may be included in otherwise allowed signage.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person attaches, erects or maintains any sign:
(1) Upon any public utility pole, or structure, or on any tree that is located on public land or in a public
right-of-way;
(2) Over or in public rights-of-way. No sign shall be erected in the right-of-way except movement
control, traffic-control devices, street signs or directional signs placed by the city or state; or
(3) In a public visibility easement or visibility triangle.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person erects or displays a sign in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall
be attached to a standpipe or fire escape;
(2) Obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where by reason of position, shape, color,
degree, manner or intensity of illumination may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(3) Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic-control device; or
(4) Encroach upon the visibility triangle of any street intersection, except as permitted by section
3.06.008(g).
(d) A person commits an offense if the person makes use of words, phrases, symbols or characters, or employs
any lamp or light, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.606; Ordinance 2016-21, sec. 3, adopted 6/13/16)
Sec. 3.06.010 Vehicular signs
Vehicular signs shall conform to the following regulations:
(1) It is unlawful to attach any sign advertising anything other than the name of a special event or
company and the service it provides to a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure or vehicle, where the
primary use of said attachment is to provide a base for such sign or constitute the sign itself. This
provision does not restrict the identification signs on vehicles used for any bona fide business activity.
(2) Signs attached to or upon any vehicle shall be prohibited where any such vehicle is allowed to
remain parked in the same location, or in the same vicinity, at frequent or extended periods of time,
where the intent is apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for purposes of advertising an
establishment, service or product.
(3) It shall be prima facie evidence that a sign is used to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or activity if the vehicle or trailer is parked in the same location for a continuous period
exceeding seventy-two hours.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.607)
Sec. 3.06.011 Political signs
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/435
(a) A person commits an offense if the person erects or displays a sign which contains primarily a political
message and the sign:
(1) Is more than eight feet in height;
(2) Has an effective area of greater than 36 square feet;
(3) Is illuminated;
(4) Has any moving elements; or
(5) Is placed on private real property without the consent of the property owner.
(b) A person who erects or maintains a sign which contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis
on a sign generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not
primarily political shall comply with the regulations applicable to that type of sign.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.608)
Sec. 3.06.012 Pole signs
Pole signs are permitted in both residential and nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Pole signs in nonresidential zoning districts. Pole signs in nonresidential zoning districts are
subject to the following restrictions:
(A) Each premises shall have no more than one pole sign.
(B) A pole sign shall not exceed thirty-five feet in height, except pole signs on properties
fronting onto U.S. Highway 380, State Highway 114, or State Highway 101, which shall not
exceed fifty feet in height.
(C) A pole sign shall not exceed 100 square feet of gross surface area per side.
(D) A pole sign may be located next to, but not into, the public right-of-way, provided that the
sign does not create a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. If placed on a corner, the sign shall not be
placed in the visibility triangle.
(E) Premises containing two or more businesses, as permitted by individual certificates of
occupancy, may have one pole sign which advertises multiple occupants.
(2) Pole signs in residential zoning districts. Pole signs shall be allowed in multifamily zoning districts
and are subject to the following restrictions:
(A) Each premises shall have no more than one pole sign.
(B) A pole sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet of gross surface area for each side.
(C) A pole sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(D) A pole sign may be located next to, but not into, the public right-of-way, provided that the
sign does not create a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. If placed on a corner, the sign shall not be
placed in the visibility triangle.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.609)
Sec. 3.06.013 Monument signs
Monument signs are allowed in both residential and nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Monument signs in nonresidential zoning districts. Monument signs in nonresidential zoning
districts are subject to the following restrictions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/435
(A) Each premises shall have no more than one monument sign.
(B) A monument sign shall not exceed thirty-five square feet of gross surface area for each
side.
(C) A monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height, including the base.
(D) Monument signs may be located next to, but not into, the public right-of-way, provided that
the sign does not create a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. If placed on a corner, such sign shall
not be placed in the visibility triangle.
(E) Structures containing two or more businesses, as permitted by individual certificates of
occupancy, may have one monument sign which advertises multiple occupants.
(2) Monument signs in residential zoning districts. Monument signs shall be allowed in residential
zoning districts classified as multifamily and are subject to the following restrictions:
(A) Each premises shall have no more than one monument sign.
(B) A monument sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet of gross surface area per side.
(C) A monument sign shall not exceed six feet in height, including the base.
(D) A monument sign may be located next to, but not into, the public right-of-way, provided that
the sign does not create a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. If placed on a corner, such sign shall
not be placed in the visibility triangle.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.610)
Sec. 3.06.014 Wall signs
Wall signs are permitted in both residential and nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Wall signs in nonresidential zoning districts. Wall signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning
districts, subject to the following regulations:
(A) The front and all sides of a building or leasable space abutting a public street shall be
measured to determine the amount of wall signage permitted by using the following formula:
Width x Height x Fifteen Percent
(For buildings or leasable space with a wall height of less than twenty feet, measured from
ground level to the bottom of the roof line, the following method of measurement shall be
used: Width multiplied by Twenty Feet x Fifteen Percent.)
(B) For multi-occupant structures, only the area of leasable space shall be used to determine
maximum allowable signage.
(C) All wall signs and sign copy shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they
are attached, and shall project no more than eighteen (18) inches from the building surface.
(D) Signs attached to fences shall be calculated as part of the maximum amount of wall
signage and shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article.
(E) An enclosed frame may be mounted on a building for the purpose of displaying alternating
banners or other temporary signage. Such frame shall be permitted as a permanent wall sign,
shall be calculated as part of the maximum allowable amount of wall signage, and shall be in
conformance with the requirements of this article; however, a temporary sign permit will not be
required for any temporary signage displayed within the frame.
(2) Wall signs in residential zoning districts. Wall signs shall be allowed in residential zoning districts
classified as multifamily, subject to the following restrictions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/435
(A) A wall sign is permitted for building identification only, i.e., address or building numbers.
(B) A maximum of two signs per building are permitted.
(C) All signs and sign copy shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they are
attached. Signs shall not be mounted on roofs and shall not project above the roof.
(D) No sign or sign copy shall exceed twenty-four inches in height.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.611)
Sec. 3.06.015 Awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs
(a) Awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction, provided that awning, canopy, marquee and letter signs are calculated as part of the
maximum permitted wall signage, and that such signs do not encroach into the public right-of-way.
(b) Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow additional wall signage other than that allowed in this
article.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.612)
Sec. 3.06.016 Electronic message signs
Electronic message signs shall be static, and are subject to the same size, height and location requirements as
other signs regulated by this article, and are additionally subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Electronic message signs shall be text-only displays in one color at a time, and shall not contain
animation, flashing lights, moving or still pictures, or other video display as part of the sign. Text-only
displays shall have a uniform and non-conspicuous background color.
(2) Electronic message signs are permitted only in nonresidential zoning districts.
(3) The electronic message portion of the sign shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total sign
face permitted, and shall not be the only sign face.
(4) An electronic message sign shall not emit audible sounds.
(5) Electronic message signs may not be used to display messages relating to products or services
that are not offered on the premises; except such signs may display time and temperature, public
service announcements and announcements regarding community events.
(6) Changeable copy or text shall not change more frequently than every twenty (20) seconds.
(7) Electronic message signs must be equipped to automatically dim after dark and must be
equipped to adjust the intensity of the display according to natural ambient light conditions, reducing
brightness in dark conditions and increasing brightness in light conditions.
(8) The light produced from an electronic sign shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles (fc) over ambient light
levels. Measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance of 150 feet.
(9) No electronic message sign shall be located within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of property
zoned for a single-family residence, measured in a line from the front facade of the residence to the
adjoining property line, along the property line to the right-of-way line, and along the right-of-way line to
the sign.
(Ordinance 2016-21, sec. 4, adopted 6/13/16)
Sec. 3.06.017 Temporary signs
(a) Temporary signs include, but are not limited to: banners, pennants, inflatable advertisements, streamers,
posters, sandwich boards, and any display or device that is not otherwise defined as a wall, monument or pole
sign, or as a portable sign. If a proposed sign is not clearly defined within this article, it shall be the discretion of the
building inspector to classify such sign.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/435
(b) Temporary signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Temporary signs in residential zoning districts shall be erected for a period not to exceed a total of
thirty (30) days per calendar year.
(2) Temporary signs in nonresidential zoning districts shall be erected for a period of three hundred
sixty-five (365) days, subject to the issuance of an annual temporary sign permit. Once an annual
temporary sign permit is obtained, temporary signs may be rotated by a business without obtaining an
additional annual permit.
(3) Temporary signs shall not exceed 36 square feet per sign face.
(4) The maximum permitted height of a temporary sign is six feet.
(5) A temporary sign shall not be erected unless a permit is obtained for the sign, unless a permit is
not required by section 3.06.008 or 3.06.025.
(6) A temporary sign shall not be:
(A) Illuminated or have any moving elements; or
(B) Erected or maintained within any visibility triangle or public rights-of-way.
(7) No more than one temporary sign shall be permitted or erected for the same business at one
time, except for a period of sixty (60) days following the grand opening of a new business. For that
period of sixty (60) days, up to three (3) different types of temporary signage may be erected, subject to
the issuance of an annual temporary sign permit.
(c) Inflatable advertisements, including balloons over eighteen (18) inches in diameter, are permitted in
nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Inflatable advertisements shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height or ten (10) feet in width.
(2) Inflatable advertisements shall be securely fastened in place.
(3) No inflatable advertisement shall be attached to the roof of a building or structure.
(4) Balloons on a tether line shall have the length of the tether limited to less than the distance to the
nearest electrical power line or public street.
(5) Inflatable advertisements shall be displayed for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive calendar
days.
(6) No inflatable advertisement shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a roadway or a driveway or
other ingress or egress from a property.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.613)
Sec. 3.06.018 Portable signs
(a) Portable signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and
are subject to the following regulations:
(1) A person may display a portable sign for a business for a continuous period of six months,
beginning the date that the new business receives a certificate of occupancy from the city, or the date
that the new business opens in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(2) Thereafter, a person may erect and display a portable sign for a period of up to sixty (60)
consecutive days. The portable sign shall be removed for not less than sixty (60) consecutive days prior
to the issuance of another permit.
(3) Portable signs must be removed within five calendar days of the earlier of the termination of the
activity, service, product or sale which is advertised on the sign, or the expiration of the permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/435
(b) A portable sign shall not be permitted on property located within a residential zoning district.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person erects or maintains a portable sign within the visibility triangle or
public rights-of-way.
(d) No more than a total of three (3) portable signs on-site and no more than a total of three (3) portable signs
off-premises shall be permitted for the same business at one time.
(e) Off-premises portable signs may only be used in conjunction with a permitted special event and shall
conform to all conditions of the special event temporary sign permit as set forth in section 3.06.019 of this article
and with the following:
(1) Written permission must be obtained from any private property owner where an off-premises
portable sign is erected or displayed by a sign walker. Such written permission must be displayed or
otherwise readily available for inspection by law enforcement personnel.
(2) Off-premises portable signs shall not be erected or displayed by a sign walker in such a manner
as to be considered a nuisance to other individuals, businesses or commercial interests and shall not
interfere with the normal operation of any other business or commercial interest.
(Ordinance 2014-16 adopted 8/12/14; 2001 Code, sec. 3.614)
Sec. 3.06.019 Special event temporary signs
A person owning or operating a commercial business within the city limits or the extraterritorial limits of the city
offering goods or services for sale to the public may obtain a special event temporary sign permit from the city to
temporarily allow additional signage relating to the special event, subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) A special event temporary sign permit shall be valid for a period of up to sixty (60) consecutive
days. Such temporary signage must be fully removed within five (5) calendar days following the earlier
of the termination of the activity, service, product or sale which is advertised on the sign, or the
expiration of the special event permit.
(2) Special event temporary sign permits shall be limited to two (2) per year per business location,
with a mandatory sixty (60) consecutive day interval between special events.
(3) Special event temporary signs, excluding banners and wall signs attached directly to an exterior
wall of the primary building in such a manner as would be defined in this article as a wall sign, may not
exceed thirty-six (36) square feet per face.
(4) Special event temporary signs in the form of banner and wall signs attached directly to an exterior
wall of the primary building at the business location in such a manner as would be defined in this article
as a wall sign shall not exceed the total area of the wall to which the sign is attached.
(5) No more than three (3) special event temporary signs not attached to the primary building at the
building location in such a manner as would be defined in this article as a wall sign shall be erected at
the business location at any one time.
(6) No special event temporary sign may be erected at a height exceeding the highest exterior wall
height of the primary building at the business location.
(7) No special event temporary sign shall be placed or displayed in any public right-of-way or visibility
triangle.
(8) Inflatable advertisements used as special event temporary signs shall conform to all conditions
set forth in section 3.06.017(c) of this article, with the exception that such inflatable advertising may be
displayed for up to sixty (60) consecutive days as allowed in the special event temporary sign permit.
(Ordinance 2014-16 adopted 8/12/14; 2001 Code, sec. 3.614.5)
Sec. 3.06.020 Construction signs
Construction signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the
following restrictions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/435
(1) One temporary on-premises construction sign for each contractor, lender, architect, engineer, or
to advertise the arrival of a new residential development on the premises to which the sign pertains is
allowed.
(2) Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building or development permit of the
project to which the sign pertains and must be removed at the time of final approval of the construction
or development by the building inspector.
(3) Such signage shall not exceed twelve square feet per side or exceed six (6) feet in height.
(4) Two temporary off-premises construction signs are permitted for residential subdivisions.
Developers may erect one temporary off-premises construction sign until eighty percent of the lots in
the advertised subdivision are built. The second off-premises construction sign may remain up to one
year after the subdivision has been accepted by the city or until eighty percent of the lots in the
advertised subdivision are built, whichever comes first. Off-premises signs shall not exceed thirty-five
(35) feet in height. The gross surface area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for each side.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.615)
Sec. 3.06.021 Subdivision signs
(a) Signs identifying a residentially zoned subdivision are permitted in the city and in the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Subdivision signs shall be monument signs; and
(2) Shall not exceed:
(A) Thirty-two (32) square feet for each face; and
(B) Six (6) feet in height.
(b) One subdivision sign shall be permitted for each entrance to the subdivision.
(c) A subdivision sign shall not be erected or maintained within the visibility triangle or public rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.616)
Sec. 3.06.022 Real estate signs
Real estate signs, other than signs prohibited by section 3.06.009, are permitted in all zoning districts, and in the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Developed property.
(A) One real estate sign is permitted on each street frontage.
(B) No off-premises real estate signs are permitted in residentially zoned developed
subdivisions.
(C) The total gross surface area of each sign shall not exceed sixteen square feet per side.
(D) Each sign shall not exceed ten feet in height.
(E) A real estate sign shall not be erected or maintained within the visibility triangle or public
rights-of-way.
(2) Undeveloped property. Real estate signs may be erected on undeveloped property as follows:
(A) Signs may be placed no closer than one per three hundred linear feet of street frontage.
(B) The total gross surface area for each sign shall not exceed sixteen square feet for each
side.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/435
(C) Each sign shall not exceed ten feet in height.
(D) A real estate sign shall not be erected or maintained within the visibility triangle or public
rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.617)
Sec. 3.06.023 Temporary real estate directional signs
Off-premises temporary real estate directional signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the following regulations:
(1) A permit is required prior to the placement of temporary real estate directional signs within the city
limits.
(2) The applicant shall place no more than ten temporary real estate signs at a time.
(3) Signs shall not constitute a traffic hazard or impair visibility. A temporary real estate directional
sign shall not be erected or maintained within the visibility triangle.
(4) Temporary real estate directional signs shall not be placed in the public rights-of-way.
(5) A temporary real estate directional sign shall not exceed 320 square feet in size.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.618)
Sec. 3.06.024 Directional signs and off-premises signs
(a) Directional signs are permitted in the city, and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) The maximum permitted height is three (3) feet.
(2) The maximum area is eight (8) square feet with a maximum of four (4) square feet per sign face.
(b) Off-premises signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Off-premises signs are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts; however, nothing in this
section shall be construed to allow additional signage other than the maximum amount allowed in this
article.
(2) No directional or off-premises signs shall be allowed in residential zoning districts except
temporary real estate directional signs and signs containing noncommercial messages.
(3) No directional or off-premises sign is permitted to be erected or maintained within the visibility
triangle or public rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.619)
Sec. 3.06.025 Signs not requiring permit
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and do not
require a permit, provided they meet all other requirements of this article:
(1) Protective signs that have as their purpose the protection of life and property.
(2) Signs or markers giving information about the location of underground electric transmission lines,
telegraph or telephone properties and facilities, pipelines, public sewers or water lines or other public
utilities.
(3) Signs erected by an agency of the state or a political subdivision of the state.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/435
(4) The display of legal notices or informational, directional or traffic signs which are legally required
or necessary to the essential functions of government agencies (state, federal, and city).
(5) The display of a national, state, local, religious, institutional, educational, or corporate logo flag or
emblem, subject to the following conditions:
(A) No premises in the city shall have more than three (3) permanent flag poles.
(B) No flag pole shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in residential zoning districts or thirty-five (35)
feet in nonresidential zoning districts, except that flag poles on U.S. 380 and SH 114/101 shall not
exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
(C) No more than one (1) flag per premises shall display any commercial message. Said
commercial message shall be limited to the corporate logo of the business located on the
premises.
(6) Signs with street names and/or street numbers.
(7) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material.
(8) Temporary or portable decorative displays for holidays, public demonstrations, civic, school or
religious events, or community service announcements which do not contain advertising. All such signs
shall not be erected more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the event being advertised.
All such signs must be removed within three (3) business days following the termination of the event
being advertised.
(9) Signs which state the name of the company which constructed a fence, not to exceed one square
foot in size.
(10) Real estate signs.
(11) Window signs.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.620)
Sec. 3.06.026 Noncommercial messages
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any sign that may display a commercial message may
also display a noncommercial message, either in place of or in addition to the commercial message, so long as the
sign complies with the other requirements of this article and other city ordinances.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or other ordinance, any sign that may display one type of
noncommercial message may also display any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign
complies with the other requirements of this article and other city ordinances.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.621)
Sec. 3.06.027 Air navigation facilities
Air navigation facilities such as directional beacons are allowed and a permit is required. (Ordinance 10-10
adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.622)
Sec. 3.06.028 Nonconforming signs
(a) A sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date of the ordinance adopted in this article
which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this article may be continued in operation and
maintained as a legal nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain until such time as:
(1) The sign is abandoned;
(2) The property owner or tenant changes or alters the sign in any manner other than by normal
maintenance to the configuration existing at the time of enactment of this article; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/435
(3) It is determined by the building inspector or his designee that the sign is a threat to health, safety,
or welfare of the citizens and/or a public nuisance.
(b) A nonconforming sign which has been blown down or otherwise destroyed by wind, fire or damages from any
other source may be repaired, if the sign is not abandoned, provided that the cost of repairing the sign is sixty (60)
percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, or less. If the cost of repairing the
sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, the sign may
not be altered, reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and the owner shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance
with this article.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.623)
Sec. 3.06.029 Illegal signs
A sign erected without a permit, either prior to or after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, is an
illegal sign if a permit was required for its erection at the time the sign was erected. A person commits an offense if
the person maintains an illegal sign. (Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.624)
Sec. 3.06.030 Nuisance signs
(a) Deteriorated signs declared nuisance. Pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, as
amended, a sign that is visible from a public place and that is dilapidated, deteriorated, unsafe, abandoned, or is a
hazard to the health or safety of the public is declared a public nuisance.
(b) Maintaining abandoned or deteriorated sign. A person commits an offense if the person maintains an
abandoned sign or a sign in dilapidated or deteriorated condition on property he owns or controls.
(c) Abandoned signs declared nuisance. Pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, as amended,
a sign that is abandoned and is visible from a public place is declared a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.625)
Sec. 3.06.031 Abatement procedures
(a) If the building inspector determines that any sign is dilapidated, deteriorated, unsafe, insecure, or is a hazard
to the public, he shall give written notice to the property owner, lessee, or sign erector to repair, replace or remove
such sign. If the property owner, lessee, or sign erector fails to remove or repair the sign within ten days after such
notice, the building inspector shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the
sign is located. The building inspector shall cause any sign which is an immediate hazard to persons to be
removed without notice, and the cost of same shall be paid by the property owner.
(b) Any sign which is removed by the building inspector pursuant to this section shall be impounded and stored.
Records of where such signs are located and when removed shall be kept. The building inspector shall send a
letter to the owner of such sign, if known, or, if not known, to the owner or person in control of the premises where
such sign was located, giving notice of such impoundment.
(c) The building inspector shall hold the sign in storage for at least thirty days after notice of impoundment has
been mailed. Any sign may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the costs of removal of and hauling the
sign to storage, as determined by the building inspector, plus a per-day storage fee. Such fees shall be established
by the city council.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.626)
Sec. 3.06.032 Assessment of abatement expenses; lien
(a) The city assesses the expenses incurred pursuant to section 3.06.031 of this article against the real estate
on which the nuisance is abated, and charges the owner of the property for the same.
(b) The city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was done a notice. The notice shall
include:
(1) An identification of the property;
(2) A description of the violation;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/435
(3) A statement that the city abated the condition;
(4) A statement of the city's charges and expenses in abating the condition;
(5) An explanation of the property owner's right to request a hearing within ten days; and
(6) A statement that, in the event the owner fails or refuses to pay the expense within thirty days after
the first day of the month following the one in which the work was done, the mayor or his/her designee
shall obtain a lien against the property by filing with the county clerk of the appropriate county a
statement of the expenses so incurred.
(c) The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent per year from
the date of payment by the city.
(d) The city council will conduct a hearing if the property owner submits a written request within 10 days of the
date of the notice. The council may find, if a preponderance of the evidence presented so shows, that the charges
are erroneous and may adjust the charges.
(e) When the statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens and
liens for street improvements.
(f) For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had by the city.
The statement of expenses, or a certified copy thereof, is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in
doing the work or making the improvements, all as more particularly specified in Texas Health and Safety Code
annotated, section 342.007, as amended, which is adopted and incorporated in this article by reference.
(Ordinance 10-10 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, sec. 3.627)
ARTICLE 3.07 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.07.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in the Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.801)
Sec. 3.07.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.802)
Sec. 3.07.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/435
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.803)
Sec. 3.07.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.804)
Sec. 3.07.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the
apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition;
and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the
fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured
and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1 percent annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually
is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or
V.
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/435
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year, also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design
and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS effective before that date.
Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood insurance study. See “Flood elevation study.”
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the
areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/435
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in
close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a buildings lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/435
are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
construction means structures for which there was no permanent structure prior to the start of construction and the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Nonresidential structure. Includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings
(including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural
and industrial structures, warehouses, hotels and motels with normal room rentals for less than 6 months' duration,
and nursing homes.
Reasonably safe from flooding. Base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed
from the SFHA and any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed
buildings.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when [measured] at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Residential structure. A structure that is considered to be a domicile or is used for residential purposes for 6
months or more. Residential structures include a single-family home, multiple-unit apartment buildings, a
residential condominium, or a manufactured or modular home.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See “Area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of temporary accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds which are not on a permanent foundation and are not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/435
(1) Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
(2) Flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement of a structure which does not
increase the perimeter dimension or the area of the foundation, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. Additions which increase the
perimeter dimension or the area of the foundation will be treated as new construction. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.805)
Sec. 3.07.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 2011-16
adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.806)
Sec. 3.07.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Wise County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas,” dated December 16, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated
December 16, 2011, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
article. (Ordinance 2012-01 adopted 1/3/12; 2001 Code, sec. 3.807)
Sec. 3.07.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all work within a special flood hazard area to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.808)
Sec. 3.07.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.809)
Sec. 3.07.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/435
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code,
sec. 3.810)
Sec. 3.07.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Hereby [Liberally] construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.811)
Sec. 3.07.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.812)
Sec. 3.07.013 Penalties
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code, per day, for each violation, each day being a separate violation, and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001
Code, sec. 3.822)
Secs. 3.07.014–3.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.07.041 Designation of floodplain administrator
The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance,
National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ordinance 2011-16 adopted
5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.813; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.07.042 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/435
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the
state water development board (TWDB), and also the state commission on environmental quality
(TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse
is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.07.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3 of this article.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A, A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, [and] AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.814)
Sec. 3.07.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.07.072(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated
as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.07.042(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of
the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/435
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.815)
Sec. 3.07.044 Variance procedures
(a) The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
article.
(b) The city council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration
of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.07.043(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article
(section 3.07.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variance:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/435
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.816)
Secs. 3.07.045–3.07.070 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction Standards
Sec. 3.07.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to
flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding;
(8) When a residential or nonresidential structure is intended to be constructed in an approximate A
zone, a BFE must be determined by using the same engineering standards and methods that are used
to develop BFEs in a flood insurance study (FIS); and
(9) All new and substantially improved structures located in the SFHA shall be elevated to a level that
will make them eligible to be removed from the SFHA. They shall be elevated so that the lowest
adjacent grade is higher than the BFE. The BFE must be determined by using detailed study methods.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/435
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.817)
Sec. 3.07.072 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.07.007, 3.07.042(8), or 3.07.073(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to
the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.07.043(a)(1),
is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to one (1) foot above the [base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with] walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which
includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home
has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood;
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
is elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/435
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.07.043(a) and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.818)
Sec. 3.07.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be
consistent with sections 3.07.002, 3.07.003 and 3.07.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall meet the floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.07.008 and section 3.07.043
and the provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.07.007 or section 3.07.042(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.819)
Sec. 3.07.074 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.07.007 are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if
no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/435
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this article, as proposed in section 3.07.043, are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.820)
Sec. 3.07.075 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard as established in section 3.07.007 are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway
that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all
of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(4) The storage of hazardous materials, in any form, is prohibited within the boundaries of the
regulatory floodway as delineated on the community's FIRM.
(Ordinance 2011-16 adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 3.821)
ARTICLE 3.08 INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING AND BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.08.001 Definitions
Industrialized building. A commercial structure, including the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems, that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular
components built at a location other than the commercial site; designed to be used as a commercial building when
the modules or modular components are transported to the commercial site and erected or installed; and is
erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. Industrialized building includes a permanent commercial
structure and a commercial structure designed to be transported from one commercial site to another commercial
site, but does not include:
(1) A commercial structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height as measured from the
finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof; or
(2) A commercial building or structure that is:
(A) Installed in a manner other than on a permanent foundation; and
(B) Either:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/435
(i) Not open to the public; or
(ii) Less than 1,500 square feet in total area and used other than as a school or place of
religious worship.
Industrialized housing. A residential structure, including the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems, that is designed for the occupancy of one or more families; constructed in one or more modules
or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and
designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or modular component is transported
to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. Industrialized housing does not
include a residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height as measured from the finished grade
elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof, housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system
that does not use a modular component, or a ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living
area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home
to another location.
Modular component. A structural part of housing or a building constructed at a location other than the building site
in a manner that prevents the construction from being adequately inspected for code compliance at the building
site without:
(1) Damage; or
(2) Removal and reconstruction of a part of the housing or building.
Value. The combined taxable value of a structure and a lot after installation or construction of the structure on the
lot.
(Ordinance 09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.901)
Sec. 3.08.002 Construction standards
Any industrialized housing or building erected or installed in the city must be constructed to meet or exceed the
requirements and standards of the currently adopted International Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
Code, and the National Electrical Code as adopted by the state industrialized building code council. (Ordinance
09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.902; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.08.003 Administration
The requirements of this article shall be administered and enforced by the director of development services or
his/her designated representative. (Ordinance 09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.903)
Sec. 3.08.004 General requirements
(a) Any person who intends to construct, erect, install, or move any industrialized housing or building into the city
shall first make application to the development services department and obtain all applicable local permits and
licenses before construction begins on a building site. A complete set of designs, plans, and specifications bearing
the state industrialized building code council's stamp of approval shall be submitted to the city for review for
compliance with mandatory building codes.
(b) Any industrialized housing or building in the city shall:
(1) Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation. Construction documentation shall include critical
load points and method of attachment of the structure to the foundation;
(2) Be constructed and installed by entities registered with the state department of licensing and
regulation as registered industrialized builders;
(3) Be sold by entities registered with the state department of licensing and regulation as registered
industrialized retailers; and
(4) Bear the approved decal or insignia issued by the state department of licensing and regulation
indicating inspection by the department. Each separate module of the structure must bear the insignia,
and location of the insignia must be shown on the submitted construction plans.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/435
(Ordinance 09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.904)
Sec. 3.08.005 Requirements for single-family and duplex industrialized housing
In addition to the regulations applicable to all industrialized buildings and housing in section 3.08.004 above,
single-family or duplex industrialized housing in the city must meet the following requirements:
(1) Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that are
applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings.
(2) Single-family or duplex industrialized housing shall:
(A) Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family
dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be
located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county;
(B) Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with
the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is
proposed to be located;
(C) Comply with city aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets,
subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements
applicable to single-family dwellings.
(3) Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, install, or move any single-family
or duplex industrialized housing into the city shall first make application to the building official and
obtain all applicable local permits and licenses before construction begins on a building site. In addition
to any other information otherwise required for said permits, the application shall:
(A) Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is to be located, and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as
determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county;
(B) Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration for each
single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be
located;
(C) State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the
industrialized housing; and
(D) Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real property on which the
industrialized housing is to be located.
(Ordinance 09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.905)
Sec. 3.08.006 On-site inspections
(a) A municipal building official shall inspect all construction involving industrialized housing and buildings to be
located in the city to ensure compliance with mandatory building codes and the approved designs, plans, and
specifications, including inspection of:
(1) The construction of the foundation system; and
(2) The erection and installation of the modules or modular components on the foundation.
(b) An inspection under subsection (a) shall be conducted:
(1) At the permanent site, if the inspection is of industrialized housing; and
(2) At the commercial site, if the inspection is of industrialized buildings.
(Ordinance 09-69 adopted 10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 3.906)
ARTICLE 3.09 ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/435
Sec. 3.09.001 Repeal of previous ordinances
This article repeals and replaces any other on-site sewage facility ordinance or code for the city. (Ordinance 04-03
adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1101)
Sec. 3.09.002 Enforcement of state rules and regulations
The city clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures
and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities and will fully enforce chapter 366 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code (H&SC) and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC) and associated Texas
Administrative Code rules (the “rules”) referenced in section 3.09.005 below. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04;
2001 Code, sec. 3.1102)
Sec. 3.09.003 Area of jurisdiction
The rules shall apply to all the area lying within the incorporated limits of city. (Ordinance 2012-21, sec. 1, adopted
12/18/12; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1103)
Sec. 3.09.004 Compliance with state rules
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of city must comply with the rules
adopted in section 3.09.005 below. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1104)
Sec. 3.09.005 State rules adopted
The rules, title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) section 285.1 through section 285.91 and TAC 30 [30 TAC
chapter 30], promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality for on-site sewage facilities, are
hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of city having duties under said rules are authorized to perform
such duties as are required of them under said rules. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1105)
Sec. 3.09.006 State rules incorporated by reference
The rules, 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285, and all future amendments and revisions thereto, are incorporated by
reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current rules is on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1106)
Sec. 3.09.007 Local rules
The city reserves the right to adopt more stringent rules for its on-site sewage facility ordinance and understands
that the more stringent conflicting local rule shall take precedence over the corresponding state commission on
environmental quality requirement. The city has adopted the following local rules:
(1) A property owner of a residential, commercial or institutional building utilizing an on-site sewage
facility (OSSF) that is located on a tract of land, regardless of acreage, shall secure and possess a
permit from the city to construct, alter, repair, or extend any on-site sewage facility.
(2) The minimum lot size for subdivisions and/or parcels of land requiring the use of on-site sewage
facilities for residential, commercial or institutional development shall be at least one acre.
(3) All contracted maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment shall
be conducted by a TCEQ registered maintenance provider.
(Ordinance 2012-21, sec. 2, adopted 12/18/12; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1107)
Sec. 3.09.008 Certification of inspector
The OSSF inspector of city must be certified by the state commission on environmental quality before assuming
the duties and responsibilities. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1108)
Sec. 3.09.009 Collection of fees
All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to city. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04;
2001 Code, sec. 3.1109)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/435
Sec. 3.09.010 Appeals
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to
the city council. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1110)
Sec. 3.09.011 Penalties
All applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which includes but is not limited to those found
in chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, chapters 7, 26, and 37 of the Texas Water Code
and 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 04-03 adopted
1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1111)
ARTICLE 3.10 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL*
Sec. 3.10.001 Generally
No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard
exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the state commission on environmental quality
(formerly state natural resource conservation commission) rules and regulations for public water systems (TCEQ
rules) and this article. The city shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not
installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the TCEQ rules and this article. (Ordinance 08-65 adopted
9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1301)
Sec. 3.10.002 Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance
(a) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow prevention
assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are
installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within
specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
(b) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-
Connection Control (Manual M14) or the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
(c) Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said
assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and
submitted to the city within five (5) working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention
assembly.
(d) No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or
device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the
present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow
prevention assembly or device that complies with this section, the American Water Works Association's
Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, the
University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current edition, or the current plumbing
code of the city, whichever is more stringent.
(e) Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in
accordance with the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, or the University of Southern California's Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, current edition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five (5)
working days after calibration.
(f) A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the state
commission on environmental quality.
(Ordinance 08-65 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1302)
Sec. 3.10.003 Customer service inspections
(a) A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new
construction, on any existing service when the city has reason to believe that cross-connections or other
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/435
contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water
distribution facilities.
(b) Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer
service inspection:
(1) Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by the state
board of plumbing examiners.
(2) Certified waterworks operators, and members of other water-related professional groups who
have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its
designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission.
(c) The customer service inspection must certify that:
(1) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of
contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water
system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly.
(2) No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists. Where
an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private
water supply, an approved reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed
and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention
assembly tester.
(3) No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply is
permitted [sic].
(4) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8% lead may be used for the installation or repair
of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use.
(5) No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead can be used for the installation or repair of
plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one lead test shall be
performed for each inspection.
(Ordinance 08-65 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1303)
Sec. 3.10.004 Enforcement; penalty
The city infrastructure services director shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. Any person who
violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that one or more of the
provisions in this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three (3) or more
distinct violations of this article, the infrastructure services director shall, upon due notice to the customer, be
authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under
such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of the reasonable cost of reconnection and any other
costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurances must be given to the
infrastructure services director that the same action shall not be repeated while this article is in effect. Compliance
with this article may also be sought through injunctive relief in state district court. (Ordinance 08-65 adopted
9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1304; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 3.11 HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 3.11.001 Posting of numbers required
The owner of every house and building in the city shall place the street number assigned by the city in some
conspicuous place on the exterior wall of the house or building so that the number may be plainly seen from the
street. (Ordinance 05-20 adopted 5/3/05; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1201)
Sec. 3.11.002 Standards for numbers
The owner of a residence or building shall identify the building by placing the house numbers required by section
3.11.001 in compliance with the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/435
(1) The numbers must be at least four inches high;
(2) The numbers must be made of some bright metal or other weatherproof material which contrasts
with the color of the building;
(3) The numbers must be posted in numeral form, i.e., “430” rather than “four hundred thirty.”
(Ordinance 05-20 adopted 5/3/05; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1202)
Sec. 3.11.003 Requirements for apartments
When more than one apartment building is located on a lot or tract of land, the owner or manager of the property
shall identify each building by a permanent number attached to the exterior wall of each building, located so that
they are clearly visible and readable from the street or driveway serving the building. The numbers shall be:
(1) Not less than four inches high;
(2) Made of some bright metal or other weatherproof material which contrasts with the color of the
building; and
(3) Posted in numeral form.
(Ordinance 05-20 adopted 5/3/05; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1203)
ARTICLE 3.12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.12.001–3.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations and Cuts
Sec. 3.12.031 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code, provided that each day's violation hereof shall be a separate offense. (1976 Code, sec. 17-5; 2001
Code, sec. 3.505)
Sec. 3.12.032 Permit required
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavation or cut below grade in any public street or highway within
the corporate limits of the city without having first secured a permit therefor from the city manager. Any person, firm
or corporation seeking or desiring to obtain such permit shall make application therefor to the city manager, which
application shall state the date or dates when the work is intended to be done, the expected length of time that the
street or highway shall be obstructed, the nature and purpose of the excavation and the exact location thereof. The
applicant for such permit shall further be required to present satisfactory evidence of sufficient public liability and
property damage insurance coverage to protect persons traveling along and upon the street or highway during the
time that the excavation work is in progress. (1976 Code, sec. 17-1; 2001 Code, sec. 3.501; Ordinance adopting
2017 Code)
Sec. 3.12.033 Signs, barricades and other warning devices
Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or cut below grade in any public street or highway within
the city limits shall, at all times during the course of the work, maintain and have installed sufficient and adequate
warnings, signs, flares, barricades, and barriers, so as to give warning to any and all persons traveling upon such
street or highway of the existence of such excavation or cut, and so as to prevent such persons so traveling upon
the street or highway from driving or falling into such excavation or cut. (1976 Code, sec. 17-2; 2001 Code, sec.
3.502)
Sec. 3.12.034 Backfilling and restoration of surface
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/435
Any person, firm or corporation who shall hereafter make any excavation or cut below grade in any public street or
highway within the city limits shall, upon the completion of the work for which the excavation or cut has been
made, backfill the trench, ditch, cut, or excavation with gravel or other material satisfactory to the director of public
works of the city, and shall tamp, roll, or otherwise make a compaction of such backfill, so that it shall not wash or
settle more than one-half inch (1/2") below the original grade of the street or highway; provided, however, that, in
the case of improved streets or highways, the person, firm, or corporation making the excavation or cut therein
shall make the compacted backfill hereinbefore required to at least the grade of the base of the surfacing, and
shall thereafter restore or replace the surfacing with material at least equivalent to the original surface. (1976
Code, sec. 17-3; 2001 Code, sec. 3.503)
Sec. 3.12.035 Maintenance agreement
Any person, firm or corporation who shall obtain a permit for making an excavation or cut below grade in any
public street or highway within the city limits shall, upon issuance of the permit, execute an agreement in writing
addressed to the city providing that, if the excavation or cut below grade contemplated by such permit shall at any
time within three years (3) after the completion of the work thereon settle or wash to an extent of more than onehalf
inch (1/2"), such person, firm, or corporation shall, at his own expense, re-enter such excavation or cut and
repair, resurface, or refill same. (1976 Code, sec. 17-4; 2001 Code, sec. 3.504)
Secs. 3.12.036–3.12.060 Reserved
Division 3. Parkway Contractors
Sec. 3.12.061 Definition
As used in this division, a “parkway contractor” is defined as a person or firm of persons which lays, constructs,
builds, repairs or rebuilds any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway approach on any street, alley, thoroughfare or
public right-of-way within the city. (Ordinance 00-8 adopted 3/21/00; 2001 Code, sec. 3.701)
Sec. 3.12.062 Registration required; bond; permits
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to perform the work of a parkway contractor, as defined in this division,
without first having registered with the city annually. The fee shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code, payable at the time of registration. The parkway contractor shall also be required to make
and execute a bond to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Further, for each job, the parkway
contractor shall obtain a permit, from the director of public works, the fee for which shall be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, to do such work. (Ordinance 00-8 adopted 3/21/00; 2001 Code,
sec. 3.702)
Sec. 3.12.063 Application for registration; notification of work; stamping of name on work
(a) The applicant shall file in the office of the director of public works a statement of his qualifications, together
with a surety company bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
save harmless the city and any person, firm or corporation with whom such applicant may contract to perform work
from any and all damage of every character arising from or caused directly or indirectly by any negligence in the
performance of such work, and for any imperfect or inadequate work done by the applicant, and that the applicant
will maintain such work in a good and workmanlike state of repair for and during a period of two (2) years from and
after its completion and acceptance by the city. Such statement of qualifications, approved by the director of public
works, together with the bond and date of issuance, shall be filed by the director of public works with the city
secretary.
(b) The applicant shall notify the director of public works of the date on which he intends to start operations on
any new work or contract.
(c) The applicant shall stamp his name, together with the year in which the work is completed, on each piece of
work constructed by him with a stamp having letters not less than one-half inch nor greater than one (1) inch in
size, and making an impression approximately one-eighth inch in depth.
(Ordinance 00-8 adopted 3/21/00; 2001 Code, sec. 3.703)
Sec. 3.12.064 Standards for work
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/435
All such work shall be done according to standard specifications, grades and lines furnished by the director of
public works, and shall at all times be subject to the inspection and approval of the director of public works or other
persons designated for such work by him. Use of perishable materials in the public right-of-way, such as wood
products, is strictly forbidden. Any other materials proposed for use in the public right-of-way, not included in the
engineering design manual standard specifications, must first be approved by the director of public works.
Immediately upon the completion of each and every such piece of work, the contractor shall apply for and obtain
from the director of public works a certificate, stating in substance that such work has been completed according to
the standard specifications, grades and lines given by him. (Ordinance 00-8 adopted 3/21/00; 2001 Code, sec.
3.704)
Sec. 3.12.065 Improvements required upon construction or alteration of commercial property
Owners of commercial property, at the time of construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or for such other
alterations that require a building permit, shall be required to construct any parkway improvements deemed
necessary to bring these appurtenances into compliance with current standards. At the time of plan review, the
director of public works shall determine any parkway improvements required and same shall be conveyed to the
building permit applicant. (Ordinance 00-8 adopted 3/21/00; 2001 Code, sec. 3.705)
Secs. 3.12.066–3.12.090 Reserved
Division 4. Parkway Improvements Policy
Sec. 3.12.091 Intent and purpose
(a) It is the intent of this policy to encourage the construction of parkway improvements, which include
sidewalks, curb and gutter, and driveway approaches. and the replacement of these improvements when they
have deteriorated. Sidewalks provide safety and convenience for pedestrians; curbs and gutters provide safety
and improved drainage; driveway approaches provide access to the adjoining property, improve drainage and
protect the integrity of street pavement.
(b) The existing subdivision regulations and the assessment paving regulations govern the specific procedures
to be followed for the construction of parkway improvements in certain circumstances. This policy is intended to
further clarify the relationships between these other ordinances, provide guidance for owner-initiated projects and
identify circumstances for cost sharing on facilities replacements.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1001)
Sec. 3.12.092 Responsibility for costs
As a general rule, new (first time) construction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and driveway approaches shall be
the financial responsibility of the owner of the adjoining property. Under certain conditions, the city may participate
in the cost of the replacement of these parkway improvements. (Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code,
sec. 3.1002)
Sec. 3.12.093 New construction of parkway improvements
(a) New development. In new developments (including in-fill or redevelopments), the cost of curbs and gutters,
driveway approaches, and sidewalks (where required) shall be the responsibility of the developer or property
owner in accordance with the subdivision regulations.
(b) City capital improvement projects.
(1) On streets constructed under the city's capital improvement programs, the cost of curb and gutter,
driveway approaches, and sidewalks (where required) shall be the responsibility of the property owner,
who will be assessed this cost through the city's assessment paving program.
(2) When the city determines that there is a critical need for a sidewalk to provide for the safety and
convenience of the public at large, no property owner participation will be required. This determination
will be made by the city manager or his designee, based on such factors as number of pedestrians,
pedestrian accident history, vehicular volume, traffic speed and proximity to a school or place of public
assembly. Such sidewalks will be constructed by the city, as needed, and shall be paid for one hundred
percent (100%) by the city from the appropriate fund.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/435
(c) City major maintenance projects. On streets included in the city's major maintenance program, where the
construction of new parkway improvements adjacent to maintenance projects is deemed necessary by the city
engineer, the city manager or his designee, such improvements shall be the responsibility of the property owner,
who will be assessed this cost through the city's assessment paving program.
(d) Property owner requests. Where individual property owners desire curb and gutter, driveway approaches, or
sidewalks where none exist, the construction cost shall be their responsibility. The city will provide information on
contractors who are registered to work in the public right-of-way and will give information on prevailing unit prices
for such construction.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.12.094 Replacement of parkway improvements
(a) Redevelopment. In redevelopment projects in the city, where the redevelopment is residential and property
owner initiated, the city may reimburse up to fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacing parkway improvements in
accordance with the procedures outlined below. Where the redevelopment is a purely commercial venture, the
replacement shall be at the full cost of the property owner. If the city initiates the replacement in a redeveloping
area, the city council may choose to pay the full cost or assess the adjacent property owners.
(b) City capital improvement programs.
(1) On streets constructed under the city's capital improvement programs, where the city manager or
his designee determines that the replacements are necessary to handle drainage, to protect the
integrity of the pavement, or are otherwise in the best interest of the city, parkway improvements shall
be replaced at the cost of the city.
(2) Where reconstruction of the existing improvements is not deemed necessary they will not be
replaced unless requested by the property owner. See subsection (d) below.
(c) City major maintenance projects.
(1) On streets included in the city's major maintenance program, where the city manager or his
designee determines that the replacements are necessary to handle drainage, to protect the integrity of
the pavement, or are otherwise in the best interest of the city, parkway improvements shall be replaced
at the cost of the city.
(2) Where reconstruction of the existing improvements is not deemed necessary they will not be
replaced unless requested by the property owner. See subsection (d) below.
(d) Property owner initiated replacements. Where individual property owners request the replacement of
deteriorated parkway improvements adjacent to properties used as one- or two-family residences in conjunction
with projects in either subsection (b) or (c) above, they shall be required to pay 50% of the estimated cost of the
improvements prior to construction.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.12.095 Partial reimbursement for parkway improvements adjacent to one- or two-family
residences
The city will share in the cost of replacing deteriorated parkway improvements (curb and gutter, sidewalk, and/or
driveway approaches) adjacent to one- or two-family residences under the following conditions:
(1) Prior to any construction work, the property owner must request the city's approval for cost
participation.
(2) The department of public works will inspect the existing facilities and will agree to share in the
cost of replacement if:
(A) The existing facilities are sufficiently deteriorated or damaged to justify replacement;
(B) The existing facilities can be replaced without creating drainage or other problems on
adjoining or surrounding properties;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/435
(C) Funds are available to finance the city's share of the cost; and
(D) The street is not included in any scheduled city project.
(3) All work must comply with current city standards and must be performed by a contractor
registered to perform work in the public right-of-way, to line and grade established by the city.
(4) The property owner must take the responsibility for employing a registered contractor to perform
the work and for paying the total cost of the work.
(5) The city will reimburse the property owner either: (i) fifty percent (50%) of the actual cost of the
parkway improvements, or (ii) fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the same work performed on city
projects, whichever is less. Such average prices will be determined biannually by the public works
department using the average unit prices paid for similar work on city projects over the previous sixmonth
period. Average unit prices will be available on file and from the transportation and public works
department.
(6) Where only curb currently exists, it shall be replaced with the city's standard curb and gutter
section (see the integral curb detail in the city engineering design manual). Reimbursement shall be as
described in subsection (5) above.
(7) Reimbursement for driveway approaches shall be for the area from the curb back five feet (5) or
to the property line, whichever is less (see the driveway approach detail in the city engineering design
manual).
(8) No reimbursements will be made for the cost of constructing parkway improvements where none
previously existed (that is, for missing sections in otherwise existing improvements).
(9) The cost of constructing curb and gutter on corner radii, including handicap ramps, if required,
shall be the responsibility of the city.
(10) This program shall apply only to the replacement of parkway improvements for property used for
one- or two-family residences, initiated by and accomplished by the property owner. Its provisions shall
in no way be extended to construction work initiated by the city as part of the city's construction
programs, or work governed by the city's new development policies or assessment paving regulations.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1005)
Sec. 3.12.096 Parkway improvement petitions
The city will contract for the construction of new or the replacement of deteriorated parkway improvements when
owners of all property in one (1) block sign a petition to the city and agree, by executing mechanic's liens, to pay
fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacement or 100 percent (100%) of the cost of new improvements. The city will
pay the initial cost, and the property owners can pay the city over a period of five years with interest charged at
eight percent (8%) per annum on the unpaid balance as identified in the assessment paving regulations.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1006)
Sec. 3.12.097 Hazardous conditions
Where the city has been notified that parkway improvements have deteriorated to a point that they are deemed by
the city manager or his designee to be hazardous to the public, the city may remove the improvements to alleviate
the hazard. The city may replace such improvement, subject to the availability of funds. (Ordinance 03-09 adopted
4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1007; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.12.098 Funding availability
In all situations where this policy provides for the city to finance all or part of the cost of parkway improvements,
the provisions are subject to the availability of funds for this purpose. (Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001
Code, sec. 3.1008)
Sec. 3.12.099 Parkway policy summary
Category Owner Funding City Funding
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/435
(a) New construction:
New development 100% 0%
City CIP 100% (assessment) 0%
City major maintenance 100% (assessment) 0%
Property owner project 100% 0%
(b) Replacement redevelopment:
Residential 50% 50%
Commercial 100% 0%
City CIP (by necessity) 0% 100%
Non-necessity 50% 50%
City major maintenance (by necessity) 0% 100%
Non-necessity 50% 50%
Property owner requests
Residential 50% 50%
Nonresidential 100% 0%
(c) Property owner petition; 100% of owners sign
mechanic's lien:
Replacement (city administered project) 50% 50%
New (city administered project) 100% 0%
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/435
(d) Hazardous condition:
Removal (city administered project) 0% 100%
Replacement (city administered project) 0% 100%
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/15/03; 2001 Code, sec. 3.1009)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.02.001 Sale of beer in residential areas
(a) The sale of beer shall be prohibited in all residential areas of the city.
(b) In this section, “residential area” means all areas of the city zoned residential in the following districts:
(1) R-1 One-Family District;
(2) R-2 Two-Family District;
(3) R-3 Apartment District;
(4) PD Planned Development District where the use specified in the conceptual or development plan
is primarily residential in nature;
(5) MHP Manufactured Home Parks District; or
(6) MH Manufactured Housing District.
(Ordinance 07-24, sec. 1, adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, sec. 4.701)
State law reference–Authority to prohibit sale of beer in residential areas, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.32.
Sec. 4.02.002 Sale near church, school or hospital
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to
sell the same at a place of business that is:
(1) Within 300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; or
(2) Within 1,000 feet of a private school if the city council receives a request from the governing body
of the private school.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and
the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in a direct line across intersections.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/435
(c) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multi-story building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(d) The city council may allow variances to the distance restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section if
the city council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of
the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an
applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other
reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the
situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
(Ordinance 07-24, sec. 1, adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, sec. 4.702)
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Sec. 4.02.003 License and permit fees
(a) The city hereby levies and shall collect a fee in the maximum amount allowed by state law for each permit
and license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission for premises located within the corporate limits of
the city.
(b) The permit or license fee shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year.
(c) No person shall engage in the business of selling or serving alcoholic beverages within the city without first
having paid the applicable fees established by the city.
(Ordinance 07-24, sec. 1, adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, sec. 4.703)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38;
local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
ARTICLE 4.03 SOLICITORS, VENDORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS*
Sec. 4.03.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to protect the citizens against crime, including deceptive practices, fraud, and
burglary, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of citizen's privacy, and preserve the
public health, safety, and general welfare by registering and regulating solicitors. (Ordinance 03-13 adopted
5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.101)
Sec. 4.03.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Agent. A person who undertakes to transact some business or manage some affair for another person by the
authority and on the account of the latter.
Badge. The identification permit issued by the code enforcement department of the city.
Code enforcement department. The code enforcement department of the city.
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires personal property, goods or service, money or credit for personal,
family or household purposes.
Individual permit. A permit issued under the authority of this article to each individual working under a master
permit, who engages in the business of solicitation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/435
Itinerant merchant. Any person who sells goods, takes orders, or seeks donations or contributions, from house to
house or from place to place in the city, or who sells or seeks donations or contributions out of a vehicle, wagon,
cart or other conveyance used in the transportation of such merchandise parked on premises where there is no
related business building. (Mobile food vendors are not considered itinerant merchants for the purpose of this
article.)
Local business. A business located and operated within the corporate limits of the city.
Master permit. The permit required under the authority of this article to engage in the business of solicitation.
Merchant. A party to a consumer transaction other than the consumer.
Mobile food unit. A vehicle-mounted food establishment, designed to be readily movable, typically constructed in a
truck or trailer. Mobile food units may not be permanently parked in one location.
Mobile food vendor. Any person who sells food products or takes food product orders from house to house or from
place to place in the city, and who sells such food out of a vehicle, wagon, cart or other conveyance used in the
transportation of such food on premises where there is no related business building.
Person. An individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association or other legal entity.
Police department. The police department of the city.
Residence. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within
any type of building or structure.
Solicitation. Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door to door, house to house, building to building, or along
any street in the city, or in a temporary stationary location, personally contacting occupants or other persons selling
or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods or services for commercial purposes, or seeking
donations or contributions for personal, commercial or nonprofit purposes.
Solicitor. All persons, as well as their agents and employees, engaged in or attempting to engage in solicitation.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; Ordinance 10-15, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/10; Ordinance 2013-06 adopted 6/18/13;
2001 Code, sec. 4.103)
Sec. 4.03.003 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall
be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.112)
Sec. 4.03.004 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of solicitation, as defined in section 4.03.002 of this
article, within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit and license therefor as provided herein.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.102)
Sec. 4.03.005 General regulations
(a) Home solicitation.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or
rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of the residence, for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation
transaction, without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(2) Each person engaged in or attempting to engage in a solicitation transaction must have a permit
issued under the terms of this article, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not
be reproduced, assigned or transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or
reproduction shall render the permit void.
(b) Itinerant merchants.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/435
(1) Every itinerant merchant as defined in this article shall be required to obtain a permit prior to
engaging in the business of an itinerant merchant. An applicant for such permit shall file an application
in writing with the code enforcement department not less than ten (10) days before the first day in which
he proposes to engage in business as an itinerant merchant.
(2) Every person who is licensed as an itinerant merchant to peddle edible merchandise as required
by this article shall keep all articles for sale to the public in a clean and sanitary condition, as well as the
wagons, vehicles or other conveyances used in the transportation of such merchandise. A copy of a
current health certificate is required if merchandise of edible quality is to be sold; provided, however,
this shall not apply to the sale of candy, nuts or other edibles prepared and packaged by a nationally
recognized manufacturer or a Texas manufacturer meeting standards imposed by state and local health
codes, if such packages are unbroken, or to an individual selling products of the farm or orchard
actually produced by the seller.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant to sell or offer to sell any unwholesome or unsound
merchandise or to give a false weight or measure to such article sold or offered for sale.
(c) Solicitation on public property.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, hawk, sell, solicit or take orders for any services,
wares, merchandise or goods, including, but not limited to, magazines, encyclopedias, tools,
photographs, flowers, candy, plants or statues, on the streets, street rights-of-way, parkways, medians
or sidewalks of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city, except for certain community events
sponsored by a local charitable or civic organization and/or permitted by the city (i.e., Butterfield Stage
Days, Pumpkin Fest, etc.). This provision shall not apply to commercial businesses who set up displays
to sell merchandise on the sidewalks located directly in front of their building during business hours.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor retail sale or outdoor commercial
promotion in the city except as provided in this article or in the city code.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation activities on any public street that is not
residential in character or on any street that includes four or more marked traffic lanes.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; Ordinance 2013-06 adopted 6/18/13; 2001 Code, sec. 4.104)
Sec. 4.03.006 Application for permit; fee; bond; appeals
(a) Master permit application.
(1) Any person desiring to make solicitation transactions or charitable, religious or civic fundraising
solicitations within the city shall make written application, on a form provided by the city, to the code
enforcement department for a master permit. The application shall contain the following:
(A) The name, social security number, date of birth and address of the person applying and
desiring to make solicitations;
(B) Whether the master permit is for an individual (natural person), a partnership, or a
corporation; and
(i) If an individual, the individual's business or residence address and telephone number;
(ii) If a partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address, and the
telephone number of each partner;
(iii) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether the corporation is
organized under the laws of the state or is a foreign corporation, the mailing address,
business location, telephone number, names of all officers and directors or trustees of such
corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation and registered agent for
the state;
(C) A sales tax identification number issued by the state and a copy of the sales tax permit or
proof that the goods sold are not subject to such sales tax;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/435
(D) The approximate time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of
the beginning of the solicitation and its projected conclusion and how often the applicant will solicit
in the city during the year;
(E) Names of other communities in the state in which the applicant has made solicitations
during the last six months;
(F) The nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to
be furnished;
(G) Whether such applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment
or the deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
(H) Whether the applicant or any person employed by the applicant to solicit has been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years;
(I) Names, addresses, telephone numbers and social security numbers of the adults who shall
be responsible for supervising any solicitor;
(J) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of two persons as references, excluding
relatives and persons living with the applicant;
(K) Valid state driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number with a
photograph;
(L) A copy of a current health certificate if merchandise of edible quality is to be sold; provided,
however, this shall not apply to the sale of candy, nuts or other edibles prepared and packaged by
a nationally recognized manufacturer or a state manufacturer meeting standards imposed by state
and local health codes, if such packages are unbroken, or to an individual selling products of the
farm or orchard actually produced by the seller.
(2) The application must be signed by the applicant if the person is an individual; if the person
applying is a partnership, by a general partner; and if the person applying is a corporation, by an officer.
The individual signing the application will sign a statement that he has carefully read the application and
that all the information contained therein is true and correct upon penalty of perjury.
(3) If a person applying for a master permit intends to contract with, employ or otherwise retain
individuals to engage in solicitations, the person must identify all such individuals, along with their
addresses and telephone numbers, and obtain an individual permit for each such individual.
(b) Solicitation on private property. If conducting business on private property, in addition to the information
required in the master permit, a merchant must provide written permission from the property owner to conduct
business on their property.
(c) Application fee. A nonrefundable fee for investigation and administration of the application shall be charged,
as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be paid at
the time the application is made and shall not be returned to the applicant, regardless of whether a permit is
issued. All fees are subject to change by the city council.
(d) Permit fee. A nonrefundable permit fee shall be charged for conducting business within the city limits, as
provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the
time the application is made or paid on a monthly basis. The city may revoke a permit if a permit fee is not paid. All
fees are subject to change by the city council.
(e) Bond. Each holder of a master permit requiring cash deposits or taking orders on delivery purchases (COD)
or who requires a contract or agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future
delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish the city a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 by
the master permit holder as principal, and by a security company authorized and licensed to do business in the
state.
(f) Right of action on bond. Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of a solicitor shall have the right of
acting on the bond set forth in this article for recovery of money or damages, or both.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/435
(g) Appeal process. If the code enforcement department refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the
right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary within ten (10) days
from the date of the refusal. The same procedure of appeal shall apply to a permit revoked under this article.
Thereafter, the city council shall set a reasonable time and place for a hearing on such an appeal and notice of
such hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to
the date of the hearing.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.105)
Sec. 4.03.007 Issuance of permit and badges; periodic solicitation activities
(a) Issuance of permit and badge; expiration. After review of a permit application to determine its compliance
with this article, and within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the same, the code enforcement department
shall either issue a master permit, and any associated individual permits, in the form of a badge, or notify the
person applying that the application does not comply with this article, and specifically point out what information or
explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit can be issued. All permits shall expire after one
year from the date of issuance.
(b) Requirement to display badge. Upon issuance of the badge by the code enforcement department, the
following requirements shall apply:
(1) The badge shall be valid only for the person to whom it is issued (nontransferable). Each solicitor
is also required to carry a state-approved picture identification card or a state driver's license as proof of
identification.
(2) The badge issued shall be carried/displayed by the solicitor in plain sight while he is engaged in
soliciting.
(3) The badge is, and shall remain, the property of the city and may be revoked and required to be
surrendered at any time for any false or misleading information on the permit application, for violation of
any city ordinance, including the provisions set forth in this article, and for violation of any state or
federal law.
(c) Periodic solicitation activities. Solicitors who periodically come in and out of the city during the year must
notify the police department upon returning to the city if they have not conducted any solicitation activity for thirty
(30) days.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.106)
Sec. 4.03.008 Restrictions on operation
(a) Solicitation prohibited on posted premises. All solicitation is strictly prohibited on the premises with a posted
notice indicating that solicitors are not welcome or invited.
(b) Noise and sound devices. No solicitor, or any person working on his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry,
blow a horn or whistle, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying
system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places of the city, or upon any private
premises of the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable to be plainly
heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other places, for the purpose of attracting attention to the
location or to any goods, wares or merchandise which any person permitted pursuant to this article proposes to
sell. This section also prohibits the use of any audio device for the purpose of attracting customers to retail
establishments or merchants.
(c) Dates and times of operation.
(1) Solicitors shall conduct solicitation activities only on Monday through Saturday. Solicitors shall not
conduct solicitation activities before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or sunset on any day, whichever is
earlier. The term “sunset” means the time of day identified by the National Weather Service as the time
for sunset on that day in the city. This restriction does not apply if a visit on the premises is a result of a
request or an appointment made by the occupant.
(2) Solicitors shall not engage in solicitation activities at any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, July
4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day or Christmas Day unless a visit on the premises
is a result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/435
(d) Home solicitation.
(1) Every solicitor shall identify himself as a solicitor upon approaching a citizen at a residence and
explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation of orders, or the demonstration of goods or
merchandise, or any combination of such purposes.
(2) No person engaged as a solicitor shall remain or linger at a residence after having been verbally
informed by the resident that they are not welcome, or at a residence or business that has a sign
posted giving clear notice that solicitors are not welcome, such as “No Solicitors” or words of similar
meaning.
(e) Itinerant merchants.
(1) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any mobile vending operation on any public
street that is not residential in character or on any street that includes four or more marked traffic lanes.
(2) Any person engaged in or who attempts to engage in mobile vending operations shall stop the
motor vehicle or other conveyance used in the transportation of such merchandise only in immediate
response to a direct request from a potential customer and for a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
(3) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in any mobile vending operation unless such
person has in his or her immediate possession a valid solicitor's permit and health permit.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; Ordinance 10-15, sec. 2, adopted 4/6/10; 2001 Code, sec. 4.107)
Sec. 4.03.009 Mobile food vendors
(a) Submission of plans. Plans shall be submitted to the development services department for new construction,
renovation or the conversion of a unit to a mobile food unit. Plans should show the equipment layout, and the
arrangement and construction material of the inside of the unit, including food preparation, storage, and window
service areas.
(b) Required documentation. To obtain a mobile food vendor permit, a mobile food vendor must submit a list of
foods and beverages to be served on the unit, stating the source of the item and when and where it will be
prepared. Additionally, a mobile food vendor must submit written permission from any property owner who owns
property on which the mobile food unit will be parked, regardless of the time period associated with parking the
mobile food unit on said property.
(c) Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit without having obtained a permit
issued by the city. Permits may be purchased monthly for up to one year from the date of issuance.
(d) Inspections. Mobile food units may be inspected at any time by the code enforcement officer. The mobile
food vendor shall keep the development services department informed of the general location of the mobile unit on
a quarterly basis.
(e) Certified food manager required. A certified food manager must be present at the mobile food unit during
each day of operation.
(f) Food source and food protection.
(1) All food sold on the unit must be either prepared on the unit or at an approved, permitted food
establishment. Food may not be prepared at home; food offered for sale must comply with labeling laws
where applicable; food shall be in sound condition, free of spoilage, filth, or any other contamination
and shall be safe for human consumption.
(2) Only ice that has been made from potable (drinking) water shall be used or offered for sale.
(3) Ice intended for human consumption shall be used to cool foods, food containers, or food
utensils. Ice used for cooling stored foods and food containers shall not be used for human
consumption.
(4) Food, whether raw or prepared, if removed from the original package or container, shall be stored
in a clean, covered, impervious and nonabsorbent container, except during periods of preparation or
service. Solid cuts of meat shall be protected by being covered during storage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/435
(5) Containers of food shall be stored at least 6 inches above the floor in a manner that protects food
from splash and contamination and permits easy cleaning of the floor.
(6) No food can be stored in toilet rooms or vestibules.
(7) No food, including packaged foods, shall be stored in contact with water or undrained ice.
Wrapped sandwiches shall not be stored in direct contact with ice.
(8) Conveniently located refrigeration facilities or effectively insulated facilities shall be provided to
assure that potentially hazardous foods are maintained at 41°F or below.
(9) Potentially hazardous food requiring refrigeration after preparation shall be rapidly cooled to
internal temperatures of 41°F or below. Potentially hazardous foods shall not be prepared in quantities
so large that rapid cooling will not be possible.
(10) Stored frozen foods shall be kept frozen.
(11) The internal hot holding temperature of potentially hazardous food shall be 135°F or above
except during necessary periods of preparation. Each hot storage unit must have an accurate
thermometer available.
(12) Live or dead fish bait shall be stored separately from food or food products.
(13) A product (stem type) thermometer is needed to check internal temperatures of potentially
hazardous foods.
(g) Utensils. Only single service (plastic or paper) utensils, tableware, plates, etc., shall be used.
(h) Insect and rodent control. All mobile food units shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the
entrance of flies, dust, dirt, or other foreign matter. Mobile food units must be provided with tightfitting solid or
screened doors or windows.
(i) Floors.
(1) Floors shall be constructed of smooth, easily cleanable materials such as ceramic tile, linoleum,
or laminated wood.
(2) Sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, etc., are prohibited.
(3) Mats and duckboards shall be nonabsorbent and cleaned daily.
(j) Walls and ceilings.
(1) Walls and ceilings shall be light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable.
(2) Food preparation areas shall be well lit.
(3) All lights in food preparation areas must be shielded.
(k) Ventilation. The ventilation system shall be installed and operated according to the Texas Food
Establishment Rules and the International Mechanical Code.
(l) Animals. Live animals shall be excluded from the surrounding areas of all mobile food units.
(m) Cleaning and sanitization of equipment; hand lavatory.
(1) A two-compartment sink with hot and cold running water under pressure is required; however, a
three-compartment sink is recommended.
(2) The hand lavatory must be accessible and convenient.
(n) Fresh water and wastewater systems.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/435
(1) All mobile units must have potable (drinking) water and the storage of potable water must be
according to law.
(2) All mobile food units must have hot and cold running water under pressure. Hot water at a
temperature of at least 100°F shall be provided to all fixtures at all times while the unit is in operation.
(3) Fresh water must be provided in a self-contained system within the mobile food unit. Water may
not be supplied to the mobile unit by running hoses from an establishment to the unit.
(4) The water inlet shall be capped when not being used to fill a water tank.
(5) Wastewater shall be stored in a permanently installed retention tank that is sized at least 15%
larger in capacity than the water supply tank and is sloped to drain. The drain pipe must be at least 25
millimeters (1 inch) in inner diameter or greater and equipped with a shutoff valve.
(6) Wastewater must be disposed of by a sewage transport vehicle, and under no circumstances
shall wastewater be disposed in the municipal wastewater system.
(o) Vehicle requirements.
(1) All mobile units shall be readily identifiable by business name, printed in bold letters not less than
3 inches in height, not less than one and one-half inches in width, permanently affixed, and prominently
displayed upon at least 2 sides of the unit.
(2) All mobile food units shall maintain a current state motor vehicle inspection sticker and a current
Texas motor vehicle license plate registration sticker.
(3) All mobile food units must be readily movable (capable of moving immediately upon the request
of the code enforcement officer).
(4) Mobile food vendors who only sell prepackaged goods on their mobile food units shall not remain
parked in one location for longer than three (3) hours. No time restriction shall apply for mobile food
vendors who prepare food on their mobile food unit.
(p) Applicability to prepackaged sales. For mobile food vendors who only sell prepackaged goods on their
mobile food units, the only subsections of this section that apply are those relative to:
(1) Submitting plans;
(2) Required documentation;
(3) Initial inspection of the mobile unit;
(4) Permits;
(5) Inspections;
(6) Food source and food protection when applicable, as determined by the code enforcement
officer;
(7) Insect and rodent control;
(8) Animals;
(9) Fresh water and wastewater systems, when applicable, as determined by the code enforcement
officer; and
(10) Vehicle requirements.
(q) Restroom access and trash receptacles. Mobile food vendors who prepare food on their mobile food unit
shall:
(1) Provide one or more trash receptacles for disposal of waste from customers, and shall provide for
the disposal of such waste; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/435
(2) Provide access to restroom facilities for customers within 300 feet of the mobile food unit.
(Ordinance 10-15, sec. 3, adopted 4/6/10; Ordinance 10-35 adopted 10/5/10; Ordinance 2014-18 adopted 8/19/14;
Ordinance 2014-28 adopted 11/18/14; 2001 Code, sec. 4.107(5))
State law reference–Regulation of food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units, and roadside food
vendors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.001 et seq.
Sec. 4.03.010 Notice prohibiting solicitors; request to leave premises
(a) A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in a solicitation at his residence shall exhibit in a
conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence a weatherproof sign or card, not less than
three inches by four inches in size, containing the words, “NO SOLICITORS” or words of similar meaning. The
letters shall not be less than two-thirds of an inch in height.
(b) Every merchant, upon going onto any premises upon which a residence is located, shall first examine the
residence to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the
residence. If notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the merchant shall immediately depart from the premises
without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(c) No person, other than the occupant of the residence, shall remove, deface or render illegible a card placed
by the occupant pursuant to this section.
(d) Any merchant who has gained entrance to a residence, or audience with the occupant, whether invited or
not, shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by
the occupant.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.109)
Sec. 4.03.011 Enforcement; denial of permit
(a) The police department is authorized to investigate the affairs of any person soliciting either before or after
the filing of an application for a permit for solicitation.
(b) The code enforcement department may deny a permit to any applicant for good cause, which shall include,
but is not limited to, the following:
(1) A fugitive from justice;
(2) Upon submission of an incomplete application for a solicitor's permit;
(3) Providing false and/or misleading statements on the application for a solicitor's permit.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.108)
Sec. 4.03.012 Revocation of permit
(a) Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the code enforcement department for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a permit.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation activities.
(3) Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the permit.
(4) Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create or constitute a danger to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(5) Failing to pay the permit fees.
(b) Upon revocation, the code enforcement department shall deliver written notice to the permit holder stating
the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the permit
holder's place of business or mailed to the permit holder's last known address. The building official or his designee
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/435
shall have the authority to seize any and all permit badges possessed by persons conducting business as a
solicitor while the official notification process is underway. At such time, any and all solicitation activities conducted
under the authority of that permit shall cease.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.110)
Sec. 4.03.013 Exemptions
(a) Persons engaged in solicitations for school-related activities or fundraising shall be exempt from all
provisions of this article, including the requirement for a permit.
(b) Persons engaged in solicitations for local charitable, religious or civic fundraising shall be required to obtain
a permit from the city; however, the following provisions of this article shall not apply:
(1) Section 4.03.006(c), application fee;
(2) Section 4.03.006(d), permit fee; and
(3) Section 4.03.006(e), furnishing a bond.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to public utility companies or others operating under franchises
granted by the city, insurance sales people, real estate sales people, and others licensed by the state, political
groups or organizations which are subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
(d) The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial agents dealing with local business establishments
in the usual course of business.
(e) The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons engaging in the business of delivery of handbills or
circulars door to door or to persons engaging in religious or charitable visitations door to door, who do not engage
in a solicitation transaction. Such persons may do so on any day from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever
is earlier.
(Ordinance 03-13 adopted 5/20/03; 2001 Code, sec. 4.111)
ARTICLE 4.04 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.04.001 Definition
Garage sales are defined as the sale or offering for sale of personal property to the general public on real property
in the city which is zoned for residential use, whether the personal property is sold or offered for sale in the garage,
carport, patio or yard of such property. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 2/1/94; 2001 Code, art. 4.500(a))
Sec. 4.04.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 94-1
adopted 2/1/94; 2001 Code, art. 4.500(e))
Sec. 4.04.003 Permit required; conditions
It shall be unlawful to offer or display any item for sale at a garage or patio sale without having first obtained a
permit from the city. The permit issued by the city shall be displayed on the property and clearly visible from the
street. Said permits shall be issued on the following regulations:
(1) Sale of merchandise shall be restricted to the permitted premises only (as defined by the property
line;
(2) No new merchandise acquired for resale shall be permitted;
(3) The duration of each such sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days;
(4) A permit fee shall be established by the city council and shall be as provided for in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code. A permit fee shall be waived if the garage sale is in conjunction
with an annual city-sponsored garage sale;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/435
(5) No person may hold a garage sale, or receive a permit for same, at the same address more than
four (4) times per calendar year;
(6) The person making application for the permit must reside upon the subject premises where the
garage sale is to be held.
(Ordinance 94-1 adopted 2/1/94; Ordinance 05-06 adopted 3/1/05; 2001 Code, art. 4.500(b))
Sec. 4.04.004 Signs
It shall be unlawful to erect in the public right-of-way [or] attach to any utility pole in the public right-of-way or
easement any sign advertising a garage or patio sale. Such sign must be erected on a stake or other suitable
device and be dated with the address and/or telephone number of the person responsible for its erection. Signs
may be placed on private property no more than 48 hours prior to the sales (or events) and must be removed
within 24 hours following the event. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 2/1/94; 2001 Code, art. 4.500(c))
Sec. 4.04.005 Cancelled sales
Inclement weather or other acts of God which result in the cancellation of a scheduled sale shall not be charged
against the frequency of sales permitted in section 4.04.003. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 2/1/94; 2001 Code, art.
4.500(d))
ARTICLE 4.05 OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Purpose
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the city is an activity which necessitates reasonable
regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their
property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish
reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for present and future operations related to the
exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in
association therewith within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, to minimize the
potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, to protect the quality of the environment, and to insure the
orderly production of available mineral resources. (Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.401)
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically
defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable oil and
gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment. As defined by the state railroad commission, and includes the plugging of the well and the
restoration of any well site as required by this article.
Ambient noise level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of
sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given
location.
Blowout preventer. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to
the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be
closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed
for preventing blowouts.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term “building”
shall be construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof.”
Cathodic protection. An electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to
the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in
the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an
impressed current system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/435
City manager. The city manager of the City of Bridgeport or his designated representative.
City attorney. The city attorney of the City of Bridgeport.
City code. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Bridgeport.
Closed loop mud system. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins
are used to collect all drilling waste.
Commission. The state railroad commission.
Completion of drilling, redrilling and reworking. The date the work is completed for the drilling, redrilling or
reworking and the crew is released by completing their work or contract or by their employer.
Daytime. The period from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is equal to 10 times the logarithm to the base
10 of the ratio of the measured sound pressure squared to a reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling
or reworking a well for the production of oil or gas.
Drill site. The premises used during the drilling or reworking of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of
a well or wells or any associated operation.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling equipment. The derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, and every piece of
apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas or other
subsurface hydrocarbons.
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Fire department. The fire department of the City of Bridgeport.
FIRM. Flood insurance rate map.
Flow or gathering lines. All pipelines operated incidentally to the development and operation of any petroleum or
natural gas well.
Frac or fracing. The process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation using high pressure hydraulic fracture
techniques.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions, and/or the gaseous
components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
Gas utility pipeline. Those pipelines within the city that under federal and state rules and regulations are exempt
from city regulations and ordinances regarding construction standards, safety standards or reporting requirements.
Historical site. A historic structure as defined by section 442.001 of the Texas Government Code, or a structure or
property that is designated as historic by a political subdivision of the state, the state, or the federal government.
Inspector. The well inspector or designated representative of the city.
Nighttime. The period between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Oil. Petroleum and other fluid hydrocarbons produced in a natural state from the earth.
Operation site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil or
gas after drilling activities are complete.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/435
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission Form W-1 or Form P-4 for a well that is, or
will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well,
including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil or gas
lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an
operator. In the event that there is no oil or gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of
the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Person. Both the singular and the plural, and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian,
partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Pipeline. All parts of a pipeline facility which carries petroleum or natural gas, regardless of the size of the pipeline,
the owner of the line, or the owner of the petroleum or natural gas within the pipeline, specifically excluding gas
utility pipelines.
Protected use. A residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park.
Public building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons
for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not
be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls,
museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, shopping malls, stores
and hospitals.
Public park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes,
but shall not include privately owned amusement parks or privately owned or privately managed golf courses.
Redrill. Re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the existing well bore.
Refracture. The process of restimulating a well after initial completion using high pressure hydraulic fracture
techniques.
Refracture permit. A permit authorizing the refracture of a completed well, issued pursuant to the rules and
regulations of this article.
Religious institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended
primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for
dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a
well permit is filed with the city manager.
Reworking. Re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack
operations which do not extend more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing well bore, or replacement
of well liners or casings.
Right-of-way. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is
dedicated to the use and benefit of the public.
School. Any public and private primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and
including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by
the city that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under
14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
Seismic survey activity. Any activity where, for any consideration whatsoever, shock waves, sound waves, or
vibrations are generated for the purpose of surveying, mapping, identifying, classifying or otherwise distinguishing
subsurface characteristics indicative of the presence or absence of hydrocarbon substances, including, but not
limited to, oil and natural gas.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including
the entire right-of-way.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/435
Well. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing oil, gas,
liquid hydrocarbons, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal
or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.402; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.003 Penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a permit issued under this article;
(2) Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. No notice of default required by this article shall be a precondition to immediate
criminal enforcement due to a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.405; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.004 Inspector
(a) The city council shall appoint an inspector, as a third party consultant, to assist with the enforcement of this
article. The inspector shall have a degree in petroleum engineering with a background in drilling and production
and be licensed as a professional engineer (P.E.). The inspector shall advise, counsel or represent the city on such
matters relating to oil or gas operations within the city, as the city may want or require, on the health, welfare,
comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such inspector is employed for the purpose of advising,
counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or
request relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such inspector shall be assessed against and paid
for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article.
(b) The inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and
purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive
shall constitute a violation of this article.
(c) The inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this
article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to the inspector shall constitute a
violation of this article. The inspector shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in
the city to determine that the wells are operating in accordance within proper safety parameters as set out in this
article and all regulations of the commission.
(d) The inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the
commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to
establish and determine compliance with the applicable well permit. Failure of any person to provide any such
requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.403)
Sec. 4.05.005 Operator's agent
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. A physical address will be
required on all applications. No P.O. box addresses will be accepted. Every operator so designating such agent
shall within ten (10) days notify the city manager in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address
unless operations within the city are abandoned. (Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.404;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 4.05.006–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Well Permits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/435
Sec. 4.05.031 Required; conditions
(a) A person wanting to engage in and operate in oil or gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a well
permit under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee,
independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation,
reworking, fracturing or operation of any such well, or conduct any activity related to the production of oil or gas
without first obtaining a well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are
not limited to, reworking, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing
and pressurizing.
(b) The operator must apply for and obtain a well permit for the drilling, redrilling, deepening, re-entering,
activating or converting of each well. Each proposed well bore or hole shall require a separate permit and shall not
be permitted on a blanket basis.
(c) A well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator
shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is re-entering and
drilling an abandoned well.
(d) When a well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, redrilling, deepening, re-entering,
activating or converting of a well, such well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for conducting drilling,
operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment
of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well; provided, however,
that a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well may be reworked for purposes of redrilling,
deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then-current permit for such
well.
(e) Any person who intends to refracture a permitted well after initial completion shall apply for and obtain a
refracture permit. Application for a refracture permit must be submitted no later than 45 days before the activities
are proposed to begin and must include an inspection fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code. The application must identify where the activities will be conducted and describe the
activities in detail. Within ten (10) days after the permit is submitted the applicant shall provide evidence to the
director of development services of the city that notice of the proposed refracture has been provided to each
surface owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within six hundred feet (600') of the proposed
refracture site. The notice must also include the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the
activities. The person conducting the refracture activities must post a sign on the property giving the public notice
of the activities, including the name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities.
Reinspection by the inspector of the proposed refracture site to ensure continued compliance with the provisions of
this article shall occur within 15 days of the date of submission of the refracture permit. The inspector shall submit
recommendations to the director of development services of the city regarding the approval of the refracture permit
authorizing a one-time refracture of a single completed well, including such restrictions or conditions the inspector
deems appropriate. The director of development services shall review and consider the inspector's
recommendations and administratively act upon the refracture permit, unless the director of development services
in his or her discretion chooses to submit the application to the city council for determination. In such instance, the
city council shall review and consider an application for a refracture permit at the next regularly scheduled council
meeting after receiving the inspector's recommendations. In determining whether to grant a refracture permit, the
council shall consider the applicable factors set forth in this article for the initial well permit. Refracture activities
shall comply with all other provisions of this article governing fracture stimulation operations. Each completed well
proposed for refracture shall require a separate permit.
(f) The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well within six
hundred feet (600') of an occupied residence:
(1) At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the
entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence;
(2) Flowback operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed during
daylight hours only unless the inspector approves such operations during non-daylight hours;
(3) A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations; and
(4) At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing
the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/435
(g) A well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of the issuance. A well permit may be extended by the city council for one
additional period of one hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the operator and proof that the classification of
the requested well permit for such location has not changed.
(h) Except to the extent otherwise provided for herein, no additional well permit or filing fees shall be required
for:
(1) Any wells existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the corporate limits of the
city on the effective date of this article;
(2) Any wells where drilling has commenced on the effective date of this article;
(3) Any wells in existence or any wells on which drilling has commenced on land annexed into the
city after the effective date of this article; or
(4) Any well that was planned for the land before the effective date of its annexation and one or more
licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were
required by law for such well and the completed application for the initial authorization was filed before
the annexation proceedings were instituted.
(i) The well permit required by this article is in addition to and is not in lieu of any permit which may be required
by any other provision of this code or by any other governmental agency.
(j) No well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any floodway identified by FEMA on the most
current FIRM.
(k) No well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any public park or on any city-owned property
without the prior consent of the city council.
(l) No well permit shall be issued for any property not appropriately zoned by the city for oil or gas exploration,
production and development.
(m) By acceptance of any well permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and
agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to
be incorporated in any well permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was
set forth verbatim in such well permit.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.421)
Sec. 4.05.032 Application; fees
(a) Every application for a well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or
some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the city manager.
(b) Every application shall be accompanied by a well permit fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(c) The application shall include the following information:
(1) The date of the application and type of well permit requested.
(2) An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil or gas operation, the
parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property
recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
(3) Map showing proposed the transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste
products used or produced by the oil or gas operation.
(4) Proposed well name.
(5) Surface owner names(s) and address(es) of the lease property.
(6) Mineral lessee name and address.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/435
(7) Operator/applicant name and address, and if the operator is a corporation, the state of
incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(8) Name and address of the individual designated to receive notice.
(9) Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil or gas operation site activities and a
24-hour phone number.
(10) Location and description of all improvements and structures within six hundred feet (600') of the
well.
(11) Owner and address of each parcel of property within six hundred feet (600') of the proposed drill
site.
(12) A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and
equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited
to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage sheds.
(13) The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an
emergency.
(14) The exact and correct acreage and number of wells.
(15) Copies of all reports required by the commission.
(16) A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the city that provides that the operator shall
repair, at his own expense, any damage to city roads, streets, utilities or highways caused by the use of
heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, and operation of oil
or gas wells. An operator drilling or reworking multiple wells within the city at any given time may elect
to provide a blanket or city-wide road maintenance agreement in a form acceptable to the city manager
and city attorney. A sample road maintenance agreement is attached to Ordinance 08-63 as appendix
1.
(17) A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation.
(18) A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
(19) A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together with attachments and survey plats
which are applicable to the drill and operation sites.
(20) A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, if required by the Environmental Protection
Agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city manager three (3) days prior to the
commencement of any on-site activity.
(21) A copy of the determination by the state commission on environmental quality of the depth of
usable quality groundwater.
(22) Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(23) A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the
information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or
designated representative, true and correct.
(24) All required application and well permit fees in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(25) A fencing plan, as required by section 4.05.096 hereof.
(26) A landscape and irrigation plan, as required by section 4.05.097 hereof.
(27) The location and route of all flow lines and gathering lines related to the well site to transport
petroleum or natural gas from the well to the transmission pipeline or gas utility pipeline.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/435
(28) In the case of a pipeline that utilizes public thoroughfares, a right-of-way license agreement from
the city signed by the authorized agent for the pipeline.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.422; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.033 Procedure
(a) An application for a well permit shall include all the requirements of section 4.05.032 of this article as well as
a detailed site plan that includes specific details regarding the projected location of the major components of the
drilling site, impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent buildings and other structures
and the measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing
and landscaping.
(b) The permitting procedure for a well permit shall be as follows:
(1) Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an application that complies in all respects with the
provisions of this article, the city manager shall request that the matter be placed on the city council
agenda for a public hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to the
applicant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. The forty-five (45) day
period shall not begin to run until the applicant/operator has provided the city manager with a complete
and fully compliant application package.
(2) At least twenty (20) days and no more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing
before the city council for a well permit the operator shall notify, at the operator's expense, each surface
owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within one thousand feet (1,000') of the proposed
well, not owned by or under lease to the operator, of the hearing date and time. Such notice, as outlined
below, shall be by depositing the same properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail.
The operator shall file an affidavit with the city showing the name and last known address, as identified
by the current tax roll, of each owner of property to whom notice was mailed and the names of each
owner of property to whom notice is required to be given, but whose address is unknown. Notice shall
be sent to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half mile of the proposed drill site.
(3) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council for a well
permit the operator, at the operator's expense, shall publish a copy of the notice as outlined below in
two consecutive issues of the weekly official newspaper of the city. An affidavit by the printer or
publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be filed with the application and will
be prima facie evidence of such publication. The notice shall read as follows:
Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of
Bridgeport, Texas, on the ______ day of ____________, 20___, ____________ filed with
the City of Bridgeport, an application for a Well Permit to drill, complete and operate a well
for oil or gas upon property located at ____________, Wise County, Bridgeport, Texas, more
particularly shown on the map of record in Volume ______, Page ______, Plat records of
Wise County, Texas or per Tax Tract Number ______, Wise County, Texas. The City Council
will conduct a public hearing on the request for said permit on the ______ day of
____________, 20___ at ______ o'clock __.m. in the City Council Chambers located at 900
Thompson Street, Bridgeport, Texas.
(4) At least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council for a well
permit the operator shall, at the operator's expense, erect at least one sign, no less than three feet by
three feet, upon the premises upon which a well permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign
or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest
any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. The city manager
may require additional signage if the premises fronts on more than one right-of-way, street, roadway, or
public thoroughfare.
(A) The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a well permit to drill for oil or gas has been
requested and state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and shall further set forth that
additional information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/operator at the number
indicated on the sign.
(B) The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed a condition precedent
to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action pursuant to this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/435
(C) Any sign(s) shall be removed by the applicant/owner subsequent to final action by the city
council.
(5) All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance
with this section.
(6) After a well permit application is submitted, the inspector shall evaluate the public impact of the
proposed activity. The inspector shall consider the proposed site and the proposed operations or drilling
program and shall draft recommended restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance
for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment and procedures, recommended noise reduction
levels, screening and any other requirements the inspector deems appropriate. The recommendation
shall be submitted to the city council for consideration prior to the public hearing, along with evidence
that timely actual notice of the hearing was given to all persons as required by this article.
(7) The burden of proof on all matters considered in the hearing shall be upon the applicant/operator.
(8) The city council shall review the application and any other related information. The city council
shall consider the following in deciding whether to grant a well permit:
(A) Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions
prevailing in the area considering the particular location and the character of the improvements
located there;
(B) Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly growth and development of
the city;
(C) Whether there are other alternative well site locations that would allow reasonable access
to explore, develop and produce the mineral estate without creating mineral waste;
(D) Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the
public when and if conducted in accordance with the well permit conditions to be imposed;
(E) Whether there is acceptable access for the city fire personnel and firefighting equipment;
(F) Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general public by operations
conducted in compliance with the well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing
the following factors:
(i) The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore, develop, and produce the
minerals; and
(ii) The availability of alternative drill sites; and
(G) The recommendations of the inspector.
(9) The city council may require an increase in the distance the well is set back from any residence,
religious institution, hospital building, school, cemetery, historical site or public park, or require any
change in operation, plan, design, layout or any change in the on-site and technical regulations of this
article, including fencing, screening, lighting, delivery times, noise levels, tank height, or any other
matters reasonably required by public interest.
(10) The city council may accept, reject or modify the application in the interest of securing
compliance with this article or the city code and/or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.423; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.034 Amendment of permit
(a) An operator may submit an application to the city manager to amend an existing well permit in accordance
with this section.
(b) Applications for amended well permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include
the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/435
(1) The application fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2) A description of the proposed amendments.
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing well permit (if such
information has not previously been provided to the city).
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the inspector to demonstrate compliance
with the applicable well permit.
(5) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the inspector to prevent imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons.
(c) All applications for amended well permits shall be filed with the city manager for review. Incomplete
applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written explanation of the
deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return any application as incomplete if
there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the operator.
(d) The city manager shall place the application for an amended well permit on the city council agenda for
consideration. No additional notice or public hearing shall be required in this case. If, however, the activities
proposed by the amendment are materially different and, in the judgment of the inspector, might create a risk of
imminent destruction of property or injury to persons that was not associated with the activities covered by the
existing well permit or that was not otherwise taken into consideration by the existing well permit, the inspector
may require the amendment to be processed as a new well permit application.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.424; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.035 Suspension or revocation; appeals
(a) If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any
requirement of a well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the well permit), the
city manager shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a
reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts
required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event,
however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic
reports as required by this article.
(b) If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the city
manager may suspend or revoke the well permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(c) No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the well permit issued under this
article during any period of any well permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of
the city in suspending or revoking the well permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the
necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or
revocation of the well permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the railroad commission.
(d) If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the city manager,
upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the railroad commission take any
appropriate action.
(e) The operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the city manager in writing to suspend
or revoke a well permit, file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this section.
(f) The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is
error or abuse of discretion regarding the revocation or suspension of any well permit as provided by this article.
Any person or entity whose permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed to be
abandoned may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the city manager, file an appeal to the
city council in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The grounds for
appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the appellant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/435
(2) Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall transmit all papers
involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by
mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to the appellant and any other party who has requested in
writing to be so notified. No other notice needs to be given.
(g) Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(h) The decision of the city council shall be final and binding on the appellant.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.425; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.036 Changes to information; reports; annual site inspection
(a) The operator shall notify the city manager of any changes to the following information within one business
week after the change occurs:
(1) The name, address (physical address), and phone number of the operator.
(2) The name, address (physical address), and phone number of the person designated to receive
notices from the city (which person must be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by
registered or certified mail).
(3) The operator's emergency action response plan (including drive-to maps from public rights-of-way
to each drill site).
(b) The operator shall notify the city manager of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number
of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day.
(c) The operator shall provide a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the railroad
commission of [or] any notice of violation from the railroad commission within 30 days after the operator has notice
of the existence of such reports or complaints.
(d) Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st thereafter
until the operator notifies the city manager that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator
shall submit a written report to the city manager identifying any changes to the information that was included in the
application for the applicable well permit that have not been previously reported to the city.
(e) The inspector shall perform an annual site inspection to insure that the operator is conducting operations in
compliance with the well permit and the provisions of this article and to verify the accuracy of the information
reported pursuant to this section. The operator shall pay an annual inspection fee in an amount as set forth in the
fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.426; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 4.05.037–4.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Insurance, Bond and Indemnity
Sec. 4.05.061 Bond or irrevocable letter of credit
(a) Prior to the issuance of a well permit the operator shall provide the city manager with a security instrument in
the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as follows:
(1) Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do
business in the state, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the
well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the
expiration of the well permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored,
whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city,
as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this
article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the city secretary with a copy of the same
provided to the inspector.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/435
(2) Letter of credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in
the state and shall become effective on or before the date the well permit is issued. The letter of credit
shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the well
permit term. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or
penalties assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted
to the city secretary by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a
copy of the same provided to the inspector.
(b) (1) The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
for any single well. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be
maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
(2) An operator drilling or reworking between one and five wells at any given time may elect to
provide a blanket bond or letter of credit in the principal minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($150,000.00). If the operator drills or reworks more than five wells at a time, the blanket bond
or letter of credit shall be increased in increments of $50,000.00 per each additional well. Once the
wells are in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, the operator may elect to
submit a request to the city council for approval to reduce the existing bond and provide a blanket bond
or letter of credit for the remainder of the time the well produces, without reworking, as follows:
Number of Producing Wells Blanket Bond/Letter of Credit
Amount Required
Up to 75 wells $100,000.00
75 to 150 wells $150,000.00
More than 150 wells $200,000.00
(3) If at any time after no less than a fifteen-day written notice to the operator and a public hearing,
the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the
operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per well.
(c) Whenever the city manager or the inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any
requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall
specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the city manager or the
inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator
shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall
pay to the city one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the
notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of
imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide
periodic reports as required by this article. The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of
credit or bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed
by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability
shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been
properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the
operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the
regulations of this article.
(d) In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city
the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses
to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond, the city may proceed to
obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against
the operator, or by both such methods.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/435
(e) When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letter of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in
conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission, and notice to
that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit
or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.441; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.062 Insurance
In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies
of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state. In the event
such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation
and the operator's right to operate under such well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional
insurance as provided herein.
(1) General requirements applicable to all policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an additional
insured to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's worker's
compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution
liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a
claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-:VIII or better rating by the most current
version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers
acceptable to the city.
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a per occurrence
basis unless otherwise stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Bridgeport, City Manager, 900
Thompson Street, Bridgeport, Texas 76426, evidencing all the required coverages, including
endorsements, prior to the issuance of a well permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in
favor of the city.
(G) Any failure on the part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not
constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty-day notice of
cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten (10) day
notice shall be acceptable in the event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the city
manager, any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which
could result in a property loss.
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations,
blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket
contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent
contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
(3) Excess or umbrella liability.
(A) Excess, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy:
$5,000,000.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/435
(B) Excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. Coverage must include an
endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a
claims-made basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended
coverage period insurance when necessary: $10,000,000.00.
(4) Environmental pollution liability coverage.
(A) The operator shall purchase and maintain in force, for the duration of the well permit,
insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage,
including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or
destroyed, cleanup costs, and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the
investigation, defense or settlement of claims, all in connection with any loss arising from the
insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00).
(B) Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the
escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste
material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
(C) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage
period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that
any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the
issuance of the permit by the city.
(5) Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control,
redrilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator
and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of
residents.
(A) $5,000,000.00 per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of ten
million dollars ($10,000,000.00).
(B) $500,000.00 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the
operator has care, custody and control.
(6) Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance.
(A) Worker's compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits.
(B) Employer's liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
accident.
(C) Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide
coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile liability insurance.
(A) Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property
damage.
(B) Coverage must include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles.
(8) Certificates of insurance.
(A) The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the state, unless the
coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer.
(B) The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have
been approved by the state department of insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form
acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well
coverage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/435
(C) The policies must forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to
requirements and instructions contained herein.
(D) The policies shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in
coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read “THIS POLICY WILL NOT
BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE TO
THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR
NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS
REQUIRED.”
(E) Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with
the certificates of insurance.
(9) Blanket insurance. An operator drilling or reworking multiple wells within the city at any given time
may elect to provide a blanket policy or policies of insurance in the amounts required by this section in
a form acceptable to and approved by the city manager and the city attorney, covering all such
operations of the operator.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.442; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.063 Indemnification and express negligence provisions
Each well permit issued shall include the following language:
Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments,
and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have,
against the City of Bridgeport, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors,
assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known
or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection
with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a well permit. The operator
shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Bridgeport, Texas, its
departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers
from and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability,
damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in
defense of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or
employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which
may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of,
arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work
performed by the operator under a well permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Bridgeport, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees,
successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result
of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the city, its departments, its officers, agents,
servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the City of
Bridgeport occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and
permitting the wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN
WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT
OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF
INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE
INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE
OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS AND/OR
ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE
CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS AND/OR
ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT
NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY,
DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.443)
Secs. 4.05.064–4.05.090 Reserved
Division 4. On-Site and Technical Regulations
Sec. 4.05.091 On-site requirements
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/435
(a) Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission and
pursuant to section 4.05.099 of this article.
(b) Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled,
worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during
operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations
of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers,
flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission.
(c) Compliance. The operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(d) Discharge of oil, wastewater or other substance. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or
permit to be placed, deposited or discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or
any refuse, including wastewater or brine, from any operation or the contents of any container used in connection
with any operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary
drain or any body of water or any private property in the city.
(e) Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem
tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate separator to
storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by
circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(f) Dust, vibration and odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best
accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban
areas. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or
annoying substances or effects will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or
from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or
structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in
industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of
reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(g) Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those
already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision.
(h) Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells.
No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city
ordinances and the appropriate national codes.
(i) Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any production activities, the operator shall submit
to the inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting
from drilling, completion or producing of oil or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the
state commission on environmental quality, the department of transportation and/or the Environmental Protection
Agency.
(j) Equipment painting and maintenance. All production equipment on the site shall be painted and maintained
at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures.
(k) Explosives. Use of explosive charges within the city limits shall not be permitted without permission of the
city manager, the fire chief and the police chief of the city.
(l) Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department
and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost,
and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall
be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an
automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall
contain an emergency shutoff valve to the well distribution line.
(m) Protection of fresh water wells.
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located
within two hundred feet (200') to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from
the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/435
(2) The operator of a well shall provide the inspector with a pre-drilling and post-drilling water
analysis from any fresh water well within five hundred feet (500') of the well.
(3) Within 180 days of its completion date, each well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection
system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The inspector may approve an
alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion.
(4) The two hundred foot (200') distance requirement set forth above may be reduced at the
discretion of the city council and upon the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths of all the
members of the city council. For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may
impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance. The reduction of the distance
requirement is subject to the railroad commission regulations and any other state or federal
requirements.
(n) Gas lift compressor. Any on-site compressor used to lift gas shall be designed to comply with the noise
requirements of this article.
(o) Gas emission or burning restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the
atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the
venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as
permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than three hundred feet
(300') from any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in
such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners.
(p) Gas processing on site. Except for a conventional gas separator or line heater, no refinery, processing,
treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the
premises without appropriate city permits and a certificate of occupancy.
(q) Grass, weeds and trash. All drilling and operation sites shall be kept clear of grass or weeds over 10 inches
in height and combustible trash within a radius of one hundred feet (100') around any tanks or producing wells.
(r) Hazardous materials plan. A hazardous materials management plan and all material safety data sheets for all
hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported, and/or used on the premises shall be on file with the
fire marshal and the inspector.
(s) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner
so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site.
To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward
and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within three hundred feet
(300').
(t) Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in
connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the
open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of
noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or
ignited carbon or soot.
(u) Pits. The following applies for pits used for drilling and completion operations:
(1) Closed loop mud systems shall be used for all well permit sites. No lined earthen mud or
circulating pits shall be permitted in the city, except to store fresh water.
(2) All pits and contents shall be dewatered, backfilled and compacted following the schedule
established by the statewide rules of the railroad commission.
(3) Drill cuttings and rotary mud generated during drilling operations may be buried on-site only with
the permission of the property (surface) owner. No wastewater generated during drilling operations may
be buried on-site.
(4) The fresh water fracing pit shall be enclosed with open design chain-link black or dark green
fencing on all four sides. No fresh water pit may be placed in any city recognized drainageway, FEMA
floodplain or floodway. Construction of the fresh water pit must comply with all city, state and federal
regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/435
(5) Every drill pit used for drilling operations shall be fenced on all open sides during drilling
operations and enclosed on all four sides in accordance with the fencing regulations set forth in section
4.05.096 of this article.
(6) No flowback wastewater produced by frac operations shall be placed in any open pit without a
copy of a valid state permit submitted to the inspector.
(7) Fresh water fracing pits shall be closed and the site restored within one hundred twenty (120)
days after cessation of 24-hour on-site supervision by the operator, unless extended by the city council,
or waived by the city council at the request of the property (surface) owner.
(v) Private roads; access to drill site.
(1) Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill
site and the operation site itself shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide, have an overhead clearance of
fourteen feet (14') and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent
dust and mud. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be
altered at the discretion of the city council after consideration of all circumstances including, but not
limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways, distances from adjoining and
nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation, the purpose for which the
property of such owners is or may be used, topographical features, nature of the soil, and exposure to
wind. Watering, wetting or other methods or materials must be used to control the dust on all roads
adjacent to residential property.
(2) A permanent approach, meeting the city design standards, and gate shall be constructed at the
entrance of the access road onto a public street within sixty (60) days after drilling operations have
ceased, or as required by the inspector.
(w) Salt water wells. No salt water disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(x) Storage of equipment; refining or processing equipment.
(1) On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or
production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes,
tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations
are being conducted on the site.
(2) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street or right-of-way or in any
driveway or alley or upon any operation site which constitutes, in the opinion of the fire chief or his
designee, a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires, except that
equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site.
(3) No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed,
established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to exclude a conventional gas
separator or dehydrator.
(y) Storage tanks. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the
following:
(1) The operator must use portable closed steel or fiberglass storage tanks for storing liquid
hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a
vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed within the fence required
by section 4.05.096 of this article.
(2) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (API)
specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief. The top of the tanks shall be no
higher than eight feet (8') above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All storage tanks shall be equipped
with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary
containment system shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and one and one-half (1-1/2) times
the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one foot (1') below
the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump-out connection to contain the liquids from the
storage tank.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/435
(3) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire
Protection Association, but in all cases shall be at least twenty-five feet (25') from any public right-ofway
or property line. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will
automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank.
(4) No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other above-ground facilities, other than the
well head and flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway or the 100-year floodplain identified by FEMA on
the most current FIRM.
(5) Tanks must be at least one hundred feet (100') from any residence, religious institution, public
building, hospital building, school, public park, or combustible structure.
(z) Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and
regulations of the commission.
(aa) Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning
arrestor system.
(bb) Shutoff valve. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production.
(cc) Vehicle routes.
(1) Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to
such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the city wherever
capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being
used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck
route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route
means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor
vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof.
(2) The operator shall keep thoroughfares throughout the city free from dirt, dust, mud or other debris
deposited by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or pipeline installation process. The
operator shall eliminate dirt, dust, mud or other debris accumulations within 2 hours of notification by
the city. If, for safety or other reasons, the city elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal
shall be paid by the operator.
(dd) Waste disposal. All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water
pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
(ee) Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on-site during the drilling or
reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(ff) Work hours. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. Truck
deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation
and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the hours of 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. except
in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary
to prevent the cessation of drilling or production.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.461; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.092 Noise
A well permit holder shall be subject to the following noise restrictions:
(1) No well shall be drilled or redrilled or any equipment operated at any location within the city in
such a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level, when measured at the
nearest protected use receiver's/receptor's property line or one hundred (100) feet from the nearest
protected use structure (as measured to the closest exterior point of the building), whichever is closer to
the receiver/receptor, that exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels during
daytime hours and more than three (3) decibels during nighttime hours. Fracing operations may not
exceed the ambient noise level by more than ten (10) decibels. Backflow operations may not exceed
the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels during nighttime hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/435
(2) The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the city the pre-drilling ambient
noise level prior to the issuance of a well permit. Once the drilling is complete, the operator shall be
required to establish a new ambient noise level prior to the installation of any new noise generation
equipment.
(3) Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in this section may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase (dBA) Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 Less than 1
*Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
(4) All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. Workover operations shall mean
work performed in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there has been
none, restore production that has ceased or increase production.
(5) The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other operations of all wells located
within three hundred (300) feet of a protected use shall be continuously monitored, to ensure
compliance. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the operator. The operator shall report
monitoring data to the city manager at least once every two weeks.
(6) Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods as approved by the
inspector may be used to ensure compliance. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry
standards and is subject to approval by the city's fire department.
(7) The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National
Standard Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
(8) A citation shall be issued for the failure to correct the violation within 24 hours of the notice of
violation by either the inspector or the city police.
(9) During nighttime operations, the operation of vehicle audible backup alarms shall be prohibited or
replaced with approved non-auditory signaling systems, such as spotters or flagmen. Deliveries of pipe,
casing and heavy loads shall be limited to daytime hours, except for emergency situations. The derrick
man and driller shall communicate by walkie-talkie or other nondisruptive means only when the derrick
man is in the derrick. Horns may not be used to signal for connection or to summon crew (except that a
horn may be used for emergency purposes only). The operator shall conduct on-site meetings to inform
all personnel of nighttime operations noise control requirements.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.462; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.093 Well setbacks
(a) Established. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
(1) Within twenty-five feet (25') from any outer boundary line;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/435
(2) Within twenty-five feet (25') from any storage tank, or source of ignition;
(3) Within seventy-five feet (75') of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way or
property line;
(4) Within one hundred feet (100') of any building accessory, but not necessary to the operation of
the well;
(5) Within two hundred feet (200') to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line
from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. The distance requirement for fresh water wells is
subject to the railroad commission regulations and any other state or federal requirements; or
(6) Within six hundred feet (600') from any protected use.
(b) Measurement of distance. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsection (a) above.
(c) Reduction of distance.
(1) The distances set out in subsection (a) above may be reduced at the discretion of the city council
and upon the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths of all the members of the city council, but
never less than two hundred feet (200') from any protected use, with:
(A) A waiver granted by the city council; or
(B) Written notarized waivers granted by all the protected use property owners within a six
hundred foot (600') radius around the proposed well. All waivers must identify the property
address, block and lot number, subdivision name (if applicable) and plat volume and page, and be
filed, at the expense of the operator, in the county records prior to the application for a well permit.
(2) For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may impose additional
requirements for a reduction of such distance. The reduction of the distance requirement is subject to
the railroad commission regulations and any other state or federal requirements.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.463)
Sec. 4.05.094 Restricted area for construction of protected use
No building permits for new construction of a protected use shall be issued for the area within a two hundred foot
(200') radius of a permitted drill site, until the well has been plugged and abandoned in accordance with the
requirements of the railroad commission and this article. The radius of the restricted area shall be calculated from
the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. (Ordinance 08-63 adopted
8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.464)
Sec. 4.05.095 Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property; drilling in or encumbering
streets
(a) The operator shall apply to the city for a license agreement for the purpose of constructing, laying,
maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines on, over, under, along or across the city streets,
sidewalks, alleys and other city property, so long as production or operations may be continued under any well
permit issued pursuant to this article.
(b) The operator shall:
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities
located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way.
(2) Furnish to the city a site plan or plat showing the location of such pipelines.
(3) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations, properly cased
and vented if under a street.
(4) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as
existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/435
(c) No well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or
projected streets or alleys shown by the current comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be
blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is
obtained from the city council. Any such consent shall be temporary in nature, and state the number of hours
and/or days for such temporary closure.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.465)
Sec. 4.05.096 Fencing and signage
(a) Fencing requirements. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling. completion or
reworking operations as long as 24-hour on-site supervision is provided. Immediately upon cessation of 24-hour
on-site supervision, the operator shall install fencing to enclose either the entire pad or operation site, or to enclose
each component of production equipment on the operation site, as approved in the fencing plan, and constructed
in accordance with standard engineering practices and the minimum requirements of this section. A secured
entrance gate on the access road containing a Knox box shall be required and all gates are to be kept locked
when the operator or his employees are not on the premises. All production equipment on the operation site shall
be completely enclosed by a permanent chain-link fence with a secured gate and Knox box as follows:
(1) The fence shall be eight feet (8') in height;
(2) Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into the ground to a depth sufficient
to maintain the stability of the fence; provided, however, so long as stability of the fence is maintained,
temporary fence posts shall not be required to be set in concrete;
(3) The chain-link shall be dark green or black steel wire, with like color wood slats through the chainlink
fencing;
(4) The chain-link fence shall have a minimum thickness of eleven (11) gauge;
(5) Posts and rails shall be standard black or dark green welded pipe; and
(6) Tension rods shall be three-eighths-inch round steel bolt stock. Adjustable tighteners shall be
turnbuckle or equivalent having a six-inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum
thickness of one-fourth by three-fourths inch.
(b) Fencing plan. The operator shall submit a fencing plan to the city council for approval as a component of the
well permit application required pursuant to section 4.05.032(c).
(c) Gate specifications. All fences shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following
specifications:
(1) Each gate shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide and be composed of two (2) gate doors,
each of which is not less than six feet (6') wide, or one (1) sliding gate door not less than twelve feet
(12') wide. If two (2) gate doors are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span;
(2) The gates shall be of wrought iron construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of
other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chain-link fence;
(3) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a
padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and
(4) The operator must provide the city fire chief with a Knox padlock or Knox box with a key to access
the well site to be used only in case of an emergency.
(d) Signs.
(1) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and
permanent site fencing erected. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and,
unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two (2) square
feet nor more than four (4) square feet and shall be lettered with the following:
(A) Well name and number;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/435
(B) Name of the operator;
(C) The emergency 911 number; and
(D) Telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in
case of emergency.
(2) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED” shall be posted
immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery
or in any other location approved or designated by the fire chief of the city. Sign lettering shall be four
inches (4") in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign
shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire department and the operator, and well and
lease designations required by the commission.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.466)
Sec. 4.05.097 Landscaping
(a) Screening shrubs shall be installed completely around all required fencing of the operation site and be
sufficient to screen from view the structures sought to be screened. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of three
feet in height at planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height of a minimum of six feet and must have an
installed irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. The vegetation shall be kept in
an attractive state and in good condition at all times by the applicant or operator.
(b) The operator shall submit a landscape and irrigation plan as a component of the well permit application
required pursuant to section 4.05.032(c).
(c) Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the operator may petition the city council to toll the required
landscaping installation until such time as the council, in its sole discretion, after written notice to the operator and
a public meeting, may determine that the required landscaping installation is necessary due to development
around the drill site, change in circumstances, or other factors which the council deems appropriate. The failure of
the operator to install the required landscaping in compliance with this section may result in the revocation of the
well permit in accordance with section 4.05.035 hereof, or, in the alternative, the city may elect to draw from the
required bond or letter of credit to install or direct the installation of the required landscaping.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.467)
Sec. 4.05.098 Cleanup and maintenance; blowouts
(a) Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator
shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property
caused by such operations within sixty (60) days.
(b) Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or
cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the inspector all waste materials from any public or
private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. If the
owner fails to begin site cleanup within twenty-four (24) hours, the city shall have the right to contact the
commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or
malfunction.
(c) Weeds, trash, etc. The property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools
of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of one
hundred feet (100') around any separators, tanks and producing wells. Burial of debris will not be allowed.
(d) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads,
pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the inspector shall
consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree
of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall
include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city
manager.
(e) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable
steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the inspector as soon as
practicable. The inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the city manager. If the inspector,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/435
in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the
operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the
inspector may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services,
or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the inspector deems necessary to regain control of
such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to
secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the inspector in gaining control of
said well.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.468; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.099 Plugged and abandoned wells
(a) Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the
requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well
site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(b) Approval after abandonment. Abandonment shall be approved by the inspector after restoration of the drill
site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the inspector:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site;
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials, regardless of
depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the
commission;
(4) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and
(6) During abandonment, the operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article.
(c) Approval by commission; notice of intent to abandon. The operator shall furnish the following at the
discretion of the inspector:
(1) A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment
proceedings under the state law; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such
work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so
stated.
(d) Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall
meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit
for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
(e) Final inspection. After the site has been cleaned up and screened, the operator shall notify the inspector and
city manager for a final inspection. Prior to the final inspection, the operator must provide the city with geographic
coordinates of the well bore.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.469; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.100 Seismic survey permit
(a) A permit shall be required for seismic surveys in the city. All seismic survey permit applications shall be
submitted to the development services department of the city for processing. A seismic survey shall not begin prior
to the issuance of a seismic survey permit by the development services department of the city. A seismic survey
permit is an administrative permit and is not considered a special use permit under the zoning ordinance of the
city.
(b) A permit application shall include the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/435
(1) Operator/applicant name, phone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, e-mail
address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of the incorporation, and if the operator is a
partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided.
(2) Detailed mapping of the location and extent of the seismic survey.
(3) Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted.
(4) Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on the site.
(5) Date and time the seismic survey will be completed.
(6) If the seismic survey is to be conducted in any city-owned right-of-way or on city property,
issuance of the permit must be approved by the city council and the operator must reimburse all costs
to the city for any damages associated with the seismic survey.
(7) A nonrefundable seismic survey fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(8) Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of dynamite,
be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey.
(c) Upon demonstrated compliance with the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the
development services department of the city shall issue a seismic survey permit covering the proposed activities
set forth in the application. The seismic survey permit shall be valid for dates and times stated in the application.
(Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.470)
Sec. 4.05.101 Map of flow lines and gathering lines
Once a well is completed and producing, the operator shall deliver to the city a set of as-built plans showing the
location of all flow lines and gathering lines constructed to transport petroleum or natural gas from the well to the
transmission pipeline or gas utility pipeline. (Ordinance 08-63 adopted 8/19/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.471)
Sec. 4.05.102 Variance procedures
A variance to the on-site and technical regulations found in this division may be granted to an applicant by the city
council when the applicant requests in writing to appear before the city council to request the variance. The written
request must include a detailed summary of the variance being requested and the reason for the request, and
must be submitted to the city secretary two calendar weeks before the city council meeting at which the applicant
desires to request the variance. In approving any variance, the city council may require such conditions that will, in
its sole judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
(Ordinance 2011-08 adopted 3/22/11; 2001 Code, sec. 4.472)
ARTICLE 4.06 WRECKER SERVICES*
Sec. 4.06.001 Applicability
(a) A person commits an offense if the person operates or employs another to drive or operate any wrecker over
any street in the city for the purpose of engaging in a police nonconsent tow, except as provided by this article.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of a violation of subsection (a) hereof that the person is engaging
in:
(1) The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker operator from some point outside the
city to some destination within the city;
(2) The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker operator from some point outside the
city and traversing the city to some other destination outside of the city;
(3) The transportation of a vehicle by a wrecker operator at the request of the owner or operator of
that vehicle; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/435
(4) The transportation of a vehicle on the private property of another by a wrecker operator with the
consent of the operator or owner of the vehicle, or of the owner of the private property.
(Ordinance 05-03 adopted 1/4/05; 2001 Code, sec. 4.601)
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
In this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them below:
Accident. Any occurrence that renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or his designated representative.
Consent tow. The towing of a vehicle at the request of the owner or operator.
Disabled vehicle. A motor vehicle that has been rendered unsafe to be driven as the result of some occurrence,
including but not limited to mechanical failure or breakdown, fire or vandalism, or a motor vehicle that is in a safe
driving condition but whose owner or operator is not present, able or permitted to drive so as to reasonably
necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Police nonconsent tow. The towing of a vehicle without the prearranged knowledge and consent of the owner or
operator of said vehicle. Examples include, but are not limited to, vehicles towed when the driver is incapacitated
following an accident, vehicles towed when the driver has been arrested, vehicles removed from public property
without pre-notification of the vehicle owner, and seizures.
Vehicle. Every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Wrecked vehicle. A discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked or worn-out motor vehicle that is not in a condition to
be lawfully operated on a public road.
Wrecker. A vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked or disabled vehicles which is equipped
with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move a vehicle, and which charges a fee for its
services.
Wrecker or tow truck operator. A person engaged in the business of using a wrecker to tow, winch or otherwise
move a motor vehicle.
(Ordinance 05-03 adopted 1/4/05; 2001 Code, sec. 4.602)
Sec. 4.06.003 Contract with city; rotation system
(a) The city shall have the right to contract with one or more wrecker service companies for the towing of cityowned
vehicles or for the towing or impoundment of any vehicle made necessary in the exercise of the city's police
and governmental functions. Should the city contract with more than one wrecker company, the companies shall
be called on a rotation basis. If the wrecker service is called to respond to a tow and is unavailable, the next
company on the list shall be called.
(b) The city may call any wrecker company or use any wrecker in cases where the wrecker company is unable
to respond as required by the agreement, when there exists an emergency situation or when deemed necessary
by the chief of police or his authorized representative. In all cases, a report will be forwarded to the chief of police
describing the circumstances involving such use.
(Ordinance 05-03 adopted 1/4/05; 2001 Code, sec. 4.603)
Sec. 4.06.004 Removal of vehicles from private property
The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle from private property shall notify the city police department prior to
such removal and the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours after the removal. The information to be
provided in such notification shall include:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/435
(1) The date, time and location of the removal;
(2) The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle;
(3) The name of the tow truck operator which performed the removal; and
(4) The storage location of the vehicle.
(Ordinance 2017-06 adopted 3/13/17)
Sec. 4.06.005 Repossession of vehicles
The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle for the purpose of repossessing the vehicle shall be required to do
the following:
(1) Contact the police department prior to making such repossession; and
(2) Present a written notice to the police department prior to making such repossession from the
lienholder requesting such repossession, which shall include the following information:
(A) The name of the owner of said vehicle;
(B) The date, time and location of the removal;
(C) The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle, including a
photocopy (front and back) of the vehicle's title;
(D) The name of the tow truck operator which is to perform the removal; and
(E) The storage location of the vehicle.
(Ordinance 2017-06 adopted 3/13/17)
ARTICLE 4.07 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
The words and terms used in this article that are not defined herein shall have the meanings commonly ascribed to
them. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words in the singular number include the plural
number and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word “he” shall be defined to include the
word “she.”
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult novelty store or adult video store. A commercial establishment which, as one (1) of its
principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, DVDs, slides or other visual representations, or any combination
thereof, which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities. This does not include items used for birth control or for prevention of sexually
transmitted diseases.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features the
following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/435
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which does the following:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closedcircuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated
two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the business
is an adult motel.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Church. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious
worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of
religious belief.
Customer. Any person who meets one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or
any other form of consideration or gratuity.
(2) Enters a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any
merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein.
(3) Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private club.
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business or
who works in or about a sexually oriented business and who receives compensation for the service or work from
the operator or owner of the sexually oriented business or from the customers therein. The term “employee” does
not include an independent contractor on the premises solely for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment, or for delivery of goods to the premises.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association who, as one of its principal business purposes, furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Licensed day care center. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care,
training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, where the
children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24
hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
any and all individuals listed as applicants on the application for a license.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/435
Nude model business. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical
areas is provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
(2) All portions of a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola continuing
downward to the lowest portion of the breast;
(3) Human buttock, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage; or
(4) Any combination of the above.
This term also includes human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
Operated or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, licensee or manager of the establishment.
Operator. An individual who is in control of the operations of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited
to, a person designated by the licensee as required under this article. This control can be either on an hourly basis,
daily basis, weekly basis, or shift basis, or any combination thereof. An operator includes, but is not limited to,
manager, assistant manager, house mother, floor manager, or shift manager.
Person. An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company, corporation or other
legal entity.
Principal. Over 25% of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas or presentation time devoted to or
generated from material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Stock in
trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or rental, including those that
are identical being considered a separate title or object.
Regularly. Featuring, promoting or advertising a happening or occurrence on a recurring basis.
Residential district. A residentially zoned district as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
Residential use. A single-family home, townhouse, duplex, mobile home, manufactured home or multiple-family
use as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration the following:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex.
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of
the persons is in a state of nudity.
Sexually oriented business.
(1) Includes the following: any establishment, including but not limited to an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion
picture theater, escort agency, nude model business or sexual encounter center, whose principal
business is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or whose employees or customers appear in a
state of nudity.
(2) The term “sexually oriented business” shall not be construed to include the following:
(A) Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical
therapists, registered nurses or licensed athletic trainers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/435
(B) Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors
engaged in practicing the healing arts.
(C) Any activity conducted or sponsored by any state independent school district, licensed or
accredited private school or public or private college or university.
Simulated nudity. A state of dress in which any device or covering is worn and exposed to view that simulates any
part of the genitals, buttocks, anus, pubic region, or areola of the female breast.
Specified anatomical areas. Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
Specified sexual activities. Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy
or bestiality.
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
(4) Excretory functions.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.801)
Sec. 4.07.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each
offense affecting zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other
offenses. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 08-25
adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.815)
Sec. 4.07.003 Location restrictions
(a) A sexually oriented business shall be located within a specific zoning district as set forth in the zoning
ordinance of the city.
(b) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually
oriented business within 1,500 feet of the following:
(1) A church.
(2) A public or private elementary school, secondary school, college or university.
(3) A boundary of a residential district.
(4) A licensed day care center.
(5) A public park.
(6) A lot devoted to a residential use.
(7) A public library.
(c) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually
oriented business within 1,500 feet of any other sexually oriented business.
(d) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually
oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(e) For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as tenant
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/435
space occupied for a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or
private elementary school or secondary school or college or university, licensed day care center, public library,
residential district, or residential use, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park.
(f) For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located or from the wall of the tenant space occupied, as applicable.
(g) For purposes of subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, “expanded” shall mean an increase by twentyfive
percent (25%) or more in floor area occupied by the business.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.802)
Sec. 4.07.004 Nonconforming uses
(a) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this article that is in violation of
section 4.07.003 above shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed three years from the effective date of this article, unless sooner terminated for
any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The nonconforming use shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more
sexually oriented businesses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use, and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city council may extend the amortization
period herein provided to a reasonable period of time for any nonconforming sexually oriented business upon a
showing by a particular business that without an extension it will be unable to recoup its investment in the
nonconforming structure.
(1) Any nonconforming sexually oriented business which desires an extension must register with the
city council as a nonconforming use no later than December 31, 2008. Any nonconforming sexually
oriented business which desires an extension of the amortization period must file an application for an
extension of the amortization period not later than December 1, 2010. Requests for an extension of the
amortization period shall be limited to one application with the city council.
(2) This subsection (b) shall not apply to any establishment which has undergone a change in
ownership since the effective date of this article.
(c) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this article is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the commencement of operation of the sexually
oriented business, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, licensed day care
center, public library, residential use or residential zoning district, or another sexually oriented business within
1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.803)
Sec. 4.07.005 Location appeal board; exemption from location restrictions
(a) The zoning board of adjustment shall serve as a location appeal board, and shall have the power to rule on
the appropriate disposition of applications for exemptions from the location restrictions for sexually oriented
businesses set forth section 4.07.003 of this article. The location appeal board shall follow the rules and
procedures set forth in this section.
(b) If the city manager denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business is in violation of section 4.07.003, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days
after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the location
restrictions.
(c) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the 10-day limit, the location appeal board shall
consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the
written request is received.
(d) A hearing by the board may proceed only if five (5) of the board members or alternates are present. The
board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/435
apply.
(e) The location appeal board may grant an exemption from the location restrictions of section 4.07.003 of this
article if it makes the following findings:
(1) That the location of the sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby
properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) That the location of the sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or
quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(3) That the location of the sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program
of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
(4) That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(f) In making the findings specified above, the board shall take into account, among other things:
(1) Crime statistics of the location and its one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot radius, without
regard to city boundaries, maintained by the appropriate law enforcement agency for the previous sixmonth
period;
(2) County appraisal district appraisals for the location and its one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot
radius, without regard to city boundaries, taking into account any decline or increase in property values;
(3) Vacancy rates of residential, commercial, or office space within the surrounding one thousand five
hundred (1,500) foot radius, without regard to city boundaries; and
(4) Any evidence regarding the award or denial of any public or private grants for neighborhood
conservation, urban renewal, or restoration for any property located within a one thousand five hundred
(1,500) foot radius, without regard to city boundaries.
(g) The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote approving
the exemption shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the location appeal board is final.
(h) If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the board's action.
Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of
section 4.07.003 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(i) If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least twelve (12)
months have elapsed since the date of the board's action.
(j) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any provisions of this article other than the
locational restrictions.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.814; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.006 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
structure which meets the following conditions:
(1) Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure indicating a nude
person is available for viewing;
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the item of descriptive, printed, film or video material
offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, and, when
taken as a whole, does not appeal to the prurient interest in sex.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/435
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.804)
Sec. 4.07.007 Adult cabarets
(a) An employee of an adult cabaret, while appearing in a state of nudity, commits an offense if he touches a
customer or the clothing of a customer.
(b) A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if the customer touches an employee appearing in a
state of nudity or the clothing of an employee appearing in a state of nudity.
(c) Each adult cabaret shall have a manager's station, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor
area. A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee permits any
customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station by entering a private, exclusive,
closed, curtained, or otherwise screened area, excluding restrooms. The view required in this subsection shall be
by direct line of sight. The view shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility of such line of sight must be attained
by utilizing flashlights or spotlights in addition to overhead house lighting.
(d) A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another person to appear in a state of nudity in an area of the adult cabaret
premises that can be viewed from a public right-of-way.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person employs at an adult cabaret any person under the age of 18
years.
(f) An employee of an adult cabaret must attend training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of
this article as they pertain to adult cabarets before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment before the
employee receives any compensation for services, and at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this section. These records shall include a
signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in
training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the specific topics
discussed.
(g) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the adult cabaret. At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the
adult cabaret is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A manager or a person appointed under this
section shall have the duty to remain in the manager's station at all times the adult cabaret is occupied by a
customer(s).
(h) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (g) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the adult cabaret has received the training required by subsection (f) above and each employee
is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this article or which would provide grounds, or
part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article.
(i) No employee of an adult cabaret may appear in an area of the business visible to customers unless the
employee completely and opaquely covers his or her genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, and anus, and, if female,
her areola.
(j) No licensee, owner, operator, or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit an employee to violate subsection
(i).
(k) A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator, or employee appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an adult cabaret, unless the person is
an employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on which no patron or customer is present) that is at
least eighteen (18) inches above the floor, and that is at least six (6) feet from any customer.
(l) It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret, to solicit any pay or gratuity
from any customer or to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any customer to pay or give
any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret. Such gratuity
or pay may be provided to such an employee through a tip receptacle, located more than (6) feet from the nearest
point of the performance stage where the employee is in a state of nudity, or may be paid to an employee that is
not in a state of nudity, as part of the customer's bill.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/435
(m) A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator fails to display a sign on the interior of
the premises notifying customers and employees of the prohibitions described in this section. The sign must be
prominently and continuously displayed where customers enter the premises, and immediately adjacent to each
performance stage, and must state in letters at least two inches high:
TOUCHING OR TIPPING AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS IN A STATE OF NUDITY IS A CRIME
(MISDEMEANOR) PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $500. CUSTOMERS SHALL REMAIN
AT LEAST SIX FEET FROM ALL PERFORMANCE STAGES.
The city manager may also require, at the time of issuance or renewal of the license, the licensee to display the
sign in a language other than English if he determines that a substantial portion of the expected customers speak
the other language as their familiar language. Upon notification, a licensee commits an offense if the sign does not
contain this language in the required language, in addition to English.
(n) A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator fails to prominently and continuously
display a glow-in-the-dark line on the floor of the adult cabaret, at least two (2) inches wide, marking a distance of
six feet from each performance stage on which an employee in a state of nudity may appear in accordance with
subsections (k) and (l).
(o) An adult cabaret shall also comply with all other applicable requirements in this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.805; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.008 Escort agencies
(a) A person commits an offense if he employs at an escort agency any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the
age of 18 years.
(c) An employee of an escort agency must attend training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of
this article as they pertain to escort agencies before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment before the
employee receives any compensation for services, and at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this section. These records shall include a
signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in
training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the specific topics
discussed.
(d) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the escort agency. At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the
escort agency is open.
(e) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (d) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the escort agency has received the training required by subsection (c) above and each
employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this article or which would provide
grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article.
(f) An escort agency shall also comply with all other applicable requirements in this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.806)
Sec. 4.07.009 Nude model businesses
(a) A person commits an offense if he employs at a nude model business any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in or on the premises of a nude model
business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a
state of nudity in an area of a nude model business premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A person commits an offense if he places or permits a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises of
a nude model business, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/435
(e) Each nude model business shall have a manager's station, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
of floor area. A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee permits
any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station by entering a private,
exclusive, closed, curtained or otherwise screened area, excluding restrooms. The view required in this subsection
shall be by direct line of sight. The view shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility of such line of sight must be
attained by utilizing flashlights or spotlights in addition to overhead house lighting.
(f) An employee of a nude model business, while appearing in a state of nudity, commits an offense if the
employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(g) A customer at a nude model business commits an offense if the customer touches an employee or the
clothing of an employee while the employee is appearing in a state of nudity.
(h) An employee of a nude model business commits an offense if that employee allows, asks, directs, or
suggests that a customer disrobe to a state of nudity.
(i) An employee of a nude model business must attend training given by the licensee concerning the
requirements of this article as they pertain to nude model businesses before the employee receives any
compensation for the employee's services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for services, and at least once a
year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to
this section. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the
employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the
training was provided and the specific topics discussed.
(j) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the nude model business. At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time
the nude model business is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A manager or a person appointed
under this section shall have the duty to remain in the manager's station at all times the nude model business is
occupied by a customer(s).
(k) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (j) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the nude model business has received the training required by subsection (i) above and each
employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this article or which would provide
grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article.
(l) A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator, or employee appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in the nude model business, unless the
person is an employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on which no patron or customer is present)
that is at least eighteen (18) inches above the floor, and that is at least six (6) feet from any customer.
(m) It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity in a nude model business, to solicit any pay or
gratuity from any customer or to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any customer to pay
or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is in a state of nudity. Such gratuity or pay may
be provided to such an employee through a tip receptacle, located more than (6) feet from the nearest point of the
performance stage where the employee is in a state of nudity, or may be paid to an employee that is not in a state
of nudity, as part of the customer's bill.
(n) A nude model business shall also comply with all other applicable requirements in this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.807)
Sec. 4.07.010 Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years in or on the
premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in or on the premises of an
adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(c) Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters shall also comply with the requirements of sections 4.07.011,
4.07.044 and 4.07.013 to 4.07.015, except that adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters are not required to
comply with section 4.07.014(c) in a viewing room while a film, photograph, picture, videocassette or other video
reproduction is being shown. Viewing rooms shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/435
to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five
footcandles as measured at floor level while a film, photograph, picture, videocassette or other video reproduction
is being shown.
(d) An employee of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater must attend training given by the licensee
concerning the requirements of this article as they pertain to adult theaters or adult motion picture theaters before
the employee receives any compensation for the employee's services. The licensee shall provide this training to all
employees at the beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for services, and
at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain written records of the training provided to each
employee pursuant to this section. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee
verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the licensee identifying the date on
which the training was provided and the specific topics discussed.
(e) Each adult theater or adult motion picture theater shall have at least one manager's station, which shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The interior of the premises shall be configured to allow an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access, excluding the restroom. The view required by this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station. It shall be the duty of the operator and any agents or employees present in the premises to
ensure that the view remains unobstructed at all times. It shall also be the duty of the operator and any agents or
employees present in the premises to ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises
that has not been designated as an area in which customers will be permitted.
(f) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the adult theater or adult motion picture theater. At least one person so appointed shall be on the
premises at any time the adult theater or adult motion picture theater is occupied by a customer(s) or open for
business. A manager or a person appointed under this section shall have the duty to remain in the manager's
station at all times the adult theater or adult motion picture theater is occupied by a customer(s).
(g) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (f) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the adult theater or adult motion picture theater has received the training required by subsection
(d) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this article or
which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
article.
(h) An adult theater shall also comply with all other applicable requirements in this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.808)
Sec. 4.07.011 Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room, a film, photograph, picture, videocassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall also comply with the
following requirements:
(1) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which customers
will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some designated street or
object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The city manager may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since the previously submitted diagram was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior
approval of the city manager.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/435
(4) An operator or manager shall have a duty to remain in the manager's station(s) at all times a
customer is present on the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this section must be by direct line of sight from
the manager's station.
(6) The licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee
permits any customer access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's station
for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
(7) The licensee, operator and any employees present on the premises shall ensure that the view
area specified in subsection (a)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present on, in or about
the premises, and that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which customers will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection (a)(1) above.
(8) The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits illumination of any area of the premises
to which customers have access to be less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level.
(9) No viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet may be occupied by more than one
person at any time.
(10) No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind to exist between adjacent or adjoining
viewing rooms or booths.
(11) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or hole of any kind between adjacent or
adjoining viewing rooms or booths.
(12) The licensee or operator shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls of all
viewing rooms or booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(13) The walls of any viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet shall be no more than 48
inches tall. At least one wall of any viewing room or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line of
sight from the manager's station. Each wall or door of any viewing room or booth shall be constructed
of clear transparent glass, plastic or substantially equivalent materials that allow an unobstructed view
of the entire interior of the viewing room or booth.
(14) Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room or booth of less than 500 square feet of
floor space, as well as any other room adjacent to or visible from any such viewing room or booth.
(15) The licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator knowingly allows a
person to appear in a state of nudity in, on or about the premises of a sexually oriented business, other
than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 500 square feet of
floor space, a film, photograph, picture, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(16) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in
a viewing room of less than 500 square feet of floor space, a film, photograph, picture, videocassette or
other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(17) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a)(15) and (16) above if the person was in a
restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (17) above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/435
(c) An employee of a sexually oriented business that exhibits sexually explicit films, photographs, pictures or
videos must attend training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of this article as they pertain to such
a business before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's services. The licensee shall
provide this training to all employees at the beginning of the employment before the employee receives any
compensation for services, and at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain written records of the
training provided to each employee pursuant to this section. These records shall include a signed and dated
statement from each employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the
licensee identifying the date on which the training was provided and the specific topics discussed.
(d) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the sexually oriented business as described in this section. At least one person so appointed
shall be on the premises at any time the sexually oriented business as described in this section is open.
(e) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (d) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the sexually oriented business as described in this section has received the training required by
subsection (c) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this
article or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued
under this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.809; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.012 Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores and adult video stores
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which customers
will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some designated street or
object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The city manager may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since the previously submitted diagram was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior
approval of the city manager.
(4) The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits a manager's station to be unattended by
an employee at any time a customer is present on the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this section must be by direct line of sight from
the manager's station. The view shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility of such line of sight must
be attained by utilizing flashlights or spotlights in addition to overhead house lighting.
(6) The licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee
permits a customer access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's station for
any purpose, excluding restrooms.
(7) The licensee, operator and any employees present on the premises shall ensure that the view
area specified in subsection (a)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present on, in or about
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/435
the premises, and that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which customers will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection (a)(1) above.
(8) No viewing room or reading room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind to exist between adjacent or adjoining
viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths.
(10) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or hole of any kind between adjacent or
adjoining viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths.
(11) The licensee or operator shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls of all
viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(12) The walls of any viewing room, reading room or booth shall be no more than 48 inches tall. At
least one wall of any viewing room, reading room or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line
of sight from the manager's station. Each wall or door of any viewing room, reading room or booth shall
be constructed of clear transparent glass, plastic or substantially equivalent materials that allow an
unobstructed view of the entire interior of the viewing room, reading room or booth.
(13) Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room, reading room or booth as well as any other
room adjacent to or visible from any viewing room, reading room or booth.
(14) The licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator knowingly allows a
person to appear in a state of nudity in, on or about the premises of an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store that contains a viewing room or reading room of less than 500 square feet of
floor space.
(15) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly appears in a state of nudity in, on, or about
the premises of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store that contains a viewing room
or reading room of less than 500 square feet of floor space.
(16) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a)(14) and (15) above if the person was in a
restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (16) above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
(c) An employee of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store must attend training given by the
licensee concerning the requirements of this article as they pertain to such a business before the employee
receives any compensation for the employee's services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at
the beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for services, and at least once a
year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to
this section. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each employee verifying the
employee's attendance at and participation in training provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the
training was provided and the specific topics discussed.
(d) A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to manage, direct and control the premises
and operations of the adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. At least one person so appointed
shall be on the premises at any time the adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store is open for
business. An operator or manager shall have a duty to remain in the manager's station(s) at all times a customer is
present on the premises.
(e) An operator or a person appointed under subsection (d) above shall at all times have the duty to ensure that
each employee in the adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store has received the training required by
subsection (c) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this
article or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued
under this article.
(f) An adult book, novelty and/or video store shall also comply with all other applicable requirements in this
article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.810; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/435
Sec. 4.07.013 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 12:00 midnight and 2:00 p.m. on Sundays. (Ordinance
08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.811)
Sec. 4.07.014 Additional regulations
(a) Public and employee restrooms in a sexually oriented business shall not, at any time, contain or be used for
adult sexually oriented activity, video reproduction equipment, or sexually oriented merchandise.
(b) A sexually oriented business shall at all times maintain at least one (1) legible sign posted in a conspicuous
place at each public entrance easily visible by all persons prior to entry into the establishment with lettering of at
least one (1) inch in height in English and Spanish which contains the following statement:
THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES (description of
the type of activity licensed to be conducted). IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE
OFFENDS YOU DO NOT ENTER. NO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
ALLOWED ENTRY (or “NO PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED
ENTRY,” if alcohol is served).
(c) The premises of any sexually oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
twenty (20) footcandles, excluding the limited exception for adult theaters as contained in section 4.07.010(c).
(d) During hours of darkness when a sexually oriented business is in operation, all required parking and all
outdoor areas to which pedestrians have access on the premises of the sexually oriented business shall be lighted
to an intensity of not less than five (5) footcandles measured at ground level.
(e) No models, mannequins, pictures, drawings, sketches, or other live or simulated pictorial or graphic displays
of nudity shall be allowed in a manner that is visible to the public from any street, sidewalk, or other public place.
(f) The licensee or operator commits an offense if he violates any portion of this section.
(g) A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years, or under the age of twenty-one years if alcohol is served, on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.812)
Sec. 4.07.015 Employee permits
(a) Required. A person commits an offense if he acts as a manager, operator, or employee of a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit issued by the city.
(b) Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the licensee, operator, manager, and owners of each sexually
oriented business to ensure that no person acts as a manager, operator, or employee of a sexually oriented
business unless that person holds a valid permit issued by the city.
(c) Application.
(1) Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall make application in person
at the offices of the city manager between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, city-observed holidays excepted. The application shall be made under oath upon a form
prescribed by the city manager and shall include:
(A) The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of the applicant;
(B) Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least
one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency;
(C) A list of any criminal charges pending, convictions, and time of service in jail or prison as
related to any violation of this article or any applicable offense that is specified in section
4.07.043(a)(10) of this article; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/435
(D) One passport-type photograph of the applicant of a size specified by the city manager,
which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued. If an on-site card
is required under subsection (c)(4)(B) of this section, then the application must contain a second
photograph of the same type.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in the amount
provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Each applicant shall be required to provide
fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant
shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the city manager to request on behalf of the
applicant criminal history reports from the state department of public safety and any appropriate federal
agency.
(3) The city manager shall issue the permit within ten days from the date of filing of the application
unless he finds that the application is incomplete or that the applicant has been convicted of or spent
time in jail or prison for a violation of this article or an offense specified in section 4.07.043(a)(10) of this
article within the time specified therein. If the application is not granted, then the applicant shall be
given written notice of the grounds and of his right to provide a written response as provided by section
4.07.048 of this article, within ten days from the date of filing of the application.
(4) Each permit issued by the city manager shall consist of either one or two photographic
identification cards.
(A) Each employee of a sexually oriented business shall have an identification card, called a
personal card.
(B) If a sexually oriented business is required by this article to have an on-site manager, then
each employee of such a business shall have a second identification card, called an on-site card.
(5) Upon the applicant's completion of all requirements in subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section,
then the applicant may, upon written request, be immediately issued a temporary permit, which shall be
valid until the third day after the applicant is given notice of the decision of the city manager.
(6) If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the
city manager and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a replacement fee in the amount
provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, within three days following verification of the
identity of the holder.
(7) No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not
provide proof that he is at least 18 years old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or
error to any person under age 18 shall be void.
(d) Term; transfer; amendment.
(1) A permit is valid for two years from the date of its issuance.
(2) A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for use by any other person.
(3) Each permit holder shall notify the city manager of his new address within ten days following any
change of his address.
(e) Display.
(1) Each manager or employee shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all
times while acting as a manager or employee of a sexually oriented business.
(2) Each manager or employee who is required under this article to have an on-site card shall
provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business
to hold while the manager or employee is on the premises.
(3) In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed that the actor did not have a permit
unless the permit was in display as required under subsection (1) above.
(f) Revocation. In the event that the city manager has reasonable grounds to believe that any permit holder has
been convicted of or spent time in jail or prison for a violation of this article or an offense as specified in the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/435
applicable provisions of section 4.07.043(a)(10) of this article within the time specified therein, then the city
manager may revoke the permit under the procedures set out in section 4.07.047 of this article.
(g) Appeals. If the city manager is authorized to deny the issuance of a permit or revoke a permit as provided in
this section, the applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the city manager in accordance with the
procedures in section 4.07.048 of this article.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.813; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 4.07.016–4.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.07.041 Required
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
license issued by the city for the particular type of business.
(b) Application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city manager. The application must be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application
for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers and directors must sign the application for an
operator's license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 4.07.043 below, and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(e) The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits does not exempt him from the
requirement of obtaining a license for a sexually oriented business.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.831; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.042 Application
(a) Any person desiring to obtain a sexually oriented business license shall make application on a form provided
by the city manager or his designee.
(b) All applications for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
the amount provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. An application shall not be considered to
have been filed until the fee is paid and all information required by the application form has been submitted.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.832; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.043 Issuance
(a) The city manager shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an
application unless the city manager finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) The location of the sexually oriented business is or would be in violation of this article or the
zoning ordinance of the city.
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application.
(3) The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.
(4) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/435
(5) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
(6) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect.
(7) The license application fee required by this article has not been paid.
(8) The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the sexually oriented business owns or
holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the sexually oriented
business will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same.
(9) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this
article.
(10) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime:
(A) Involving the following:
(i) Any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code, ch. 43:
a. Prostitution.
b. Promotion of prostitution.
c. Aggravated promotion of prostitution.
d. Compelling prostitution.
e. Obscenity.
f. Obscene display or distribution.
g. Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor.
h. Sexual performance by a child.
i. Employment harmful to children.
j. Possession of child pornography.
(ii) Any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code, ch. 21:
a. Public lewdness.
b. Indecent exposure.
c. Indecency with a child.
d. Improper photography or visual recording.
(iii) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in the Texas Penal Code,
ch. 22.
(iv) Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in the Texas
Penal Code, ch. 25.
(v) Any felony as described in the Texas Penal Code.
(vi) Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
(vii) Any similar sex-related offense to those described above under the criminal or penal
code of any state or country.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/435
(B) For which:
(i) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from the terms of probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from the terms of probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
applicant's spouse.
(c) An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in this section
may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by this section has
elapsed.
(d) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name and type of business, the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business.
(e) The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.833; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.044 Inspection of premises and records; maintenance of records
(a) A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business shall be subject to the regulations under
this article and shall permit representatives of the police department to inspect all portions of the premises open to
the public and the records required to be maintained under this article by the sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with this article at any time it is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.
(b) A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person operates the
establishment without maintaining a current list of all employees of the business, along with a complete updated
employment application for each employee. A legible copy of a valid driver's license, state identification card or
passport, with a photograph, together with an original photograph accurately depicting the employee as the person
appears at the time the person is hired, shall be required and maintained on the premises with the employee's
application.
(c) A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the records and premises by a representative of the police department at any time the sexually
oriented business is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.
(d) The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain all records required to be maintained
under the provisions of this article on the licensed premises.
(e) The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person does not maintain
the required records on the premises of the licensed establishment.
(f) A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person does not
permit representatives of the police department to take photographs of the premises or the licensee, operator or
employees of the sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article at any time it
is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.
(g) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a
customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/435
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.834)
Sec. 4.07.045 Expiration
(a) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
(b) A license may be renewed by submission to the city manager or his designee of an application on the form
prescribed by the official and payment of a nonrefundable renewal processing fee in the amount provided for in the
fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(c) Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.835; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.046 Suspension
(a) Subject to subsection (c) below, the city manager shall suspend a sexually oriented business license if the
city manager determines that a licensee(s) or employee(s) of a licensee (or any combination thereof) has/have:
(1) (A) On two or more occasions within any 12-month period of time been cited for a
violation of section 4.07.003, 4.07.044, 4.07.049 or 4.07.007 through 4.07.015; and
(B) Been convicted or placed on deferred disposition or probation for the violations.
(2) Engaged in public intoxication on the premises of a sexually oriented business or knowingly
permitted gambling by any person on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
(b) A period of suspension will begin the first day after the decision of the city manager becomes final as
provided in this section, unless the licensee appeals to an appropriate court under section 4.07.048. If appeal is
taken under section 4.07.048, the period of suspension begins the day after all appeals are final.
(c) The suspension of a license as provided for in subsection (a) above shall be as follows:
(1) The first suspension of a license shall be for a period of seven calendar days.
(2) The second suspension of a license shall be for a period of 30 calendar days.
(3) On the third cause of suspension, the city manager shall revoke a license according to section
4.07.047.
(d) Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of
suspension.
(e) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business during a
period of time that the license for such business has been suspended.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.836; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.047 Revocation
(a) The city manager shall revoke a license if a license has been suspended under the provisions of section
4.07.046(c)(3).
(b) The city manager shall revoke a license if he/she determines the following:
(1) The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city manager
during the application process.
(2) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled
substances on the premises.
(3) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/435
(4) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of
time when the license for such business was suspended.
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 4.07.043(a)(10) for which the time
period required has not lapsed.
(6) On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, an employee of the establishment
committed in or on the licensed premises an offense listed in section 4.07.043(a)(10) for which a
conviction has been obtained.
(7) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual
contact” shall have the same meaning as it is defined in the Texas Penal Code, section 21.01.
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or
sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license, unless
the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation
or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the city manager revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for five years, and the licensee shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business license for five years from the date revocation became effective. If the
license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until
the appropriate number of years required under section 4.07.043(a)(10) has elapsed.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.837; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.048 Appeals
(a) When the city manager is authorized to deny the issuance of a license, or suspend or revoke a license,
under this article, the city manager shall give written notice to the applicant or licensee of such intention.
(1) The notice shall provide that the denial of issuance, suspension or revocation shall take effect at
the expiration of the tenth calendar day after notification, unless the licensee provides a written
response to the city manager before the expiration of the tenth calendar day.
(2) If a written response from the applicant or licensee is received by the city manager before the
expiration of the tenth calendar day, the denial of issuance, suspension or revocation will be stayed
pending a decision by the city manager. The city manager shall review the response before the
rendering of a decision.
(3) The city manager shall give written notice of this decision to the applicant or licensee within ten
calendar days of receipt of the written response from the applicant or licensee.
(4) The decision by the city manager is effective immediately and final pending any appeal to an
appropriate court.
(5) Notice shall be deemed delivered by hand delivery to a licensee, owner or employee of the
establishment or by a posting of the notice at the usual business entrance of the establishment. Notice
may also be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed to the address listed in the license
application for receipt of notice.
(b) Upon receipt of written notice of the denial of issuance, suspension or revocation, the licensee whose
application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to
appeal to an appropriate court.
(c) An appeal to the appropriate court must be filed within 30 days after delivery of notice of the decision of the
city manager.
(d) The licensee or applicant shall bear the burden of proof in court.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/435
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.838; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.049 Transfer; forging or alteration
(a) A person commits an offense if he transfers a sexually oriented business license to another person or
operates a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates a different sexually oriented business than the one authorized in
the license for the location where the business is being operated.
(c) A person commits an offense if he counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a sexually oriented
business license.
(Ordinance 08-25 adopted 4/1/08; 2001 Code, sec. 4.839)
ARTICLE 4.08 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.08.001 Definitions
As used herein:
Billiard or pool table means and includes any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets, upon
which balls are impelled by a cue or stick.
Pool hall means and includes any room, hall, building, or place in which there is located any pool or billiard table or
tables for the use of which a fee or charge is made, either directly or indirectly, and which place is operated for
profit or gain of any kind.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-21; 2001 Code, sec. 4.201)
Sec. 4.08.002 Penalty
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (1976 Code, sec. 5-37; 2001 Code, sec. 4.217)
Sec. 4.08.003 Exemption of private clubs
The provisions of this article shall not apply to private clubs, societies, or corporations where use of the pool or
billiard tables is restricted to the members of the society, club, or corporation and their invited guests, and from
which the general public is excluded. (1976 Code, sec. 5-36; 2001 Code, sec. 4.216)
Sec. 4.08.004 Hours of operation
All pool halls shall close and shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that on Saturday nights the hour of closing shall be 1:00 a.m., and provided further that such pool halls
shall remain closed between 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. (1976
Code, sec. 5-30; 2001 Code, sec. 4.210)
Sec. 4.08.005 Age restrictions
It shall be unlawful for the operator or operators of any pool hall to permit persons under the age of seventeen
years to engage in or play pool, billiards, or other games on the premises of such pool hall unless such persons
under the age of seventeen years shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian or shall have obtained written and
signed permission to play from a parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for the operator or operators of any pool
hall to allow any persons attending elementary, junior high, or senior high school to engage in or play billiards,
pool, or other games on the premises of such pool hall before 4:00 p.m., except during official school holidays.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-31; 2001 Code, sec. 4.211)
Sec. 4.08.006 Gambling
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/435
The operator or operators of a pool hall shall not knowingly permit gambling, betting, or wagering of any kind or
character to take place on the premises of such pool hall. (1976 Code, sec. 5-32; 2001 Code, sec. 4.212)
Sec. 4.08.007 Intoxicating beverages
The operator or operators of a pool hall shall not knowingly permit the drinking of intoxicating beverages of any
kind or character to take place on the premises, nor shall the operator or operators of a pool hall knowingly permit
any person to enter the premises while under the influence of intoxicating beverages. (1976 Code, sec. 5-33; 2001
Code, sec. 4.213)
Sec. 4.08.008 Prostitutes, vagrants, etc.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a pool hall to permit any prostitute, male or female procurer, or vagrant to be
present at such pool hall. (1976 Code, sec. 5-34; 2001 Code, sec. 4.214)
Secs. 4.08.009–4.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.08.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall within the corporate limits of the city unless the pool hall
has been first licensed for such purpose. The license shall be issued by the assessor and collector of taxes, when
the conditions of this article have been complied with and when the application for the license has been approved
by the chief of police or the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 5-22; 2001 Code, sec. 4.202)
Sec. 4.08.032 Application
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a pool hall shall file with the chief of police a written application
for such license, duly verified under oath, which application shall contain the following information:
(1) The location by street and number of the place which is to be used for such purpose, the size
thereof, the number of pool or billiard tables proposed to be used, and the name and address of the
applicant.
(2) If the applicant is an individual, a statement that he is a bona fide resident of the city and the
state, the length of such residence therein, and whether or not he has ever been convicted of a felony
or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense.
(3) If the applicant is a firm, association, or partnership, all of the information prescribed in subsection
(2) of this section as to each individual composing the firm, association, or partnership.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, a statement that the applicant is organized and chartered under
the laws of the State of Texas, or if a foreign corporation, that such corporation is licensed to do
business in the State of Texas, and the same information with reference to the operator or person in
charge of such pool hall shall be given as prescribed in subsection (2) of this section; in addition thereto
a list of the officers, directors, and stockholders of such corporation shall be given.
(5) The occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five years next preceding the filing
of his application.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-23; 2001 Code, sec. 4.203)
Sec. 4.08.033 Misrepresentations in application
It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind or character of the pool hall to be operated or any other fact or
statement made in such application. Any misrepresentation of any applicant for the purpose of avoiding the
provisions of this article shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation or
denial of the license as provided hereafter. (1976 Code, sec. 5-24; 2001 Code, sec. 4.204)
Sec. 4.08.034 Information to be shown on license; posting
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/435
The license herein provided for shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the address and
location of such pool hall, and the number of pool tables permitted. It shall be signed and sealed by the assessor
and collector of taxes and posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such pool hall
in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time. (1976 Code, sec. 5-25; 2001 Code, sec. 4.205)
Sec. 4.08.035 Duration; proration of fee; refund of fee
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year, and shall be renewable annually.
The fee for any license issued after January 1 of any year shall be prorated on the basis of the effective duration of
the license. There shall be no refund of any license fee paid hereunder for any cause whatsoever. (1976 Code,
sec. 5-26; 2001 Code, sec. 4.206)
Sec. 4.08.036 Investigation of premises
No license shall be granted under the provisions of this article unless it shall appear, upon investigation by the
chief of police, that the premises desired to be used as a pool hall comply with all ordinances of the city and laws
of the state. (1976 Code, sec. 5-28; 2001 Code, sec. 4.208)
Sec. 4.08.037 Appeal of denial
In the event the chief of police shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under the provisions of this article,
such applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council by giving to the council, within ten days (10) after
refusal, written notice of intention to appeal such refusal and by requesting a hearing by the council upon the
application. In the event of such appeal, a hearing shall be had before the council within thirty days (30) after
notice is given, to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police on such application. The
determination of the city council on such appeal shall be final. (1976 Code, sec. 5-29; 2001 Code, sec. 4.209)
Sec. 4.08.038 Cancellation
(a) If any licensee under the provisions of this article violates the provisions of this article or other ordinances of
the city or laws of the state, the chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to such licensee or operator of
such pool hall of a hearing to be held for the purpose of determining if the license should be cancelled, and upon
such hearing the chief of police may cancel such license for any of the above causes, which action shall be final at
the end of ten days (10) after such hearing.
(b) The licensee shall have the right of appeal to the city council, within such ten (10) day period, and if such
appeal is taken, then the city council shall conduct a hearing on such cancellation, and may cancel such license for
any of the causes so shown, which action shall be final.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-35; 2001 Code, sec. 4.215)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or of the code hereby adopted, or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any lawful order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, and from which
no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/435
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1976 Code, sec. 9-29; 2001 Code, sec. 5.129)
Sec. 5.01.002 Open burning
Burning is hereby prohibited in the city limits, except for provisions outlined in chapter 3, section 307.2 of the
International Fire Code. The fire investigator may give approval to persons desiring a one-time burning permit.
(Ordinance 09-75, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.125)
State law reference–Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 382.
Sec. 5.01.003 Mobile service units
(a) Prohibited; definition.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell or dispense fuel from a mobile
service unit in the city, or to operate the same as a service station, including self-service.
(2) “Mobile service unit,” as used in this article, shall mean and include any vehicle, tank, tank truck,
or other movable device from which flammable liquids used as fuel may, as an act of retail sale, be
dispensed into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle. It is the intent of this article to prohibit mobile gasoline
filling stations which either park or roam around on off-street parking lots and from which the driver or
attendant makes sales of gasoline to persons whose vehicles are parked on such lots. This article shall
not apply to the delivery of liquefied petroleum gas to lawful recipients having proper containers other
than motor vehicles, or to the emergency delivery of motor fuel to a stalled vehicle.
(b) Penalty. The violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1976 Code, secs. 9-41, 9-42; 2001 Code, secs. 5.301, 5.302)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 5.02.001 Chief
The office of chief of the fire department is created by the constitution and bylaws of the volunteer fire department.
He shall be elected by the volunteer fire department. The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for the
general conduct of the fire department, and shall have the authority and duty to see that all provisions of this
chapter are carried out. (1976 Code, sec. 9-4; 2001 Code, sec. 5.104)
Sec. 5.02.002 Constitution and bylaws
The constitution and bylaws of the volunteer fire department will organize this body for fire protection. (1976 Code,
sec. 9-5; 2001 Code, sec. 5.105)
Sec. 5.02.003 Cost recovery for services related to motor vehicle accidents
(a) Collection of fees.
(1) The chief of the Bridgeport volunteer fire department, or his designee, shall collect all fees and
costs for fire prevention services and for other public safety and emergency services rendered by the
department when providing these services for motor vehicle accidents. Such fees include but are not
limited to the use of equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs of whatever
nature which constitute full reimbursement to the Bridgeport volunteer fire department for services
actually rendered and as hereinafter authorized. Said fees shall be deposited to the city.
(2) Within thirty (30) days of the date of providing fire prevention and protection services or other
public safety and emergency services for motor vehicle accidents, the chief of the Bridgeport volunteer
fire department, or his designee, shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses
related to providing such services, to include but not be limited to all actual expenses including costs of
equipment operations, cost of materials utilized, costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not
in the full-time employment of the city, overtime costs, and other incidental costs incurred by the city as
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/435
a result of the incident, to the customer, client, owner, designated agent, representative and/or
insurance company who received, covered and/or otherwise benefited from these services. The
provisions of this section shall apply only to those persons who were not residing within the city at the
time of the incident, which led to the benefits of services.
(3) Any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to cleanup costs, fees or expenses that are
imposed upon the city or the Bridgeport volunteer fire department by any local, state or federal agency,
related to the rendering of fire protection or prevention services or of other public safety and emergency
services involving motor vehicle accidents, may be included in the billing or billed separately within 30
days of receipt.
(4) Any fees or expenses billed by the chief or his designee shall be payable in full within sixty (60)
days of the date of the invoice. Failure to timely make payment may result in the accumulation of
interest on any unpaid balances at the rate of 10 percent per annum for any unpaid balances.
(b) Enforcement. The city may enforce the provisions of this section by any action allowed by law for the
collection of any amounts due hereunder, including reasonable and necessary attorney fees, costs and expenses,
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 01-19 adopted 5/15/01; 2001 Code, art. 5.400)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE INVESTIGATOR AND FIRE INSPECTOR
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.03.001 Delegation of duties
In the absence of either the fire inspector or the fire investigator, the other may perform the duties of the absent
position, so long as the person performing such duties is properly qualified and trained to perform such duties and
to the extent that such delegation of duties does not conflict with state law. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 6, adopted
12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.130)
Sec. 5.03.002 Inspections for fire hazards; remedial action
The fire investigator and the fire inspector, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or
property adjacent, or without complaint, shall have the right, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of
examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or
more often, to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all
mercantile, manufacturing, and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall
find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any
cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so
occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting
devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene,
dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, or combustible, inflammable, and refuse materials, or other
conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous
to firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith
complied with by the owner or occupant. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may,
within five (5) days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his
authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or
occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.114; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.03.003 Notice required before prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under the provisions of this article until the order provided for in section 5.03.002
be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1976 Code, sec. 9-18; 2001 Code,
sec. 5.118)
Secs. 5.03.004–5.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fire Investigator
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/435
Sec. 5.03.031 Position created
The position of fire investigator is hereby created. Any reference to “fire marshal” in the Code of Ordinances shall
hereafter mean fire investigator. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.106)
Sec. 5.03.032 Appointment
The fire investigator shall be appointed by the chief of police. The fire investigator shall be properly qualified for the
duties of his position. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.107)
Sec. 5.03.033 Duty to investigate fires; other duties
The fire investigator shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire investigator shall also be responsible for the enforcement
of fireworks, outdoor burning and fire lane regulations of the city. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09;
2001 Code, sec. 5.108)
Sec. 5.03.034 Taking of testimony
The fire investigator, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation
to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4,
adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.109)
Sec. 5.03.035 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of evidence
The fire investigator shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire investigator is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4,
adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.110)
Sec. 5.03.036 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire investigator may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.111)
Sec. 5.03.037 Duty when evidence indicates crime
If the fire investigator shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of
arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct, in
connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or
either of them, and shall furnish the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of
witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken
in the case. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.112)
Sec. 5.03.038 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear and testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the
fire investigator, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire investigator in
the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire investigator
to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.113)
Sec. 5.03.039 Authority to enter building where fire has occurred
The fire investigator shall have the authority, at all times of the day and night, when necessary in the performance
of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/435
authority shall be exercised only with good reason and good discretion. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted
12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.115)
Sec. 5.03.040 Reports to state fire marshal
At the end of each month, the fire investigator shall report to the city council and to the state fire marshal all
existing hazardous conditions, together with separate report on each fire in the city during the month. (Ordinance
09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.116)
Sec. 5.03.041 Record of fires
The fire investigator shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics, and
circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this article. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.117)
Secs. 5.03.042–5.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Fire Inspector
Sec. 5.03.071 Position created; appointment
The position of the fire inspector is hereby created. The fire inspector shall be appointed by the director of
development services. The fire inspector shall be properly qualified for the duties of his position. (Ordinance 09-75,
sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.127(a))
Sec. 5.03.072 Duties
The fire inspector shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire code, building code, and substandard
building regulations of the city. The fire inspector shall also be responsible for development and plan review for
new construction, and for establishing an annual fire inspection program for commercial businesses in the city. The
fire inspector shall also be responsible for the enforcement of the regulations of explosives, flammable liquids,
hazardous chemicals, and the transportation of the same. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09; 2001
Code, sec. 5.127(b))
Sec. 5.03.073 Appeal of decisions
Whenever the fire inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire inspector to the city
council within thirty days (30) from the date of the decision appealed. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09;
2001 Code, sec. 5.128)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
(a) Adoption. The 2012 International Fire Code, as revised, including all appendix chapters of said code,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for the purpose of
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupation, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in
the city. This building code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) Availability to public. The material contained in the International Code, although fully adopted and
incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material
shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and the building inspector. This
exhibit shall be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. The purpose of
maintaining these records separate and apart from the municipal codification is to avoid the inclusion of detailed
technical construction material, subject to frequent change, which would unreasonably lengthen the code.
(c) Amendments. The model amendments recommended by the North Texas Council of Governments (NTCOG)
are hereby adopted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/435
(d) Additional modifications. The city may from time to time determine that additional local modifications to the
International Fire Code are necessary and appropriate to meet the unique building needs of the city. To effectuate
modifications, the city council may enact individual ordinances amending this article fully setting forth the change
to be made in the code.
(Ordinance 2015-20 adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.04.002 Modification of code
The city council shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the International Fire Code upon application in
writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the city council thereon shall be entered in the minutes of the city council, and a signed copy shall be
furnished the applicant. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.126)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.05.001 Definition
Fireworks means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy
guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers,
or other devices of like construction, and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound or any
tablet or other device containing an explosive substance, except that the term “fireworks” shall not include any auto
flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain of explosive
content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of
which shall be permitted at all times. (Ordinance 90-3 adopted 6/5/90; 2001 Code, sec. 5.201)
Sec. 5.05.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, company, or association who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or
suffer or allow the same to be violated, shall upon conviction therefor be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 90-3 adopted 6/5/90; 2001 Code, sec.
5.206)
Sec. 5.05.003 Discharge prohibited
No person, firm, company, corporation, or association shall cast, throw, or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo,
grenade, cap, or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind, in the city. (Ordinance 90-3 adopted 6/5/90;
2001 Code, sec. 5.202)
Sec. 5.05.004 Exceptions; supervised displays
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation
agencies for signal purposes of illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater or for
signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports or for use by military organizations, or to the sale, storage or
use by military organizations, or to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in
photographic supplies, or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if
conducted under the supervision of the fire investigator of the city after written application is made and a written
permit is issued by the fire investigator of the city for such demonstration or display. Such permit shall not be
granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as, in
the opinion of the fire investigator of the city, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger the public safety.
(Ordinance 09-75, sec. 7, adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.203)
Sec. 5.05.005 Enforcement; seizure of fireworks
The fire investigator of the city, or his designee, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article, and
to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed any fireworks in violation of this article, at the expense of the
owner or person in charge of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation hereof. The fire
investigator shall dispose of, in a safe way, any such fireworks confiscated. (Ordinance 09-75, sec. 7, adopted
12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 5.204)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/435
Sec. 5.05.006 Possession constitutes prima facie evidence of violation
The possession of any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of an
intention to violate the provisions of this article [and] shall be deemed an offense. (Ordinance 90-3 adopted 6/5/90;
2001 Code, sec. 5.205)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 SMOKING†
Sec. 6.02.001 Smoking prohibited in municipal facilities
(a) Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings defined as
follows:
Burning. The lighting or combustion of a tobacco product.
Electronic cigarette. A cigarette-shaped device containing liquid that is vaporized and inhaled, used to simulate the
experience of smoking tobacco.
Municipal building. A structure having a roof and enclosed on all sides by walls and which is owned or leased by
the city; except a municipal building does not include a structure occupied as a residence.
Smoking. Emitting or exhaling the smoke of burning tobacco, weed, or other plant or tobacco product.
Tobacco product. A cigar, cigarette, pipe and any type of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe, cigarette or cigar
or a similar product intended for consumption by combustion.
(b) Smoking prohibited. A person commits an offense if the person smokes or burns a tobacco product or
electronic cigarette inside any municipal building. It is not an offense to possess a non-burning tobacco product or
electronic cigarette inside a municipal building.
(c) Posting of signs. The mayor shall cause conspicuous signs to be posted at each entrance of each municipal
building. The sign shall contain the words “No Smoking, City of Bridgeport Ordinance” or other language that
clearly prohibits smoking, and include the universal symbol for no smoking.
(Ordinance 02-09 adopted 3/5/02; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 3/19/03; 2001 Code, art. 6.600; Ordinance 2015-07
adopted 5/19/15)
ARTICLE 6.03 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE*
Sec. 6.03.001 Prohibited conditions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, or legal entity of any kind who shall own or occupy any lot
or other parcel of real property in the city to permit or allow holes or places on said lot or parcels of real property
where water may accumulate and become stagnant.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business or legal entity of any kind who shall own or occupy any lot
or other parcel of real property in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of filth, carrion, or other impure and
unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/435
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business or legal entity of any kind who shall own or occupy any lot
or other parcel of real property in the city to permit or allow weeds, rubbish, brush, or other objectionable, unsightly
or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow thereon.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business or legal entity of any kind who shall own or occupy any lot
or other parcel of real property in the city to permit or allow:
(1) Grass, weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a height greater than 10 inches on an
average or to grow in rank profusion upon such premises, including along the sidewalk or street
adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or if there is no curb, then within 10 feet
outside the property line, and including in any alleyway or other easement upon such premises;
(2) Grass, weeds, or any plant to grow more than three inches in front of the back edge of the curb
along any street, alleyway or easement adjacent to any portion of the lot, tract, or parcel of land; or
(3) Grass, weeds, or any plant to grow more than three inches in front of the back edge of the
pavement along any street, alleyway or easement without a curb, adjacent to any portion of the lot,
tract, or parcel of land.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; Ordinance 03-19 adopted 8/5/03; 2001 Code, sec. 6.301)
Sec. 6.03.002 Work or improvements by city; notice
(a) If the owner of property in the city does not comply with a municipal ordinance or requirement under this
article within 10 days of notice of a violation, the city may:
(1) Do the work or make the improvements required; and
(2) Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the
property.
(b) The notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) By publication at least twice within 10 consecutive days;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(c) The city in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the
owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on
or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at
the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this
subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an
ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by subsections (a)(1) and (2) and
assess its expenses as provided by section 6.03.003 of this article.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 6.302)
Sec. 6.03.003 Assessment of city's expenses; lien
(a) The city council may assess expenses incurred under section 6.03.002 of this article against the real estate
on which the work is done or improvements made.
(b) To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, municipal health authority, or other municipal official
designated by the mayor must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk. The lien statement must state
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/435
the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the
lien statement with the county clerk.
(c) The lien obtained by the city council is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of
10 percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(d) The lien is inferior only to:
(1) Tax liens; and
(2) Liens for street improvements.
(e) The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and
interest due.
(f) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred
by the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
(g) The remedy provided by this section is in addition to the remedy provided by section 6.03.005 of this article.
(h) The city council may foreclose a lien on property under this article in a proceeding relating to the property
brought under subchapter E, chapter 33, Tax Code.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 6.303; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 6.03.004 Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds
(a) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) Not later than the 10th day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice
to the property owner in the manner required by section 6.03.002 of this article.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's
abatement of the weeds.
(d) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later
than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city a written
request for a hearing.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after
the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information
relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(f) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens
under section 6.03.003 of this article. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien
created under section 6.03.003 of this article.
(g) The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 6.03.002 of this
article.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 6.304)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/435
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
342.008.
Sec. 6.03.005 Penalty; injunction
(a) Any person violating this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) Any person violating this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 6.305)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 JUDGE†
Sec. 7.02.001 Office ratified
The office of judge of the municipal court is hereby ratified. (1976 Code, sec. 1-81; 2001 Code, sec. 7.101)
ARTICLE 7.03 FINES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES**
Sec. 7.03.001 Special expense for issuance and service of warrant of arrest
The special expense for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under section 38.10, Penal
Code, or under section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section
543.009), and the special expense described in article 17.04 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure dealing with
the requisites of a personal bond and the special expense for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest after
due notice, shall be in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. Said
special expenses, as levied, shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. (Ordinance 85-7
adopted 10/15/85; 2001 Code, art. 7.200; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 7.03.002 Technology fund
(a) Establishment.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the
fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general
revenue account.
(b) Amount of fee; assessment and collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/435
(B) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
(4) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city, who shall deposit the fee
into the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Designated use of fund; administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the
municipal court of the city, including, but not limited to those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of
Criminal Procedure, article 102.0172.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 99-11 adopted 9/21/99; 2001 Code, secs. 7.301–7.303; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.03.003 Building security fund
(a) Created. There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. This fund shall be administered
under the direction of the governing body of the city.
(b) Fee assessed. All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be
required to pay a fee, as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, as a cost of court. A
person is considered convicted for purposes of this section if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person
receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the
person's case. The security fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the official who
discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the municipal court building security fund.
(c) Purpose. The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the following items when
used for the purpose of providing security services for any buildings housing the municipal court of the city
including those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; Ordinance 2011-32 adopted 9/6/11; 2001 Code, secs. 7.401–7.403; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.03.004 Juvenile case manager fund
(a) Created. There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund (the “fund”), as set forth in the Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, article 102.0174.
(b) Fee assessed. A defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall pay a
juvenile case manager fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. For purposes of
this section, a person is considered to be “convicted” if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the defendant by the court; or
(2) The defendant receives deferred disposition from the court, including deferred proceedings under
article 45.052 or 45.053 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(c) Waiver of fee. The municipal court judge is authorized to waive the juvenile case manager fee in case of
demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted defendant.
(d) Collection. The municipal court clerk shall collect the fee beginning May 16, 2007, and pay it to the city
treasurer, to be kept in a separate fund known as the “juvenile case manager fund.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/435
(e) Purpose. The fund may be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager that is
employed under Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 45.056.
(f) Administration. The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 07-21 adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, art. 7.500)
State law references–Authority to employ juvenile case managers and reimbursement, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.056;
juvenile case manager fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0174.
Sec. 7.03.005 Collection fee
In accordance with article 103.0031 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, there is hereby imposed an
additional fee of thirty percent (30%) on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution,
and other debts, that are more than sixty (60) days past due and have been referred to a private firm for collection.
(Ordinance 2015-03 adopted 3/5/15)
State law reference–Contracts for collection services, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 103.0031.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 False fire or police alarms
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and falsely, by any means whatever, to give, turn in, sound, or make
any fire or police alarm, there being no occasion therefor. (1976 Code, sec. 9-3; 2001 Code, sec. 5.103)
Sec. 8.01.002 Draining or pouring petroleum products on street
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drain or pour oil, gasoline, or other
petroleum products upon any public street, alley, or thoroughfare in the city.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Additionally, any
cleanup costs incurred as a result of said violation shall be charged to the violator.
(1976 Code, secs. 17-11, 17-12; Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, secs. 8.301, 8.302)
Sec. 8.01.003 Defacing public structure
(a) Prohibition. No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to attach signs, paint upon, scribe upon in any
way or deface in any manner any city-owned structure, power poles, fences, towers, signs or any appurtenance of
the city, save and except such lawful uses as set forth by the mayor and city council, state or federal agencies and
officers and agents of the city carrying out the required duties of the positions.
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 97-3-A adopted 4/15/97; 2001 Code, art. 8.500)
Sec. 8.01.004 Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on city property
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess alcoholic beverages of any nature or
kind, including beer, whiskey or wine, on any city-owned property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/435
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation that violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with or that
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
(c) Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of the offense under subsection (a) if:
(1) The alcoholic beverage is being possessed or consumed at an event:
(A) For which a special event permit has been issued by the city and the state alcoholic
beverage commission has granted temporary licenses or permits for the sale of alcoholic
beverages at the event;
(B) That is at one of the following facilities or locations:
(i) Bridgeport Stage Theater;
(ii) Bridgeport Activity Center; or
(iii) The right-of-way of Halsell Street between 13th Street and SH 114;
(Ordinance 07-24, sec. 2, adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, art. 8.600)
(iv) The rights-of-way of 9th Street, 10th Street, 11th Street, or 12th Street, located south
of Stevens Street and north of Cates Street;
(v) Harwood Park;
(vi) 1107 8th Street; and
(Ordinance 2018-11, sec. 1, adopted 4/9/18)
(2) The alcoholic beverage being possessed or consumed was purchased at the event from the
holder of a temporary license or permit granted by the state alcoholic beverage commission.
(Ordinance 07-24, sec. 2, adopted 5/15/07; 2001 Code, art. 8.600)
ARTICLE 8.02 NOISE*
Sec. 8.02.001 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, or any agent or employee thereof who violates any provision of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. Each act in violation of this article should be considered as a separate offense and a separate
violation thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 12-25; 2001 Code, sec. 8.105)
Sec. 8.02.002 Prohibited noise generally
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise, which causes material distress, discomfort, or injury to
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 12-21; 2001 Code, sec. 8.101)
Sec. 8.02.003 Noise disturbing occupants of private homes or nursing homes
Any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of private homes or nursing homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 12-22; 2001 Code, sec. 8.102)
Sec. 8.02.004 Specific noises prohibited
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but such enumeration
shall not be determined to be exclusive:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/435
(1) Musical instruments, including radios, record players, tape recorders, or television sets, which are
played at a loud volume.
(2) Loudspeakers, either on motor vehicles or in homes or businesses in the vicinity of a nursing
home.
(3) Horns or other signal devices on vehicles.
(4) The running of any automobile, motorcycle, truck, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or
in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibrations.
(5) Steam whistles.
(6) Exhaust without mufflers.
(7) Devices operated with compressed air.
(8) Drums.
(9) The use or operation of an auxiliary or compression engine brake, commonly referred to as a
“jacobs” or “jake brake,” which produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise,
within the city. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of such braking mechanism by
emergency vehicles while in the performance of their official or normal duties. This provision is not
intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine or jake brakes in posted areas, but
rather prohibit the use of such equipment in posted areas.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-23; Ordinance 03-11 adopted 5/6/03; 2001 Code, sec. 8.103)
Sec. 8.02.005 Quiet zone near hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutions
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital, nursing home, or other similar
institution which unnecessarily and unreasonably interferes with the patients or workers of such hospital, nursing
home, or similar institution [is prohibited], provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that
there is a hospital, nursing home, or similar institution on such street. (1976 Code, sec. 12-24; 2001 Code, sec.
8.104)
ARTICLE 8.03 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.03.001–8.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.03.031 Definitions
In connection with this division, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning given herein:
Adult. A responsible person, 18 years of age or older, other than a parent, guardian or custodian, in whose care
and under whose individualized supervision the child has been placed by the parent, guardian, or custodian and
under circumstances which demonstrate actions indicating oversight and concern for the child.
City. The City of Bridgeport, Texas, as defined by its corporate boundaries.
Minor. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) or, in equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person
sixteen (16) or less years of age.
Parent. Any person having legal custody of a minor:
(1) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) As legal guardian;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/435
(3) As a person who stands in loco parents; or
(4) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
Parking lot. Any area, whether paved or unpaved, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of vehicles.
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon the streets or parking lots of the city.
Street. A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular travel or in the case of sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term “street” includes the legal right-ofway
including but not limited to traffic lanes, the curbs, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass
plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term “street” applies irrespective of what it
is called or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise.
Time of night. As referred to herein, the time of night is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether
Central Standard or Central Daylight Savings Time. The time observed in the city administrative offices and police
station shall be prima facie evidence of the time of night.
Year of age. Continues from one birthday, such as the sixteenth (16th), to (but not including the day of) the next
seventeenth (17th) birthday, making it clear that sixteen (16) or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to
the phrase “under seventeen (17) years of age.”
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 8.401)
Sec. 8.03.032 Curfew hours
It shall be unlawful for any person sixteen (16) or less years of age (under seventeen (17)) to be or remain in or
upon the streets or parking lots within the city at night during the period of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Sunday through
Thursday and 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. (Ordinance 10-42 adopted 12/21/10; 2001 Code, sec.
8.402)
Sec. 8.03.033 Defenses
It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 8.03.032 of this division where one of the following situations
exists:
(1) The minor was accompanied by a parent.
(2) The minor was accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such a minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
(3) The minor was en route, using the most direct route, to or from the following:
(A) A place of the minor's employment;
(B) A restaurant, library, movie theater, store or other place of public accommodation;
(C) A play, dance, sporting event or other of public entertainment;
(D) A church, meeting hall, school, courthouse or other place of public assembly or worship; or
(E) An emergency errand.
(4) A minor was exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
(5) The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance
with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 8.403)
Sec. 8.03.034 Enforcement procedure
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/435
Any police, officer upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.03.032, may transfer the case to proper authorities
for handling under the provisions of title 3 of the Family Code. In addition, a complaint may be filed against the
parents in municipal court for violation hereof. The police department shall file all necessary legal papers, supply
all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this division by
either the minor or by any parent or guardian. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 8.404)
Sec. 8.03.035 Parental responsibility
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by insufficient control to
allow such minor to be or remain upon any city street or parking lot under circumstances not constituting a defense
to or otherwise beyond the scope of this division. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is
intended that a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility be applied through an objective test. It
shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 8.405)
Sec. 8.03.036 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this
code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 8.406)
ARTICLE 8.04 GRAFFITI*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
In this article:
Aerosol paint. An aerosolized paint product, including, but not limited to, a clear or pigmented lacquer or finish.
Graffiti. An unauthorized inscription, work, signature, symbol, design, or other marking which is etched, engraved,
written, painted, drawn, or applied in any other way to a structure, building, or property.
Indelible marker. A device that makes a mark with a paint or ink product that is specially formulated to be more
difficult to erase, wash out, or remove than ordinary paint or ink products.
Minor. A person younger than 17 years of age.
Owner. A person who owns or is in control of property.
Unauthorized. Without the permission of the owner of property.
(Ordinance 04-36 adopted 9/7/04; 2001 Code, sec. 8.701)
Sec. 8.04.002 Possession of aerosol paint or indelible marker by minor
(a) Offense. A minor commits an offense if the minor possesses aerosol paint, or an indelible marker.
(b) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the minor possessed the aerosol paint or
indelible marker while the minor was:
(1) Accompanied or supervised by a parent or guardian;
(2) Accompanied or supervised by a teacher in connection with a school project;
(3) Supervised during the minor's regular employment;
(4) On the property on which the minor lives;
(5) Engaged in an organized event sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church or other
officially recognized organization; or
(6) Traveling to or from the events described in subsection (5) with an indelible marker.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/435
(Ordinance 04-36 adopted 9/7/04; 2001 Code, sec. 8.702)
Sec. 8.04.003 Placement of graffiti
A person commits an offense if the person places graffiti on property. (Ordinance 04-36 adopted 9/7/04; 2001
Code, sec. 8.703)
Sec. 8.04.004 Failure to remove graffiti
An owner of property commits an offense if the owner fails to remove graffiti from the owner's property if the graffiti
is visible from public or private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists. The city must notify the
owner of the need to remove the graffiti, and the city shall offer to remove the graffiti free of charge. In the event
the owner fails to request assistance from the city or fails to remove the graffiti within the prescribed time, a citation
may be issued. (Ordinance 09-74, sec. 1, adopted 12/1/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.704)
Sec. 8.04.005 Notice to remove; abatement procedure
(a) Notice required. The city must notify the property owner of a violation of this article, and must offer to remove
the graffiti free of charge and give the owner the opportunity to remove the graffiti before:
(1) Issuing a citation for a violation of section 8.04.004; or
(2) Entering the property and doing the work necessary to remove or cover the graffiti and abate the
nuisance.
(b) Waiver of notice; permission to abate. The property owner may waive the right to notice and the opportunity
to remove the graffiti by filing a written statement with the city secretary giving the city permission to enter the
property and abate the nuisance.
(c) Method of notice. Notice must be given:
(1) In writing personally delivered to the owner;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner's address as listed on the most recent ad valorem tax rolls; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown:
(A) By publication in the official newspaper at least twice within 10 consecutive calendar days;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each structure or building on the property
to which the violation relates; or
(C) If the property does not contain any buildings, by posting the notice on a placard or sign
attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
(d) Contents of notice. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owner;
(2) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property upon which the
violation is located;
(3) A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to correct the violation;
(4) A statement advising the owner that, if the owner does not request assistance from the city within
five (5) calendar days and the work is not completed within 10 calendar days, the city will complete the
work and assess the cost of the work to the owner;
(5) A statement that, if the city performs the work after the owner's refusal and the owner fails to pay
the cost, a lien may be placed on the property;
(6) A statement that, within five calendar days after receiving notice of a violation, the owner may
submit a written request to the director of infrastructure services or his designee for assistance in
removing the graffiti;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/435
(7) A statement that, within five calendar days after receiving notice of a violation, the owner may
submit a written request to the director of infrastructure services for an informal hearing before the
director of infrastructure services or his designee to contest whether the violation exists; and
(8) A statement that the city may, at any time, file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in municipal
court with a maximum fine of $500.00 for each calendar day the violation exists, in addition to any other
remedy provided by law.
(e) Time of notice. For purposes of this article, notice is deemed to have occurred:
(1) For personal service, on the day notice was personally delivered to the owner;
(2) For mailed notice, three calendar days after written notice was mailed to the owner;
(3) For notice by publication, on the date that the second notice is published; or
(4) For notice by posting, the day of posting.
(f) Issuance of citation. A citation for a violation of section 8.04.004 may be issued 10 calendar days after notice
of the violation is received.
(g) Abatement by city. If the owner does not request assistance from the city to remove the graffiti free of
charge, or if the owner does not comply with this article by removing the graffiti by the 10th calendar day after
notice is deemed received, the city may enter the property or authorize another to enter the property and do or
cause to be done all work necessary to abate the graffiti. If the city performs or causes to be performed the
abatement work, the city shall initially pay for the work done, and may, at its sole discretion, charge the expenses
to the owner of the property.
(h) Liability for work. The city shall not be responsible for the color or quality of the paint or any damages done
to the owner's property while abating the nuisance on the property.
(Ordinance 09-74, sec. 2, adopted 12/1/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.705)
Sec. 8.04.006 Informal hearing
If, within five calendar days after receiving notice, the property owner files a written request with the city secretary
according to section 8.04.005(d)(7), the director of public works or his designee shall hold an informal hearing.
Unless the owner requests and is granted an immediate hearing and waives the right to notice, notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. At the hearing, the owner may provide
evidence or testimony that a violation does not exist and abatement is not warranted. After the hearing, the director
of public works or his designee may determine whether a violation requiring abatement exists. Failure of the
property owner to timely request a hearing or to appear at a hearing constitutes a waiver of any right to challenge
the abatement of the violation. (Ordinance 04-36 adopted 9/7/04; 2001 Code, sec. 8.706)
Sec. 8.04.007 Assessment of city's expenses; lien
The city may assess expenses incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to section 8.04.005
against the real property on which the work was done if the owner refused to request or allow the city to remove
the graffiti free of charge, and the owner failed to remove the graffiti within the prescribed time. To obtain a lien
against the property, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of expenses and a copy of the notice that
the city provided to the owner. The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of 10
percent per annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. The lien is inferior only to tax liens and
liens for street improvements. (Ordinance 09-74, sec. 3, adopted 12/1/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.707)
Sec. 8.04.008 Assistance in removal
Upon notification of graffiti on property, an owner may request assistance from the city to remove graffiti from the
owner's property. To receive assistance the owner must submit a written request for assistance to the city manager
or his designee within five calendar days after receiving notice. Failure to submit request within five calendar days
will be deemed as a refusal for assistance. (Ordinance 09-74, sec. 4, adopted 12/1/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.708;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 8.05 WEAPONS*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/435
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.05.001–8.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Firearms
Sec. 8.05.031 Definitions
Firearm. Any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy
generated by an explosion or burning substance, by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs, or any
other means capable of discharging shots, cartridges, pellets, missiles, projectiles or any object, or any device
readily convertible to that use. Firearms specifically include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Rifle;
(2) Shotgun;
(3) Automatic rifle;
(4) Revolver;
(5) Pistol;
(6) Handgun; and
(7) Sawed-off shotgun.
(Ordinance 04-02 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 8.801)
Sec. 8.05.032 Discharge prohibited
(a) Offense. A person commits an offense if the person discharges any kind of firearm, or other weapon
designed for the purpose of firing or discharging a shell, cartridge, or projectiles of any kind, regardless of whether
the shell or cartridge is blank or live ammunition, within the city.
(b) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
(1) The person was a law enforcement peace officer acting in the performance of his or her official
duties;
(2) The person was at a shooting range operated by the United States government, the state, or a
political subdivision of the state;
(3) The person was using blank cartridges for a show or theatrical production, or for signal or
ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or by a military organization;
(4) The person discharged the weapon in the lawful protection of life or property as defined in the
penal statutes of the state;
(5) The person was at a shooting sports competition or event within the city which competition or
event had been approved or permitted by the city council and police chief of the city;
(6) The person is a certified gunsmith and discharged the weapon for testing in a manner which does
not pose a threat to the lives or property of others, and which has been approved or permitted by the
police chief of the city.
(Ordinance 04-02 adopted 1/20/04; 2001 Code, sec. 8.802)
ARTICLE 8.06 PROHIBITED SMOKING MATERIALS
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
For purposes of this article:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/435
Prohibited smoking material. Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking
purposes, whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof, if it includes any of the
following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
(1) Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and
homologues;
(3) (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-210 or HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018, Spice or K2);
(5) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
(6) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081);
(7) N-benzylpiperazine, commonly known as BZP;
(8) 1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine, commonly known as TFMPP;
(9) Any other synthetic cannabinoid; or
(10) Any similar substance which when inhaled or otherwise ingested produces intoxication,
stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, or irrational behavior or in any manner changes, distorts or disturbs
the auditory, visual, or mental process and the product or substance had no other apparent legitimate
purpose for consumers.
(Ordinance 10-37 adopted 10/19/10; 2001 Code, sec. 8.901)
Sec. 8.06.002 Use, possession, purchase or sale prohibited
It shall be unlawful to use, possess, purchase, sell, gift, barter, publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, gift or
barter a prohibited smoking material within the city limits. (Ordinance 10-37 adopted 10/19/10; 2001 Code, sec.
8.902)
Sec. 8.06.003 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of section 8.06.002 if the use of the prohibited smoking
material is at the direction of or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to
prescribe controlled substances within the state.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of section 8.06.002 if the use of the prohibited smoking
material is at the direction or under the supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or ensure
compliance with this article.
(c) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of section 8.06.002 if an individual charged with a violation
can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious
undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long-standing historic membership supported
by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the state.
(Ordinance 10-37 adopted 10/19/10; 2001 Code, sec. 8.903)
ARTICLE 8.07 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in this article unless otherwise indicated:
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/435
Enforcement officer. The regularly salaried, full-time city employee tasked by the city manager with the
administration of this article.
Junked vehicle.
(1) A vehicle that:
(A) Is self-propelled; and
(B) Is:
(i) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(ii) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
a. Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
b. Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(2) For purposes of this article, “junked vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This
article applies only to:
(A) A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate;
(B) An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft
identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration
regulations in 14 CFR part 47; or
(C) A watercraft that:
(i) Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and
(ii) Is not a watercraft described by section 31.055 of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Code,
as amended.
Motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or
special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle
for historic interest.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.201; Ordinance 2016-04 adopted 2/2/16; Ordinance adopting
2017 Code)
Sec. 8.07.002 Declaration of nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or
public right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of public property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates fire hazards;
(5) Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/435
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.202)
Sec. 8.07.003 Notice
(a) Prior to any action being taken to abate and remove a junked vehicle constituting a public nuisance from
private property, public property or a public right-of-way, not less than 10 days' notice shall be given, except as
hereinafter provided, to the following parties:
(1) The last known registered owner of the junked vehicle as shown on the certificate of title;
(2) Any lienholder of record; and
(3) The owner or occupant of the property upon which the junked vehicle is located or the owner or
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located.
(b) The notice shall be either personally delivered, mailed by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or
delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service. The notice shall state the
following:
(1) The nature of the public nuisance;
(2) That it must be removed and abated not later than the 10th day after the date on which the notice
was mailed;
(3) That any request for a hearing must be made in writing before the 10-day period expires; and
(4) That failure to abate the nuisance, request a hearing or attend the hearing, if requested,
constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their
consent to disposal for the junked vehicle under the terms of the Texas Transportation Code concerning
the disposal of junked vehicles.
(c) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be
placed on the junked vehicle, or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.
(d) If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered delivered; however, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued
to a date not earlier than 11 days after the date of the return of the notice.
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.203)
Sec. 8.07.004 Hearing; issuance of order
(a) The owner of the vehicle or occupant of the premises may, within the 10-day period after the service of
notice required by section 8.07.003 to abate the nuisance, request the city secretary, either in person or in writing,
to set a date and time to appear before the municipal court for the public hearing to determine whether the person
is in violation of this article. If a hearing is requested within 10 days after service of notice to abate the nuisance,
the junked vehicle shall not be abated by the city until ordered to do so by the municipal court.
(b) At the public hearing, the municipal court shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests
and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city employees and interested persons relative to such
alleged public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(c) At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be
inoperable.
(d) Following the public hearing, the municipal court shall consider all evidence and determine whether the
vehicle, or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the municipal court finds that a public
nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that notice requirements proved
[provided] in this article have been met, the municipal court judge shall make a written order setting forth his or her
findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/435
(e) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance
must include:
(1) The vehicle's description;
(2) The vehicle's vehicle identification number;
(3) The vehicle's license plate number; and
(4) A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with the Texas Transportation
Code.
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.204)
Sec. 8.07.005 Abatement by city
If no hearing is requested prior to the expiration of 10 days after the notice required by section 8.07.003 was
served or in the event the municipal court orders abatement of the nuisance after notice and a hearing, the
enforcement officer or any duly authorized person may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the
junked vehicle after the issuance of an order meeting the requirements of section 8.07.004. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, however, procedures for abatement and removal of a junked vehicle must be at the direction of a
regularly salaried, full-time city employee. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.205)
Sec. 8.07.006 Vehicle not to be made operable after removal
After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this article, it shall not be reconstructed or made
operable again. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.206)
Sec. 8.07.007 Notice to state department of transportation
No later than the 5th day after the date of removal of the junked vehicle pursuant to this article, notice must be
given to the state department of transportation. Such notice must identify the vehicle. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted
1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.207)
Sec. 8.07.008 Relocation of vehicle
After the city has sent notice in accordance with section 8.07.003, the relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public
nuisance to another location in the city has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public
nuisance at the new location. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.208)
Sec. 8.07.009 Disposal of vehicle
Any junked vehicle taken into custody by the city or any duly authorized person pursuant to a provision of this
article shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas
Transportation Code. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.209)
Sec. 8.07.010 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is:
(1) Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or
other public or private property; or
(2) Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor
vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any,
are:
(A) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(B) Not a health hazard; and
(C) Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly
growing trees, or shrubbery.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/435
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.210)
Sec. 8.07.011 Violations; penalty
(a) In lieu of or in addition to following the abatement proceedings set forth in this article, the city may pursue the
filing of a criminal complaint against the owner or occupant of the property in the municipal court for violation of this
article or chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 8.07.002
hereof. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with state law. Each
day an offense occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.211; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 8.07.012 Removal with permission of owner or occupant
If, within 10 days of receipt of notice from the city in accordance with section 8.07.003 to abate the nuisance, the
owner or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the city for removal of the junked motor
vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered in compliance with provisions of this
article. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 8.212)
Sec. 8.07.013 Right of removal from streets preserved
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances or other laws that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public
property which is abandoned or which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. (Ordinance 09-02 adopted 1/6/09; 2001
Code, sec. 8.213)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policy manual adopted
The city council hereby adopts the personnel policy manual dated March 27, 2017, as the official policy of the city
with regard to personnel administration. A copy of the manual shall be permanently on file in the office of the city
secretary and shall become a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein. (Ordinance 2011-12 adopted
4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 9.201; Ordinance 2017-09 adopted 3/27/17)
Sec. 9.01.002 Classification and compensation plan
The city council hereby adopts the classification and compensation plan dated November, 1999, as the official
policy of the city with regard to salary administration. A copy of the plan shall be permanently on file in the office of
the city secretary and shall become a part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ordinance 99-15 adopted 11/2/99; 2001 Code, art. 9.300)
Sec. 9.01.003 Job descriptions
The job descriptions for positions within the city shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 95-6-A adopted 11/21/95; 2001 Code, art. 9.800)
ARTICLE 9.02 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.02.001–9.02.030 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/435
Division 2. City Manager†
Sec. 9.02.031 Council to deal with administration through city manager
(a) Neither councilmembers nor the mayor shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or removal
from employment by the city manager or any of the manager's subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry,
the council and its members shall deal with the administration through the city manager, and neither the council
nor the mayor shall give orders to subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately.
(b) The city council, however, shall have the duty to appoint those municipal officers specified in section 22.071,
Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 2011-17, sec. 2, adopted 5/3/11; 2001 Code, sec. 9.404; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 9.02.032–9.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. City Secretary*
Sec. 9.02.061 Office ratified
The office of the city secretary is hereby ratified. (1976 Code, sec. 1-51; 2001 Code, sec. 9.101)
Sec. 9.02.062 Appointment
The city secretary shall be appointed by the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 1-52; 2001 Code, sec. 9.102)
Charter reference–Appointment of city secretary, sec. 4.08.
Sec. 9.02.063 To serve until successor is appointed and qualified
The person appointed city secretary shall serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. (1976 Code,
sec. 1-53; 2001 Code, sec. 9.103)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department
Sec. 9.03.031 Created
There is hereby created the police department of the city. (Ordinance 09-59 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec.
9.901)
Sec. 9.03.032 Composition; appointment of police officers and employees
The city manager, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint the chief of police. The department shall be
composed of the chief of police and such other officers, patrolmen and employees as the chief of police may
determine with the approval of the city manager and subject to a budget approved by the city council. The chief of
police and all other police officers must hold an appropriate license or certification as required by state law.
(Ordinance 09-59 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec. 9.902; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 9.03.033 Authority of chief of police
The chief of police shall have direction and control of the police department subject to the supervision of the city
manager, federal and state laws, and rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by the city council. The chief of
police shall have the authority to promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures for the operation of the police
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/435
department and the conduct of police department personnel. (Ordinance 09-59 adopted 10/6/09; 2001 Code, sec.
9.903; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 9.03.034 Powers and duties of police officers
The chief of police and all police officers have the powers, rights, and jurisdiction as prescribed by state law. It
shall be their duty to prevent the commission of offenses against the laws of the state and against the ordinances
and regulations of the city; to obey, observe, and enforce all such laws, ordinances, and regulations; to detect and
arrest offenders of all such laws, ordinances, and regulations; to preserve the good order of the city; and to secure
the inhabitants of the city from violence, injury, and property damage. (Ordinance 09-59 adopted 10/6/09; 2001
Code, sec. 9.904)
Secs. 9.03.035–9.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve Force
Sec. 9.03.061 Established
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city, hereafter referred to as the “police reserves.” (1976
Code, sec. 20-1; 2001 Code, sec. 9.601)
Sec. 9.03.062 Composition; number of members
The police reserves shall be an auxiliary police force composed of volunteers who shall serve without pay. The
chief of police shall establish the size, composition and organization of the police reserves, which shall not exceed
fifteen (15) in number. (1976 Code, sec. 20-2; 2001 Code, sec. 9.602)
Sec. 9.03.063 Authority of chief of police and city council
The police reserves shall function under the general direction and control of the chief of police, and also subject to
such rules, regulations, and orders as may be promulgated from time to time by the chief of police or the city
council. (1976 Code, sec. 20-3; 2001 Code, sec. 9.603)
Sec. 9.03.064 Application for membership; qualifications
Each applicant for membership in the police reserves shall make application on a form to be prescribed by the
chief of police. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character,
temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and the physical ability to perform the duties of the
position for which the applicant seeks appointment. (1976 Code, sec. 20-4; 2001 Code, sec. 9.604)
Sec. 9.03.065 Additional standards for members
The chief of police shall establish qualifications for police reserve officers which shall meet at least the minimal
physical, mental, educational and moral standards established by the state commission on law enforcement officer
standards and education for police reserve officers, but may be stricter than such standards. All applicants shall be
checked by the federal identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of such person. A list of qualified
applicants and appointees together with their records shall be maintained by the police department. (1976 Code,
20-5; 2001 Code, sec. 9.605)
Sec. 9.03.066 Appointment and removal of members
Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by the chief of police from the list of qualified applicants
and may be removed at any time at his discretion. An appointment to the reserve force must be approved by the
city council before the person appointed may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. (Ordinance 2011-
14 adopted 4/19/11; 2001 Code, sec. 9.606)
Sec. 9.03.067 Training of applicants
Prior to performing any duties as a reserve police officer, each police reserve applicant shall receive training
meeting the requirements of the state commission on law enforcement standards and education and shall apply for
certification by such commission as a reserve police officer. The names of reserve police applicants who have
received certifications from the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education shall be
submitted to the city council for approval for duty. (1976 Code, sec. 20-7; 2001 Code, sec. 9.607)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/435
Sec. 9.03.068 Relationship to regular police force
Members of the police reserve force shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall
in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements for
such regular police officers. (1976 Code, sec. 20-8; 2001 Code, sec. 9.608)
Sec. 9.03.069 Supervision generally
The chief of police shall be the head of the police reserves and the members of the reserve force shall be under
the authority, control and command of the chief of police, and such subordinates as he shall designate. (1976
Code, sec. 20-9; 2001 Code, sec. 9.609)
Sec. 9.03.070 Rules and regulations
The chief of police may, by written order, establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserves, to fix
specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from
time to time and command members of the police reserves to obey the instructions of a regular police officer in
carrying out their duties. (1976 Code, sec. 20-10; 2001 Code, sec. 9.610)
Sec. 9.03.071 Uniforms and badges
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police reserves and direct the
manner in which the same shall be worn. Each individual reserve officer shall bear the cost of uniforms and
badges, but shall be reimbursed for such expenses after twelve (12) months' consecutive service. (1976 Code,
sec. 20-11; 2001 Code, sec. 9.611)
Sec. 9.03.072 Duties
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of
police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the
maintenance of peace and order during periods of duty designated by the chief of police. The chief may prescribe
other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserves not inconsistent with the
provisions of this division. (1976 Code, sec. 20-12; 2001 Code, sec. 9.612)
Sec. 9.03.073 Power of arrest
A member of the police reserves shall have the power of arrest only while he is on duty and when off duty shall
have no power of arrest not possessed by any other citizen. (1976 Code, sec. 20-13; 2001 Code, sec. 9.613)
Sec. 9.03.074 Entry upon private property
No member of the police reserves shall break into or otherwise forcefully enter upon private property or enter the
dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of a member of the police department who then and
there requests his aid in the enforcement of the law. (1976 Code, sec. 20-14; 2001 Code, sec. 9.614)
Sec. 9.03.075 Carrying weapons
No person appointed to the police reserves may carry a weapon while serving as a police reserve officer except at
the express direction of the chief of police. The chief of police may authorize members of the police reserves to
carry arms only in discharging official duties in active service. (1976 Code, sec. 20-15; 2001 Code, sec. 9.615)
Sec. 9.03.076 Compensation
No reserve police officer appointed pursuant to this division shall be entitled to compensation of service. (1976
Code, sec. 20-16; 2001 Code, sec. 9.616)
Sec. 9.03.077 Status as police officers
Reserve officers of the police reserves shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties,
subject at all times to the direction, control, and supervisory authority of the chief of police. (1976 Code, sec. 20-
17; 2001 Code, sec. 9.617)
Sec. 9.03.078 Termination of membership
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/435
Membership of any person in the police reserve may be terminated by the chief of police at any time with or
without cause. Any member may resign from the police reserves at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the
chief of police of his resignation. (1976 Code, sec. 20-18; 2001 Code, sec. 9.618)
Sec. 9.03.079 Part-time officers
In addition to the positions provided for herein, there shall also exist the paid position of part-time officers.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 9.619)
ARTICLE 9.04 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.04.001 Participation in system authorized
(a) The city council, on behalf of the city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the
employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created, except those employees of the fire
department who are included in or who are eligible to be included in membership in firemen's relief and retirement
fund of the city, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act, and all of the
benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees.
(b) The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that
the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system.
(c) Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition
of his employment.
(d) In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement
System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at
the rate of five percent (5%) of the full earnings of each employee of said departments.
(e) Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed “prior service credit” (as defined in subsection
6(b) of section VI of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the “base prior service credit” of
such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in said act.
(f) For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of Texas
Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member
at the time of his retirement, a sum that is two hundred percent (200%) of such member's accumulated deposits
for such month of employment, and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current
service accumulation fund.
(g) The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be
deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of the
TMRS Act, and said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city
the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the
average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and
all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System.
(h) Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become
effective on October 1, 1981.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-121; 2001 Code, sec. 9.501)
Sec. 9.04.002 Supplemental retirement benefits authorized
(a) The city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city
(as above defined) participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System, as provided by chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature, and all the benefits and
obligations of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(b) The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that
the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above-mentioned departments participate in the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/435
supplemental benefits fund of said system.
(c) Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department in said fund shall, as a condition of his employment, be covered into the
supplemental benefits fund of said system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new
employees to said fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund.
(d) The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of the city
as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System; provided that the rate of
contribution to said fund shall not exceed one-half of one percentum (1/2%) of the earnings of the employees of
the city who are covered under said fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of
trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe.
(e) Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental benefits fund shall be effective October
1, 1981.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-122; 2001 Code, sec. 9.502)
Sec. 9.04.003 Supplemental death benefits authorized
(a) The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms
provided for in section XIX of the TMRS Act (article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended) for each of
the city's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death
benefits as provided in said section XIX for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this
city.
(b) The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this section, and
of the participation of the city in said fund.
(c) Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund
shall be effective on October 1, 1981.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-123; 2001 Code, sec. 9.503)
Sec. 9.04.004 Additional rights, credits and benefits
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410 of subtitle G of title
110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular
Session, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city adopts the following provisions
affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall
herein be referred to as the “system”):
(1) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service
retirement annuity, if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for
one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a
like provision under section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act.
(2) If a “vested member,” as that term is defined in section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die
before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member
has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in the
event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the
system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and
conditions of said section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such
time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse
may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during
the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived
and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the
member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse.
(3) At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom
subsection (2) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/435
accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise
payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first
monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the
account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
(4) The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions
heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(5) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a
“standard occupational disability annuity” under section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an “optional
occupational disability retirement annuity” under section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making
application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees
of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees: (i) that
the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's
employment; (ii) that the disability is likely to be permanent; and (iii) that the member should be retired.
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 64.409 of the
TMRS Act.
(6) The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) above
are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the
TMRS Act.
(b) This section shall become effective on the first day of January 1, 1923 [1988] provided that it has previously
been determined by the actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the municipality accumulation fund,
including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city within its maximum contribution rate and within
its amortization period.
(Ordinance 87-7 adopted 12/15/87; 2001 Code, sec. 9.504)
Sec. 9.04.005 Credit for active military service
(a) Pursuant to section 853.502, subchapter F, of chapter 853, title 8, Government Code, as amended, the city
hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the
United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall
be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said subchapter F, and the
amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505.
(b) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the
number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in the
municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the
accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service
matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit.
(Ordinance 03-25 adopted 10/7/03; 2001 Code, sec. 9.505)
Sec. 9.04.006 Authorization of restricted prior service credit (2003)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.305 of subtitle G of title 8, Texas Government Code, as
amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
(hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of the city shall
receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities
described in said section 853.305, provided that:
(1) The person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and
(2) The service meets the requirements of said section 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement
eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be
used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/435
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required
under said section 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(Ordinance 03-26 adopted 10/7/03; 2001 Code, sec. 9.506)
Sec. 9.04.007 Additional rights (2006)
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of section 854.202(g) of subtitle G of title 8, Texas Government Code, as
amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city, adopts the following provisions
affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the
“system”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service
retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for
one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g) of the TMRS
Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has:
(A) Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and
(B) Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act,
chapter 551, Texas Government Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted
and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(b) This section shall become effective on the first day October, 2006.
(Ordinance 06-52 adopted 9/28/06; 2001 Code, sec. 9.507)
Sec. 9.04.008 Authorization of updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (2005)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8, Government
Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system
in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service
in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall
be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of
the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is
eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with the city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service
and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and
was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be
credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set
forth in said section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated service
credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit,
special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits
required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current
service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
(f) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to
provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees
and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or
increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/435
(g) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is
13 months before the effective date of this section.
(h) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(i) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(j) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant
is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(k) Dates of allowances and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement
annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2006, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the
system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder
on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section
853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the
determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(l) Increased deposit rate. All employees of the city who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
shall make deposits to the system at the rate of 6% of their individual earnings effective the 1st day of October,
2005.
(Ordinance 05-31 adopted 8/16/05; 2001 Code, sec. 9.508)
Sec. 9.04.009 Authorization of updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (2006)
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8, Government
Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system
in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service
in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall
be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of
the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is
eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service
and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and
was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be
credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set
forth in said section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated service
credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit,
special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits
required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current
service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
(f) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to
provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees
and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or
increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(g) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/435
based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in consumer price index for all urban consumers, from
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is
13 months before the effective date of this section.
(h) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(i) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(j) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant
is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(k) Dates of allowances and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement
annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2007, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the
system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder
on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section
853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the
determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(l) Increased deposit rate. All employees of the city who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
shall make deposits to the system at the rate of 7% of their individual earnings effective 1st day of October, 2006.
(m) Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become
effective on the first day of October, 2006.
(Ordinance 06-49 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 9.509)
Sec. 9.04.010 Current and prior service contributions
Pursuant to section 855.407(g) of the TMRS act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service
contributions to its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total
compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall
annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the
city under the TMRS act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of
the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS act limiting the combined
rate of city contributions. (Ordinance 2017-23 adopted 8/14/17)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted; extension to extraterritorial jurisdiction
The subdivision ordinance, Ordinance 99-3, passed by the city council on February 16, 1999, previously published
as chapter 10, exhibit A, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances, is hereby continued in force and effect, and is hereby
extended to apply to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The subdivision ordinance is incorporated herein by
reference and is included at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance
and the technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only
nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and
denoted by a history note following the amended section. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/435
notation. Any other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Ordinance 09-66 adopted
10/6/09; 2001 Code, art. 10.100; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 10.03 DEVELOPMENT PLATS†
Sec. 10.03.001 Required; exceptions
Pursuant to the requirements of this code and subchapter B of chapter 212 of the Local Government Code, every
person who proposes the development of a single tract of land within the corporate limits of the city or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be required to submit a development plat of said tract and obtain approval of said
plat prior to the commencement of construction upon said tract, and no construction shall commence upon said
tract prior to the filing of a plat of said property in the county plat records. Development means the new
construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement. However, if a
person is required under the subdivision regulations of the city (chapter 10, exhibit A), or other statute, to file a
subdivision plat, a development plat under this article is not required in addition to the subdivision plat. (Ordinance
02-15 adopted 5/7/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.201)
Sec. 10.03.002 Dedication requirements
(a) Generally. Every owner of property for which a development plat has been submitted for approval shall be
required to dedicate to the city that portion of such property required to serve the property with adequate streets,
roadways, thoroughfares, utilities, drainage improvements, or other public purposes, and such dedication
requirements, as imposed, shall be a prerequisite to plat approval.
(b) Effect of plat approval or disapproval on dedication. The approval of a plat is not considered an acceptance
of any proposed dedication and does not impose on the municipality any duty regarding the maintenance or
improvement of any dedicated parts until the city makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by entry,
use, or improvement. The disapproval of a plat is considered a refusal by the municipality of the offered dedication
indicated on the plat.
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.202)
State law reference–Effect of approval on dedication, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.011.
Sec. 10.03.003 Approval procedure
The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all development plats shall proceed through the following
steps:
(1) Pre-submission conference. Meeting between the developer and the city manager.
(2) Preliminary development plat. Approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council.
(3) Final development plat. Approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council.
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.203; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.03.004 Pre-submission conference
This step is intended to be of mutual benefit to the developer and the community by determining the suitability and
time of development of a tract of land in relation to availability of services and facilities. This step also involves
considerable development planning which precedes actual preparation of the preliminary development plat. The
developer's engineer, surveyor, or planner shall present the proposal to the city manager, who shall inform the
developer's engineer, surveyor or planner of the details regarding platting procedures and requirements.
(1) Actions required by the developer.
(A) Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use.
(B) Proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, streets, and other
improvements.
(2) Actions required of the city manager.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/435
(A) Determine existing zoning of the tract if within the city and determine if a zoning change is
involved.
(B) Determine the adequacy of, and possible effects on, existing or proposed schools, parks,
and other public uses.
(C) Determine the relationship of the proposed development to such existing and proposed
facilities as major streets, availability of utility systems, adequacy of accessibility, and any unusual
problems such as drainage, topography or flooding.
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.204; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.03.005 Preliminary development plat requirements
(a) Generally. The preliminary plat phase of land development includes detailed planning, submittal, review, and
approval of the preliminary development plat. To avoid delay in processing his application, the developer's
engineer or surveyor should provide the city manager with all information essential to determine the character and
general acceptability of the proposed development.
(b) Zoning. The development should be designed within the requirements for the specific zoning district within
which it is located. Any change in zoning required in relation to the preliminary development plat shall have been
adopted by the city council prior to preliminary development plat approval by the commission.
(c) Preliminary development plat submission. Upon an agreeable completion of the pre-application conference
step, the developer shall prepare and submit the preliminary development plat to the city manager not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to the commission meeting at which such plat is to be considered. The following
information, certified by a registered professional land surveyor, in accordance with the requirements of this code,
shall be submitted:
(1) The developer shall submit seven (7) copies of the preliminary development plat showing the
general features of the proposed development, and a digital file of the preliminary development plat in
Adobe Systems PDF format on compact disc, to the city planning commission, by filing the same with
the development services department at least thirty (30) days prior to the regular meeting.
(2) This preliminary development plat shall be drawn on a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred
(100) feet or larger and shall show the following:
(A) The outline of the tract that is proposed to be developed, with boundary dimensions, and
any zoning prefix designation.
(B) The proposed plan of development, showing streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements, parks,
building lines, etc., with principal dimensions. The preliminary development plat shall cover all of
the tract intended to be developed.
(C) The location, width, and name of existing streets and any blocks, lots, alleys, easements,
building lines, watercourses, floodplain, boundary of tree cover, or other natural features in the
area affected, with principal dimensions, and any other significant information on all sides for a
distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(D) The names of proposed streets. The location of the nearest existing sewers, water and gas
mains, and other public utilities if any. If none near vicinity, so state.
(E) A proposed general plan for drainage to include calculation of the 100-year storm for any
stream, creek, or channel and the limits of any floodplain either as designated by FEMA mapping
or limits as may be determined by the owner's registered professional civil engineer.
(F) The proposed drainage plan shall include: a topographical map in sufficient detail showing
all abutting drainage areas contributing to the stormwater flows within the proposed development,
preliminary plans for drainage improvements within the proposed development, and all
calculations relating to the design of the drainage plan and its impact on the downstream system.
(G) The north point, scale, and date.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/435
(H) The name of the owner or owners and the signature, date, and seal of the registered
professional land surveyor who has prepared the preliminary development plat.
(I) A vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more than one thousand (1,000) feet to the inch
which shall show all existing developments, streets, and tracts of acreage in the area.
(J) The contours shall be intervals of five (5) feet or less.
(K) The proposed plan of improvements and utilities to be constructed in the development
prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be shown with indication of street widths and
utility line sizes. The accurate location of any existing utilities within the development shall be
shown on the preliminary development plat.
(L) The following certificate shall be placed on the preliminary development plat:
APPROVED PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAT
Chairman Date
Mayor Date
Planning Commission
Secretary Date
City Secretary Date
Planning Commission
(M) One copy of the signed plat shall be returned to the developer.
(d) Preliminary development plat review.
(1) On receipt of the preliminary development plat, the city manager shall:
(A) Review the preliminary development plat for compliance with public objectives, giving
special attention to design principles and standards, to streets and thoroughfares, and to existing
and proposed zoning and land use of the tract and adjacent tracts.
(B) Distribute copies of the preliminary development plat to the following offices for review,
when appropriate:
(i) City departments and the city's consulting engineer.
(ii) Public utilities.
(iii) County engineer and/or school district (when concerned with a specific plat).
(2) The reviewing offices will transmit their recommendations to the city manager, who will then
summarize the recommendations of the reviewing officer and present them to the planning commission
for their consideration in action on the preliminary development plat.
(e) Preliminary development plat approval. If the requirements of this code have been met, the commission shall
render a decision thereon at the next regular meeting of the commission. Such decision may consist of approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval. The recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be sent to
the city council for their final approval and acceptance of the preliminary development plat. The commission shall
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/435
act on the plat within the thirty (30) day period following the filing of the plat with the city manager. The city council
shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the commission.
(1) The approval or conditional approval of a preliminary development plat by the council is the
authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final development plat and application to consider
the final development plat. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary development plat does not
constitute the acceptance of a development or the improvements placed therein.
(2) The conditional approval of a preliminary development plat by the council is the approval of the
plat subject to compliance with all conditions prescribed by the council. All conditions prescribed by the
council shall be furnished in writing to the developer within fourteen (14) days of council action.
Compliance with the conditions imposed shall be reflected on the “approved preliminary development
plat” to be submitted following council approval, as set forth in subsection (5) below, and on the final
development plat and related documents required for consideration of the final development plat.
Failure to comply with the conditions imposed shall constitute disapproval of the preliminary
development plat.
(3) The disapproval of a preliminary development plat by the council shall be final. Written notice of
the reasons for disapproval shall be provided to the developer within fourteen (14) days of council
action.
(4) Council approval or conditional approval shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of council action. If within the twelve (12) month period no application is made for final
development plat consideration, the preliminary development plat shall become null and void. The
developer may request and the council, at its discretion, may grant an extension of the time limit for a
specified period of time.
(5) Upon council approval of the preliminary development plat, the developer shall provide to the city
five (5) copies of the plat, with revisions needed to comply with a conditional approval (if no revisions
are necessary, the five (5) copies of the plat originally submitted will suffice), and bearing the following:
APPROVED PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAT
Chairman Date
Mayor Date
Planning Commission
Secretary Date
City Secretary Date
Planning Commission
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/09; 2001 Code, sec. 10.205; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.03.006 Final development plat requirements
(This step includes the final design of the development, engineering of public improvements, and submittal of the
final development plat by the developer.)
(a) Final development plat submission. After the preliminary development plat has been approved by the council
and any or all conditions are complied with, the developer's registered professional land surveyor shall prepare
and file with the city manager, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/435
which the plat is to be considered, a final plat which shall comply with the requirements of this code and shall
include the following:
(1) The developer shall submit ten (10) copies and two (2) mylars of the final development plat, and a
digital file of the final development plat in Adobe Systems PDF and AutoCAD DWG (or DXF) format on
compact disc to the development services department.
(2) The final development plat shall be proper for filing for record in the office of the county clerk with
the following information given:
(A) The name or names of the owner and developer.
(B) The name of the registered professional land surveyor who prepared the plat.
(C) The name of the street (to conform whenever possible to existing street names).
(D) The north point, date, acreage of the lot, and scale.
(E) An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances referenced to the
corner of an existing survey or established development, with complete and accurate field notes
of said boundaries. The lines with dimensions of all adjacent lands and alleys, and easements in
adjacent properties shall be shown in dashed lines.
(F) Each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of
the external configuration of the building, structure, or improvement.
(G) Each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property.
(H) The dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property
intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent to the street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part.
(I) All necessary dimensions, including linear, angular, and curvilinear, and other surveying
information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground with the linear and curvilinear
dimensions shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
(J) The angular dimensions shall be shown by true bearings. The length of all straight lines,
deflection angles, radii, tangents, and central angle of curves shall be shown for the centerline of
the street. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points and points of curve of lot lines. All lots
on curves shall be shown with curve length dimensions based on arc definitions.
(K) All survey monuments shall be shown on the plat.
(L) Certification by a registered professional land surveyor, licensed by the state, placed on the
plat as follows:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
THAT I, ____________, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and
accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon shall be properly
placed, under my personal supervision, in accordance with the regulations of the Bridgeport
City Code.
(SEAL)
(M) Certificate of approval by the planning commission to be placed on the plat in a manner
that will allow the filling in of the certificate:
I hereby certify that the above and foregoing Final Development Plat of ____________ was
approved this ______ day of ____________, 20___, by the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
Chairman __________________ City Secretary __________________
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/435
Said plat shall be subject to all the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Bridgeport.
Witness my hand this ______ day of ____________, 20___.
__________________, Secretary
(N) An instrument of dedication, signed and acknowledged by the owner or owners and by all
other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property, showing all restrictions,
reservations, and/or easements if any, to be imposed and reserved in connection with the plat.
Such restrictions shall include the following provisions:
No house, dwelling unit, or other structure shall be constructed on this lot by the owner or
any other person until:
(i) Such time as the developer and/or owner has complied with all requirements of the
subdivision regulations of the city regarding improvements within the area so platted,
including the actual installation of streets with the required base and paving, curb and gutter,
drainage structures, storm sewers, and water and sewer utilities, all according to the
specifications of the city; or
(ii) The developer files with the city secretary either a corporate surety bond, escrow
deposit, or irrevocable letter of credit in a sum equal to the cost of such improvements
thereon within the time period established by the city for completion of said improvements.
The developer shall execute an agreement authorizing the city to make or complete said
improvements in the event the developer fails or refuses to make or complete said
improvements within the time so stated for completion thereof. The corporate surety bond,
escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall comply with the following:
a. The sum equal to the cost of improvements shall include all construction costs,
the costs of construction staking, and engineering services related to construction,
including but not limited to periodic administration, and preparation of as-built plans.
The cost estimate for construction and related administration shall be prepared by the
developer's engineer based on currently prevailing private commercial rates and
approved by the city manager.
b. The escrow deposit shall be in the form of a cashier's check payable to the “City
of Bridgeport” escrow account. The city shall open an interest-bearing escrow account
bearing the development name with the city's depository bank or other authorized
investment entity. All interest accrued by said account shall be deposited to the
account. The city shall have the right to use the principal of the escrow deposit and all
accrued interest to make or complete construction of improvements as provided by this
code. The developer may reduce the amount of escrow deposit equal to the cost, less
ten (10) percent thereof, of each major phase of improvements as such phases are
completed and satisfactorily pass all applicable test inspections. The major phases
are: (1) water and sewer utilities; and (2) streets and drainage. The release of any
portion of the escrow deposit shall not include any accrued interest and shall not
constitute final acceptance of the improvements by the city. Upon final completion and
final acceptance of all improvements, the city shall release to the developer the
remaining balance of the escrow deposit for the development along with interest
accrued and paid on the same.
c. An irrevocable letter of credit shall be in a form and drawn from a bank
satisfactory to the city and in the amount equal to the cost of improvements as defined
heretofore. The amount of the irrevocable letter of credit may be reduced by the
developer upon completion of each major phase of construction in the same manner
applicable to the escrow deposit.
d. These restrictions, with respect to improvements, are made to insure the
installation of such improvements and to give notice to the owner of the development
that no house or other building can be constructed until such improvements are
actually made or provided for.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/435
(3) A certificate of dedication of all streets, alleys, and other land intended for public use, signed by
the owner or owners and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property and
acknowledged before a notary public.
(4) A waiver of claim for damages against the city occasioned by the establishment of grades or the
alteration of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to the grades
established in the development.
(5) Receipt showing that all taxes are paid. The final development plat submitted to the planning
commission and to be filed for record with the county clerk shall not show construction or physical
features unless so unusual as to be of significance; except that the shoreline of water areas shall be
shown with the date surveyed.
(6) Two copies of each of the following:
(A) Construction plans and specifications for public improvements.
(B) Report of soil tests and pavement designs.
(C) Executed copies of paving and utility contracts before commencing construction.
(b) Final development plat review. On receipt of the final development plat, the city manager shall check the final
development plat for completeness and conformity to the approved preliminary development plat and prepare and
submit a written recommendation to the planning commission.
(c) Final development plat approval.
(1) Upon filing of the final development plat with the city manager by the developer, the commission
shall render a decision thereon within thirty (30) days. Said decision may consist of approval,
disapproval, or conditional approval. Reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall be stated by
the commission in writing within fourteen (14) days. The recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission shall be sent to the city council for their final approval and acceptance of the final
development plat. When a final development plat is approved with conditions, ten (10) revised prints
shall be submitted showing compliance with the conditions. The city council shall act on the final
development plat within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the commission.
(2) The disapproval of a final development plat by the council shall be final. Written notice of the
reasons for disapproval shall be provided to the developer within fourteen (14) days of council action.
(3) Council approval or conditional approval shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of council action. If within the twelve (12) month period construction has not begun, the final
development plat shall become null and void. The developer may request and the council, at its
discretion, may grant an extension of the time limit for a specified period of time.
(4) Upon council approval of the final development plat, the developer shall provide to the city five (5)
copies of the plat, with revisions needed to comply with a conditional approval, and bearing the
following:
APPROVED FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAT
Chairman Date
Mayor Date
Planning Commission
Secretary Date
City Secretary Date
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/435
Planning Commission
(5) After the final development plat has been approved and has been fully and properly endorsed, the
city secretary shall file the plat with the county clerk.
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 2, adopted 6/2/09; 2001 Code, sec. 10.206; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.03.007 Creation of building site
When applicable, no permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until
a building site, building tract, or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions:
(1) The lot or tract is part of a plat or development plat of record, properly approved by the planning
and zoning commission, and filed in the plat records of the county.
(2) The plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the city council, and compliance
has been made with provisions and improvements approved on such site plan for all utility and
drainage easements, dedication of streets, alleys and other public improvements required to meet the
standards established for the platting of land.
(3) No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used or occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official which signifies compliance to the
appropriate zoning district.
(Ordinance 02-15 adopted 5/7/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.207)
ARTICLE 10.04 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL OF CERTAIN PLATS*
Sec. 10.04.001 Authority of city manager
(a) The city manager shall have the authority to approve:
(1) Amending plats described by section 212.016 of the Texas Local Government Code;
(2) Minor plats involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation
of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; or
(3) A replat pursuant to section 212.0145 of the Texas Local Government Code that does not require
the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
(b) Plats processed under the provisions of this article shall be subject to all applicable regulations contained in
this chapter and all other applicable and pertinent ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 02-33 adopted 11/5/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.301; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.04.002 Withholding of approval
The city manager may, for any reason, elect to withhold approval and present the plat for approval to the municipal
authority responsible for approving plats. (Ordinance 02-33 adopted 11/5/02; 2001 Code, sec. 10.302; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 10.04.003 Referral of plat to approval authority
The city manager shall not disapprove any plat, and shall be required to refer any plat which the city manager
refuses to approve to the municipal authority responsible for approving plats within the time period specified in
section 212.009 of the Texas Local Government Code. (Ordinance 02-33 adopted 11/5/02; 2001 Code, sec.
10.303; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 10.05 ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/435
Sec. 10.05.001 Engineering design manual adopted
All development constructed under the authority of the city's subdivision regulations shall conform to the
specifications contained in the October 2009 edition of the Engineering Design Manual. The October 2009 edition
of the Engineering Design Manual is fully incorporated herein by reference as though copied into this article in its
entirety. The material contained in the Engineering Design Manual shall not be included in the formal codification
of ordinances, but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the development services department of
the city and will be available for inspection and copying during regular business hours. (Ordinance 09-68 adopted
10/20/09; 2001 Code, sec. 10.401)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS
ORDINANCE NO. 99-3
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS, PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING PLATS AND SUBDIVISIONS OF LAND WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS AND
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS; PROVIDING DEFINITIONS;
PROVIDING FOR A PRELIMINARY PLAT; PROVIDING FOR A FINAL PLAT, FRACTIONAL OR REPLATTING
AND PROVIDING FOR FINAL APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS AND FILING PLATS, SUBDIVISION
CONSTRUCTION, ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISIONS AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS; PROVIDING
REGULATIONS FOR STREETS AND ALLEYS, STREET SURFACING, STORM SEWERS, ASSESSMENT FOR
THOROUGHFARE IMPROVEMENTS; PRESCRIBING FEES TO BE CHARGED; ESTABLISHING JURISDICTION
WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY AND WITHIN ONE-HALF (1/2) MILE THEREOF; REPEALING
ANY PART OF ANY ORDINANCE IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ORDINANCE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY
CLAUSE; PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE NOT TO EXCEED THE SUM OF
TWO HUNDRED DOLLARS ($200.00) FOR EACH OFFENSE AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, by Article 974a, Texas Revised Civil Statutes, the laws of the State of Texas provide that every owner
of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within one-half mile of the corporate limits of any city in
the State of Texas, who may divide the same in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of
any tract of land or any addition to any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and
streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
thereon or adjacent thereto, shall cause a plat to be made thereof which shall accurately describe all of said
subdivision or addition by metes and bounds and locate the same with respect to an original corner of the original
survey of which it is a part, giving the dimensions thereof of said subdivision or addition, and the dimensions of all
streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other portions of same intended to be dedicated to public use, or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, being so empowered by law, does hereby
promulgate and establish such a subdivision plan for the City of Bridgeport, Texas, and this Ordinance shall
hereinafter be known as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS:
SECTION 1: DIVISION OF LAND TO BE UNDER SUPERVISION OF THE CITY
A. All land within jurisdiction of City not heretofore subdivided.
B. No officer or employee of the City shall authorize work unless regulations have been complied with.
C. The subdivider may avail himself of the advice and assistance of the City Planning Commission.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 2: WITHHOLDING IMPROVEMENTS
City shall withhold all City improvements and issuance of building permits from subdivisions not officially approved
by the City Council. No improvements should be initiated, nor contracts executed until approval of the City Council
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/435
has been given. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
A. City - means the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
B. City Council - means the elected Mayor and Council persons of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
C. Commission - means the appointed members of the Planning Commission.
D. City Planner - means the planner reporting to the City of Bridgeport.
E. City Engineer - means the engineer representing the City of Bridgeport.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 4: PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION
A. In order to allow orderly processing of a proposed subdivision, the procedures discussed in the following
sections shall be followed. In general, the steps necessary for the subdivision shall include:
1. Preparation of Sketch Plan and Preliminary Plat.
2. Annexation by the City Council.
3. Approval of a land study by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
4. Approval of the final plat and plans by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
5. Approval of the final construction plans by the City Engineer.
6. Filing of approved plat with the City of Bridgeport and the County Clerk and the recording of all
executed easements, dedications, and other documents required to be filed of record.
7. Completion of construction and acceptance of all improvements by the City and submission of asbuilt
drawings.
This procedure may be varied at the discretion of the City Council. For those areas to be subdivided which lie
outside the corporate limits, but are being submitted for review and approval to satisfy the requirements of
extraterritorial jurisdiction and Article 974(a), Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes, the provisions concerning
annexation and zoning may be deleted. All other provisions shall remain in force.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 5: ANNEXATION
If the property is not within the City Limits of Bridgeport and the owner desires that it be annexed so as to be
qualified to receive City services, when available, owner must petition the City for annexation through lawful
annexation proceedings. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 6: PREAPPLICATION
The subdivider shall present such general subdivision information as will outline the existing conditions of the site,
including utilities and available community facilities. A simple rough sketch shall indicate the location of the
proposed subdivision, number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, commercial areas, park and
playground areas, proposed protective covenants or restrictions and proposed utilities and street improvements.
At the time the sketch plan is presented to the City Staff, a preliminary conference should be held for the general
comments and clarifications which are usually necessary. At that time, the subdivider shall purchase copies of all
forms, publications, design criteria and standards available from the City for his reference and for the benefit of his
engineer.
After meeting with the City Staff, the subdivider may, at his option, request a preliminary hearing with the Planning
Commission for clarification of unresolved questions which might affect preparation of the preliminary planning
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/435
information.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 7: LAND STUDY
In the development of any tract to be annexed by the City, either by sections or as one subdivision, the City
Engineer can request the Developer to submit a Land Study to the City. Submittal to the City shall include a letter
of transmittal requesting review and payment of the required filing fee.
The purpose of the Land Study is to allow the Planning Commission and the City Council to review proposed major
thoroughfare and collector street patterns, land use, and the property's relationship to adjoining subdivisions or
properties. The study shall be prepared as follows:
A. The study shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 200' or larger.
B. The lower right-hand corner shall contain a title block clearly showing the proposed name of the
subdivision, name and address of the subdivider and the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the
design or survey, scale, date the drawing was prepared, and the location of the tract according to the
abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas.
C. The study shall clearly show the limits of the tract and scale distances. True North shall be clearly
indicated.
D. The study shall show the names of adjacent subdivisions or the name of record or [of] owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
E. The study shall contain the location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other
public ways within or adjacent to the tract[,] existing permanent buildings, railroad rights-of-way, and
topography with existing drainage channels or creeks, and other important features such as political
subdivisions, corporate limits and school district boundaries.
F. The study shall show the layout and width of proposed thoroughfares and collector streets and
shall show a general configuration of proposed residential streets.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 8: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND PLANS
A. The developer shall submit seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat, a digital file of the preliminary plat in
Adobe Systems PDF format on compact disc, and four (4) copies of construction plans of the subdivision to the
City Planning Commission by filing the same with the Development Services Department at least thirty (30) days
prior to the regular meeting. The preliminary plat shall carry the legend “Preliminary Plat - For Review Only.”
Submittal shall include letter of transmittal requesting review and the required filing fees.
B. The purpose of the submittal is to allow the City staff, Planning Commission and city engineer to review
overall platting and plan review of the tract, and street patterns within the subdivision for conformance with the
requirements of the City. It also provides the City an opportunity to make preliminary estimates of City participation,
if any, on street costs in the subdivision.
C. The preliminary plat and plans shall be prepared as follows:
1. Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' or larger.
2. It shall contain the name of the proposed subdivision, the name and address of the subdivider and
the Engineer or surveyor responsible for the design or survey, tract designation, and other descriptions
according to the abstract and survey records of Wise County, Texas.
3. North point, scale and date.
4. The boundary lines of tract, accurate in scale, shall be shown.
5. It shall show the names of adjacent subdivision or names of record of owners of adjoining parcels,
the location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets, easements or other public ways within
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/435
or adjacent to the tract, existing railroad rights-of-way, and other important features such as section
lines, political subdivision or corporate limits and school district boundaries.
6. It shall show all parcels intended to be dedicated for public use or reserve[d] in the proposed
subdivision, together with the purpose and conditions or limitations of such reservation.
7. It shall show the layout, names and width of proposed streets, alleys and easements.
8. It shall show the layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and all building
lines.
9. The location of proposed screening walls shall be clearly indicated.
10. A complete topographic map showing existing structures of the proposed area to be subdivided
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. Contours of the tract, shall be intervals of five (5) feet or
less, referred, to sea level datum.
11. The plans shall show existing culverts, utilities or other underground structures within the tract
and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and location indicated.
12. Preliminary plans of proposed on-site and off-site drainage system and street improvements.
D. The Developer shall submit a letter, along with the preliminary plat, requesting any variances to the
subdivision.
E. It is to be understood that the approval of the preliminary plat by the City Planning commission does not
constitute official acceptance of the proposed subdivision by the City. There shall be no work done in the field on
the proposed subdivision until the final plat has been accepted.
F. Following review of the preliminary plat and other materials submitted, or conformity thereof to the regulations
of this chapter and other City codes, the Planning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as
submitted, or as modified and, if approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval as conditional
approval and state the conditions of such approval, one of which shall be the filing of a final plat or, if disapproved,
shall express its disapproval. Approval of the preliminary plat expires at the end of nine (9) months unless the final
plat has been submitted for approval.
G. After approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the same shall be forwarded to the City
Council for its inspection and comment. It shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner requesting any
variances to its Subdivision Regulations. Council approval of the preliminary plat expires at the end of nine (9)
months unless the final plat has been submitted for approval.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 3, adopted 6/2/09)
SECTION 9: FINAL PLAT AND PLANS
A. The Developer shall submit ten (10) copies and two (2) mylars of the final plat, a digital file of the final plat in
Adobe Systems PDF and AutoCAD DWG (or DXF) format on compact disc, and five (5) complete construction
plans, on sheets 24" x 36" plus seven (7) final plats of the subdivision to the City Planning Commission by filing the
same with the Development Services Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the regular meeting of
that body at which consideration is requested and on which date such plat shall be deemed filed. This plat shall
carry the legend “Final Plat.” Submittal shall include a letter of transmittal requesting review and payment of the
required filing fees.
B. The Final Plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
1. Final Plat shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' or larger.
2. It shall contain the subdivision name or identifying title and name of the city, county and state in
which the subdivision is located; the name and address of the record owner or subdivider.
3. The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings and the exact location and width of all
existing or recorded streets interacting with the boundary of the tract.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/435
4. An accurate location of the subdivision with reference to the abstract and survey records of Wise
County.
5. The exact layout including:
a. Street names.
b. Length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, length and bearing of the
tangents.
c. All easements for right-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of
the easements.
d. All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and with
bearings and angles to street and alley lines.
6. The accurate location, material and approximate size of all monuments.
7. The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use with the purpose
indicated thereon, and for all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of
the property owners in the subdivision.
8. Setback building lines.
9. Private restrictions.
10. North point, scale and date.
11. Certification by a Registered Public Surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made
by him and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size and
material description are correctly shown.
12. A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public
use forever, signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public by the Owner and Lien Holder of the land
along with complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated.
13. Additional certificates to properly dedicate easements or right-of-way as may be necessary.
14. Drainage easements, utility easements and public open space restriction statements to be placed
on plats:
a. Drainage Easement Restriction (DER) - No construction, or filling without the written
approval of the City of Bridgeport, Wise County, Texas shall be allowed within a drainage
easement. No obstruction of the natural flow of water shall occur. All owners of property affected
by such construction or filling shall be a party to the request.
b. Utility Easements (UE) - Any public utility, including the City of Bridgeport, Wise County,
Texas shall have the right to move and keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees,
shrubs, other growths or improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the easements for the
purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or
removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the
permission of anyone.
c. Public Visibility Easement - Defined as an imaginary triangle which has two sides beginning
at the edge of pavement and the meeting point of two intersecting streets, and extending along
the edge of existing roadway surfaces a set distance, as set forth in Table A (below). The line
connecting the end points of these two lines forms the third side of the triangle.
Table A
Public Visibility Easement
Dimensions
Collector A & B Local Streets (residential
and nonresidential),
Alley
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/435
Country Lanes, and
Commercial & Multifamily
Residential Driveways
1, 2, & 3
Collector A & B 30' x 30' 30' x 20' 30' x 15'
Local Streets (residential and
nonresidential), Country
Lanes, and Commercial &
Multifamily Residential
Driveways
20' x 30' 20' x 20' 20' x 15'
Alley 1, 2, & 3 15' x 30' 15' x 20' 15' x 15'
To assure visibility at all street intersections, no structure, object, plant or sign of any type
may obstruct vision from a height of twenty-four (24) inches to a height of eleven (11) feet
above the crown of the road, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, walks, signs,
trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the public visibility easement as shown on the plat with
the exception of one Utility Pole, one Street Sign, or one Fire Hydrant. The easement will
remain in effect until vacated by an order issued by the City of Bridgeport, Wise County,
Texas, Planning and Zoning Department and the property is replatted.
15. Proper blanks for certification of approval to be filled out by the City Council.
16. A receipt indicating that all taxes have been paid.
17. Construction plans for all required utilities such as:
a. Plan and profile of proposed streets.
b. Plan and profile of on-site and off-site proposed drainage facilities, including storm sewers
where required.
c. Proposed street lighting plan and any utility pole relocations.
C. The Construction Plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of Registered Professional Engineer in
the State of Texas and shall bear his seal on each sheet.
D. The plans shall contain all necessary information for construction of the project, including screening walls. All
materials specified shall conform to the specifications set forth in Appendix A and the engineering design
standards and master plan as adopted by the City.
E. Each sheet of the plans shall contain a title block including space for the notation of revisions. This space is
to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date
the revision was made.
F. After review of the plat and plans by the City Engineer, the plat shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and the City Council for their consideration. If approved by those bodies subject to changes, the
Engineer for the owner shall make all changes required. The City Engineer or his designated representative will
approve all plans to the Engineer for the owner for use by the Contractors. Each Constructor [Contractor] shall
maintain one (1) set of the plans, stamped with City approval, on the project at all times during construction. If
construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans may be
required by the City Engineer for meeting current standards and engineering requirements.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 4, adopted 6/2/09; Ordinance 07-34, sec. 1, adopted
8/7/07)
SECTION 10: FRACTIONAL FINAL PLAT
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/435
A. If desired by the subdivider and approved by the Commission and Council, the final plat may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop; however, such portion shall
conform to all the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. If final plats are submitted for approval by portions or sections of the proposed subdivision, each portion or
section shall carry the name of the entire subdivision but shall bear a distinguishing letter, number or subtitle. Block
letters shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision might be finally
approved in sections.
C. The Developer shall submit ten (10) copies and two (2) mylars of the fractional final plat, and a digital file of
the fractional final plat in Adobe Systems PDF and AutoCAD DWG (or DXF) format on compact disc to the
Development Services Department.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 5, adopted 6/2/09)
SECTION 11: REPLATTING OR RESUBDIVISION
No structure shall be placed or constructed that extends across a property line. No major addition may be made to,
or upon property, when an existing structure extends across a property line. The Building Official shall have
authority to determine if an addition shall be considered major or minor. No building permit shall be issued until
such tracts or lots have be [been] replatted or resubdivided and following approval of the City Engineer, Planning
and Zoning Commission, City Council and filed for record with Wise County. Exception, structures designed for
multiple occupancy under one roof and/or where a property line extends along a common wall of separation.
A. In order to replat a tract of land for which a final plat is filed of record in the Records of Wise
County, the tract must be either (a) fully owned by the person desiring to replat, or (b) the person
desiring the replat must furnish the City with written acknowledgement and consent by all other property
owners.
B. The procedure for replatting (resubdividing) shall be the same as for subdividing as stipulated by
this Ordinance.
C. The Developer shall submit ten (10) copies and two (2) mylars of the replat, and a digital file of the
replat in Adobe Systems PDF and AutoCAD DWG (or DXF) format on compact disc to the
Development Services Department.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 6/6/00; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 6, adopted 6/2/09)
SECTION 12: FILING OF PLAT
A. After approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission and the City Council, City Engineer and correction
for the plat as required, the Developer shall submit filing fees and the required number of copies for City to file plat
with the Wise County Clerk. These copies shall bear all signatures of the City officials. After signature by the City
officials, the City shall complete the filing process providing the City Engineer has approved the construction plans
and documents and the required bonds have been posted with the City. Said copies shall show the volume and
page of the Map and Plat Records into which the plat was filed by the Wise County Clerk. If the final plat has not
been submitted for signatures by City officials within six (6) months after approval by the City Council, the plat shall
be deemed null and void, resubmittal shall be required, and current subdivision regulations shall apply.
B. In addition to all other stipulated requirements, the Developer shall also submit a digital copy of the plat in
AutoCAD DWG (or DXF) and Adobe Systems PDF format on compact disc and shall include all lot, plat, easement
and right-of-way boundaries pertaining to the platted area. On the face of the plat, coordinates shall be shown at
two opposing/diagonal corners of the boundary, or those corners most suited to observation using GPS
procedures and presented in the NAD-83 Texas North Central Zone (4202) US Feet coordinate system.
For example:
IRF (Iron Rod Found)
N = 7,123,051.54
E = 2,189,632.24
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/435
Additionally, coordinates shown shall be tied to the City's Geodetic Control Monumentation Network (available
through the City's GIS Administrator or at the City's website). A note shall be placed on the plat indicating the two
control monuments used.
For example:
Coordinates shown hereon are projected in NAD-83, Texas North Central Zone (4202) US Feet,
and tied to City of Bridgeport Geodetic Control Monument #s: 1 and 3
#1 Halsell #3 Depot
N = 7,124,136.88 N = 7,123,785.24
E = 2,196,586.00 E = 2,193,876.82
On the face of the plat, the Basis of Bearing shall be shown and referenced to a document of public record with
controlling monuments indicated. Alternatively, if the Basis of Bearing is the NAD-83 Texas North Central Zone
(4202) US Feet, a note indicating such shall be placed on the plat and indicate the City control monuments used
(as shown above) to establish said bearing.
A closure calculation sheet shall be submitted along with the digital file. The digital file shall verify closure of
tract/lot(s).
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 09-23, sec. 7, adopted 6/2/09)
SECTION 13: SUBMITTAL REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION
A. Prior to authorizing construction, the City Engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been
met:
1. The Final Plat shall be complete and in compliance with the City of Bridgeport Construction
Standards and Specifications and Master Plan at the time of approval.
2. All required contract documents shall be completed and filed with the City Engineer.
3. All necessary off-site easements or dedications required for City-maintained facilities not shown on
the Final Plat must be conveyed solely to the City of Bridgeport, Texas, with proper signatures affixed.
The original of the documents and filing fees shall be returned to the City Secretary prior to approval
and release of the engineering plans.
4. All Contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of accepted plans
bearing the stamp of acceptance of the City Engineer. These plans shall remain on the job site.
5. If required by the City Engineer, all parties participating in the construction shall meet for a preconstruction
conference to discuss the project prior to beginning work.
6. A complete list of the Contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where
a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the City Engineer.
7. Manufacturers' drawings for all fabricated appurtenances or special construction time shall be
submitted to the City Engineer.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 14: SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/435
Construction shall be inspected by the City Engineer or City representative. Completion of construction to the
approved plans and specifications of the City of Bridgeport is the responsibility of the Developer and Contractors.
The responsibility of the City Engineer is to assure conformance to the accepted plans and specifications. Any
change in design required during construction shall be made by the Engineer whose seal and signature are shown
on the plans and shall be accepted by the City Engineer prior to making such changes. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted
2/16/99)
SECTION 15: ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBDIVISION
A. After completion of all items required in the plans and specifications, the Contractor shall submit to the City a
bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the Contract amount guaranteeing workmanship and
materials for a period of one (1) year from the date of final acceptance by the City. The City Engineer shall verify
that all items have been completed, including the filing of the plat and all related easements and documents, [and]
payment of pro rata fees for streets. The City Engineer, or his designated agent, shall conduct a final inspection of
the project and, if all work is found to be acceptable, shall issue a Letter of Acceptance. Any items of exception
noted in the acceptance letter shall be immediately satisfied.
B. Acceptance of the subdivision shall mean that title to all improvements is vested in the City of Bridgeport. The
Developer and his Contractors shall, however, be bound to the City for a period of one (1) year to regain any
defects in the improvements. A maintenance bond of 10% of improvements shall also be required for one (1)
additional year.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 16: AS-BUILT PLANS
Prior to final acceptance by the City of the improvements in the subdivision, the Engineer for the Developer shall
submit to the City Engineer a complete, reproducible set of drawings of paving, drainage, and other improvements
showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an “As-Built” stamp
bearing the signature of the Engineer and the date. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 17: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS
Generally, building permits will not be issued until completion of all improvements within the subdivision or
resubdivision and acceptance by the City. The City Engineer shall have the authority, after reviewing the progress
of construction and other relevant matters, to release portions of the subdivision for building permits. (Ordinance
99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 18: FILING FEES
Subdivision related fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule provided in Appendix A to the Code of
Ordinances. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
SECTION 19: ADOPTION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
The term “subdivision” means the division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City or
within one-half (1/2) miles thereof, into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract
of land or any addition to the City of Bridgeport, Texas, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots,
and streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public used [use], or the use of purchasers or owners of
lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of creating building sites.
“Subdivision” includes resubdivision. “Subdivision” shall also mean a tract of land intended to be built upon and for
which a building permit is required.
The rules and regulations attached hereto, including the attached Appendix A, Specific Requirements and Design
Criteria is incorporated herein as if copied herein in their entirety and are hereby adopted as the subdivision
regulations of the City of Bridgeport and are made as [a] part hereof for all purposes.
No person shall create a subdivision of land, as hereinabove defined, within the corporate limits of the City or
within one-half (1/2) miles thereof, without complying with the provisions of these regulations. All plats and
subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations herein adopted.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 20: REPEALING CLAUSE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/435
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed. However, the repeal of existing ordinance by this Ordinance shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed; and prosecution for such offenses may be instituted and causes presently pending
proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance or ordinances had not been repealed. (Ordinance 99-3
adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 21: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any article, paragraph, or subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision hereof,
other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
SECTION 22: PENALTY CLAUSE
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not more than Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) for all violations involving zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, and shall be fined not
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this Ordinance. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty is cumulative of other remedies provided by
State law, including but not limited to actions authorized by Chapter 54, Local Government Code. (Ordinance 99-3
adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 02-31 adopted 10/15/02)
SECTION 23: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after the publication of its caption, as the law in such cases
provides.
DULY PASSED BY THE City Council of Bridgeport, Texas, this the 16th day of February, 1999.
APPROVED:
________________________
MAYOR
CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS
ATTEST:
________________________
CITY SECRETARY
CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
________________________
CITY ATTORNEY
CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS
APPENDIX A
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN CRITERIA
I. STREETS AND ALLEYS
A. Policy
1. Streets constructed within the City shall be classified according to the following criteria:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/435
Minor 50 feet right-of-way
Collector 80 feet right-of-way
Arterial 100+ feet right-of-way
2. Residential streets shall be so laid out that use for through traffic will be discouraged.
3. Arterial streets intersect at 90-degree angles unless otherwise approved by the City.
4. Half-streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the responsible development of the
subdivision and where the City Council finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other
one-half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
5. Strips of privately owned property reserved for the obvious purpose of controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except where control is definitely placed in the City under conditions approved by
the Planning Commission.
6. Street alignments with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited.
7. A cul-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet and at the closed end shall have a turnaround
provided, having a minimum outside roadway diameter of 80 feet and a minimum street property line
diameter of 100 feet. Parking islands shall be required if on-street parking is desired in the cul-de-sac. If
parking islands are included, the diameter of the cul-de-sac shall be designed to facilitate circular
movement of traffic around the cul-de-sac.
8. At the intersection of a new subdivision street with an existing boulevard arterial, the Developer of
the subdivision shall construct a median opening in the boulevard, unless otherwise directed by the
City.
9. Alleys are required in all residential subdivisions with rear access to lots. Alleys shall have a
minimum right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet.
10. Blocks shall be platted to allow two tiers of lots.
11. All lots shall be adjacent to a dedicated street to which access is allowed. Where a tract of land is
subdivided into parcels that are larger than normal building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to
permit the opening of future streets and a logical ultimate resubdivision.
12. Blocks lengths, generally, should not exceed 1,200 feet in length as measured from street
centerline.
13. Alleys, or loading courts, of a minimum width of 20 feet of paved surface, or in lieu thereof,
adequate off-street loading space shall be provided in business blocks.
14. Escrows for Adjacent Streets.
a. When a proposed subdivision of land abuts on both sides of an existing substandard road
according to the then-existing current City of Bridgeport standards, the Developer shall be
required to improve the existing road to bring the same to the City of Bridgeport standards. Any
reimbursement, if due to the Developer by the City will be made when funds become available.
b. If the proposed subdivision is located along only one side of a substandard road, and when
in the City Council's judgment, it is not feasible to reconstruct said substandard road at the time of
development of said subdivision, the City Council may permit the Developer to pay into escrow an
amount equal to the Developer's share of the cost of said improvements as a condition for the
approval of the final plat of the subdivision. The amount of escrow shall be determined by a “pro
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/435
rata” charge as prescribed by the City and shall be payable prior to approval of plans by the City
Engineer.
c. When funds have been provided and placed in escrow with the City of Bridgeport for the
development of a substandard road and the road is reconstructed by others at no cost to the City,
the escrowed funds and accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded to the Developer after
completion and acceptance of the improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne
by the City, the escrowed funds and accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded to the Developer
after completion and acceptance of the improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is
borne by the City, the difference between the Developer's actual proportionate cost and the
escrowed funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded to the Developer after
completion and acceptance of the improvements.
d. Whenever under any of the provisions of this section, funds are required to be escrowed for
the cost of future improvements to substandard roads, the form of such escrow shall be cash or
its equivalent.
B. Engineering Design. The engineering design of streets in the City of Bridgeport shall conform to the thencurrent
street standards as adopted by the City of Bridgeport.
II. STORM SEWERS
A. Policy. An adequate storm sewer system, consisting of inlets, pipes and other drainage structures, shall be
constructed to conform to the current drainage requirements of the City of Bridgeport. If open channels are used,
side slopes of 4:1 with concrete pilot channels shall be constructed.
1. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlet[s], pipes and/or excavated channels or natural
creeks and other underground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where
runoff of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface
drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions as established by the City will not be considered for
development until adequate drainage has been provided.
2. In general, underground drainage shall be constructed in streets and alleys. If approved by the
City Engineer, the Developer may provide, at his own expense, a right-of-way easement of sufficient
width to permit excavation and maintenance of an open channel of satisfactory depth and width. The
Developer shall complete all necessary excavation on the channel and shall sod or seed the channel to
prevent erosion. Unless the excavated channel bottom is in Chalk, Limestone, or other similar
acceptable rock, a reinforced concrete pilot channel or concrete channel lining may be required by the
City to prevent erosion or for access purposes. However, concrete lines [lined] channels shall not have
a side slope greater than 4:1. Location, and type of construction of open channels shall be approved by
the City Engineer and City Council.
3. Creeks may remain in open natural condition or excavated channels may be constructed provided
they meet one of the following requirements:
a. Creeks or excavated channels with side slopes of 4:1 or flatter from bottom of channel to top
of bank may be platted as part of individual lots. Adequate access and floodway easements shall
be provided to insure protection of these areas for maintenance purposes.
b. Creeks of [or] drainageways with banks which have slopes steeper than 4:1 must be
maintained by a maintenance entity other than individual lot owners. In such cases, the creek or
excavated channel shall meet one of the following two requirements:
1) The area of the floodway shall be provided as a park or floodway management area.
Prior to acceptance of any drainageway as a floodway management area by the City, the
drainageway shall be cleared of all debris, trash and all objectionable underbrush and
weeds. All provisions of Paragraph 2 above must be met.
2) Creeks or drainageways in any areas which have private maintenance provisions other
than individual lot owners, shall not be required as floodway management areas. The creeks
or drainageways in these areas shall not be maintained by the City. Adequate utility access
and floodway easements shall be provided to ensure protection of these areas for
maintenance purposes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/435
3) Lakes, detention ponds, and retention ponds may be constructed in all areas provided
they are approved by the City Engineer. The City may assume maintenance responsibilities
for this type of facility, if approved by the City Council, however, easements shall be
provided to assure protection of these areas for maintenance purposes.
4) Other innovative drainage concepts will be considered if approved by the City Engineer
and City Council.
5) Concrete, Brick or Masonry Headwalls: Headwalls constructed in Public Road right-ofway
are suggested to have concrete, brick or stone facing. Safety grates shall be provided
on all storm sewers.
6) Open storm sewers may be constructed across the front and sides of all developments
other than residential.
III. WATER AND WASTEWATER
A. Policy. All subdivisions shall be provided with adequate water and wastewater facilities and appurtenances to
serve the subdivision in accordance with the then-current standards, specifications and master plan as adopted by
the City.
1. When a Developer undertakes the development of a tract that would require the extension of
water and/or wastewater mains across an undeveloped tract, lot or block, the expense of the extension
of such mains shall be borne by the developer. Also, should the Developer be required to oversize
water and/or wastewater mains in order to accomplish future development of adjacent tracts, lots or
blocks, the expense of the oversizing shall be the responsibility of the Developer. In either or both
development requirements listed above a “pro rata” agreement can be obtained by City Council
agreement whereby the Developer can recoup the additional expenses for extension or oversizing of
mains as future development occurs.
2. Should oversizing of water or wastewater mains be required by the City Engineer to conform with
the City's current master plan, a “pro rata” arrangement may not be applicable.
3. All subdivisions shall have at least two sources of water supply for that subdivision and all interior
mains in the subdivision shall be looped.
4. Developers that provide water and wastewater service lines to lots from street right-of-way shall be
consistent as to the location of such service lines on all lots in the subdivision and the location of each
service line shall be marked at the curb by permanently inscribing in the curb face a “W” indicating
water and an “S” indicating the location of wastewater service lines.
5. Wastewater lift stations shall be avoided and eliminated from design and being installed whenever
practicable. Should a gravity wastewater main be located in proximity to the subdivision that is
adequately sized, the developer shall, after approval of the City Engineer, approach the City Council as
to possible City participation of cost sharing on off-site wastewater main thus eliminating perpetual
maintenance.
6. Should the City Engineer determine that wastewater lift station(s) must be installed to serve the
subdivision, oversizing such lift station(s) shall be a consideration as in 2 and 3 above.
7. The engineering design or plans for installing a private sewerage facility in the City shall conform
to the then-current standards as adopted by the County of Wise.
IV. EASEMENTS
A. Policy. Easements shall be provided on subdivision plats when the following criteria indicate that an
easement is required.
Where not adjacent to a public way, easements at least ten (10) feet wide for utility construction, service, and
maintenance shall be provided where necessary in locations approved by the City Plan Commission. Easements
of at least five (5) feet in width shall be provided, on each side of all rear lot lines and along side lot lines, where
necessary, for utilities such as electric, telephone, streetlights and natural gas. Easements having greater width
dimensions may also be required along or across lots where engineering design or special conditions make it
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/435
necessary for the installation of utilities outside public rights-of-way. For lots facing on curvilinear streets, the rear
easement should consist of straight lines with a minimum of points of deflection.
B. UTILITY EASEMENTS. Any public utility, including the City of Bridgeport, shall have the right to move and
keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other growths or improvements which in any way
endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the
easements shown on the plat; and any public utility, including the City of Bridgeport, shall have the right at all times
of ingress and egress to and from and upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction,
inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the
necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone.
C. EMERGENCY EASEMENTS. Emergency easements and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations
required by the Chief of the Bridgeport Fire Department. These easements shall have a minimum width of twenty
(20) feet and a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet. Any emergency access and fire lane easement
more than one hundred (100) feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated public street or be
provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet with an additional distance of ten (10)
feet on all sides clear of permanent structures. These easements shall be paved to Design Standards and
Specifications recommended by the City Engineer.
D. PUBLIC VISIBILITY EASEMENT. Defined as an imaginary triangle which has two sides beginning at the
edge of pavement and the meeting point of two intersecting streets, and extending along the edge of existing
roadway surfaces a set distance, as set forth in Table A (below). The line connecting the end points of these two
lines forms the third side of the triangle.
Table A
Public Visibility Easement
Dimensions
Collector A & B Local Streets (residential
and nonresidential),
Country Lanes, and
Commercial & Multifamily
Residential Driveways
Alley 1, 2, & 3
Collector A & B 30' x 30' 30' x 20' 30' x 15'
Local Streets (residential and
nonresidential), Country
Lanes, and Commercial &
Multifamily Residential
Driveways
20' x 30' 20' x 20' 20' x 15'
Alley 1, 2, & 3 15' x 30' 15' x 20' 15' x 15'
To assure visibility at all street intersections, no structure, object, plant or sign of any type may obstruct vision from
a height of twenty-four (24) inches to a height of eleven (11) feet above the crown of the road, including, but not
limited to, buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the public visibility easement as
shown on the plat with the exception of one Utility Pole, one Street Sign, or one Fire Hydrant. The easement will
remain in effect until vacated by an order issued by the City of Bridgeport, Wise County, Texas, Planning and
Zoning Department and the property is replatted.
V. UTILITY SERVICES
A. All services for available utilities shall be made available to each lot in such a manner so as to eliminate the
necessity for disturbing the street and alley pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and drainage structures when
connections are made.
B. All electric, telephone utilities, street lighting, and cable television can either be above or underground. The
use of above-ground utilities may be considered on an individual case basis if the services are placed on the rear
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/435
property line.
C. All support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground
installations shall be pad-mounted or placed underground, where applicable.
D. Where underground electric utilities are installed at the request of the subdivision developer, the subdivision
developer shall, additionally pay the differential cost between actual underground electric utility service
construction and the most economical overhead electric utility service installation which could be installed, as
calculated by the City's Engineer. All conduits from electric, telephone and cable TV shall be installed and buried at
the expense of the developer and in accordance with the City standards and City franchisee specifications.
E. For additional requirements, see City of Bridgeport General Regulations for Public Utilities - Ordinance 98-10
[article 13.02 of the Code of Ordinances].
F. Overhead services will not be permitted to cross public street rights-of-way.
VI. MISCELLANEOUS
A. Street Signs: The Developer shall pay the City for street signs for the subdivision. There shall be one sign for
each three-way intersection and two signs for each four-way intersection. The signs will be procured and installed
by the City. The fee shall include cost of the sign assembly, pole and material plus 20% for installation.
B. All lot corners shall be located and marked with one-half (1/2) inch diameter reinforcing bar, eighteen (18)
inches long, and shall be placed flush with the ground or countersunk, if necessary, in order to avoid being
disturbed.
C. The City shall install street lighting in the subdivision. In subdivisions, streetlights shall be placed each 500
feet along the streets, at each intersection and at each cul-de-sac. The cost of such lighting shall be dependent
upon the type of fixture, wattage and type of pole desired by the developer plus 20% for installation. These fees for
lighting shall be remitted to the City following billing by the City and prior to final acceptance by the City of the
developer's water and/or wastewater and/or street improvements. The City shall furnish power and perpetual
maintenance and replacement as needed for such street lighting.
D. Where traffic lights or flashing lights are required or requested, the cost shall be determined by the actual
cost plus such lighting shall be metered and payable to the City monthly. This policy in no way shall alter the City's
practice of installing security, guard or yard lighting to customer.
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99; Ordinance 07-34, sec. 2, adopted 8/7/07)
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PROCESSING CHART
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/435
(Ordinance 99-3 adopted 2/16/99)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 AD VALOREM TAXES†
Sec. 11.02.001 Residence homestead exemption for elderly or disabled persons
(a) Established; amount.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of section 11.13 of the Tax Code, there is hereby established an
exemption of $20,000.00 of the appraised value of a qualifying person's residence homestead. In order
to qualify for the exemption created herein, the individual must be either disabled or 65 years of age or
older, or both; provided, however, that under no circumstance shall the maximum exemption exceed
$20,000.00. An exemption authorized by this section is effective as of January 1 of the tax year in
which the person qualifies for the exemption and applies to the entire tax year.
(2) The exemption from taxation adopted hereby shall be as of the effective date of this section, shall
begin with the tax year 2006, and shall continue for all subsequent years unless repealed, decreased,
or increased in accordance with section 11.13 and/or other applicable provision of the Tax Code.
(b) Filing for exemption. In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January 1st
and April 1st of each year, file with the city tax assessor and collector, on a form furnished by the tax assessorcollector,
a sworn inventory of such property owned on January 1st of each year for which the exemption is
claimed, and shall initially furnish proof of age by a certified copy of his or her birth certificate or, if such person
does not have a certificate of birth, then by the affidavit of two persons at least five years (5) older than the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/435
exemption claimant with actual knowledge of the date and place of birth and by the original or certified copy of any
two of the following documents, which must be at least five (5) years old, to wit:
(1) Social security record.
(2) Federal census record.
(3) State census record.
(4) Own child's birth certificate.
(5) Original birth notice in newspaper.
(6) School record.
(7) Insurance policy.
(8) Lodge record.
(9) Military record.
(10) Passport.
(11) Marriage record.
(12) Hospital record.
(13) Voter's registration record.
(14) Church baptismal record.
(15) Employment record.
(16) Physician's record.
(1976 Code, sec. 7-2; Ordinance 06-54 adopted 10/17/06; 2001 Code, secs. 11.201, 11.202)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.002 Interest and penalties on delinquent taxes
The ad valorem taxes levied by the city council each year shall become due on receipt of the tax bill and are
delinquent if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which imposed.
(1) A delinquent tax incurs a penalty of six percent (6%) of the amount of the tax on the first calendar
month it is delinquent plus one percent (1%) for each additional month or portion of a month the tax
remains unpaid prior to July 1 of the year in which it becomes delinquent. A tax delinquent on July 1
incurs a total penalty of twelve percent (12%) of the amount of the delinquent tax without regard of the
number of months the tax has been delinquent.
(2) No discount for early payment of taxes shall be allowed. The city council does not adopt the split
payment option provided by section 31.03 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(3) A delinquent tax accrues interest at a rate for one percent (1%) for each month or portion of a
month the tax remains unpaid.
(1976 Code, sec. 7-3; 2001 Code, sec. 11.203)
State law reference–Penalties and interest on delinquent tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 33.01.
Sec. 11.02.003 Additional penalty for collection costs
The provisions of section 33.07, Property Tax Code, are hereby adopted so that hereafter an additional penalty of
fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of delinquent taxes, penalty, and interest on delinquent taxes be imposed and
collected on taxes becoming delinquent after January 1, 1982. (1976 Code, sec. 7-4; 2001 Code, sec. 11.204)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/435
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.004 Leased vehicles
The tax exemption for leased motor vehicles provided in section 11.252, Texas Tax Code, does not apply in the
city. Leased motor vehicles are subject to ad valorem taxes which may be levied by the city. (Ordinance 01-47
adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.205)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on leased vehicles otherwise exempted, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
11.252.
Sec. 11.02.005 Goods in transit
All such goods in transit personal property as defined by the amendments to Texas Tax Code, section 11.253,
under Senate Bill 1, enacted by the 82nd Legislature in Special Session, shall be taxable by the city, for tax year
2012 and for every year thereafter, all as provided for and in accordance with Texas Tax Code section 11.253.
(Ordinance 2011-37 adopted 10/18/11; 2001 Code, sec. 11.206)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods-in-transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Additional tax adopted
(a) The city council hereby finds that the election was conducted in accordance with all statutory requirements.
(b) The city council hereby declares that a total of 153 votes were cast in favor of the imposition of said
additional 1/2 of 1% sales tax, and a total of 77 votes were cast in opposition to the imposition of said additional
sales tax.
(c) Accordingly, the city council does hereby declare that the proposition has passed and been adopted by the
voters of the city by a margin of 76 votes.
(Ordinance 94-2 adopted 5/24/94; 2001 Code, art. 11.100)
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
City manager means the city manager for the City of Bridgeport or his or her designated agent.
Consideration means the cost of a room in a hotel and does not include:
(1) The cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning
and readying the room or space for occupancy; or
(2) Any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy of the room.
Hotel means any building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The
term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house or bed
and breakfast. The term does not include:
(1) A hospital, sanitarium or nursing home; or
(2) A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher
education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by
section 61.003 of the Texas Education Code, as amended, that is used by the institution for the purpose
of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the
institution.
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel.
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room
in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/435
Tax means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article pursuant to chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended.
Tourist means an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state or
country for pleasure, recreation, education or culture.
Visitor information center means a building or a portion of a building used to distribute or disseminate information
to tourists.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.301; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy and amount of tax
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room that:
(1) Is in a hotel within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(2) Is ordinarily used for sleeping; and
(3) The cost of occupancy of which is $2.00 or more each day.
(b) The tax is equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the room to the hotel.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.302)
Sec. 11.04.003 Exemptions and refunds
(a) All persons, organizations and entities specified in subchapter C of chapter 156 of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended, are exempt from the payment of the tax imposed.
(b) Any person, organization or entity entitled to receive a refund of tax paid under this article may file a refund
claim as provided in section 156.154 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 01-42 adopted 11/20/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.303)
Sec. 11.04.004 Responsibility for collection, reporting and payment of tax
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax for the city and report and
pay the tax to the city in accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth in this article. (Ordinance 01-31
adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.304)
Sec. 11.04.005 Reports; payments; fees
(a) On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is earned, every person required by this
article to collect the tax shall file a report with the city manager showing:
(1) The consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month;
(2) The amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and
(3) Any other information the city manager may reasonably require.
(b) Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the tax due on all occupancies in the
preceding month to the city manager at the time of filing the report required under subsection (a) above.
(c) Every person collecting a tax under this article may deduct a one percent collection fee from the gross
amount of tax collected on all occupancies in the preceding month if the tax is paid to and received by the city
manager no later than the 15th day of the month following the month in which the tax is required to be collected. If
the 15th day falls on a weekend or holiday, the city manager must receive the tax by the next business day. If the
tax is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the city manager is the date postmarked by the U.S. Postal Service.
(d) Each remittance of a tax required by this article must contain the following statement and representation
signed by the person required by this article to collect the tax: “The tax remitted and paid to the City of Bridgeport
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/435
with this report was collected pursuant to the requirements of Article 11.04, Chapter 11, Bridgeport City Code, as
amended.”
(e) The city manager shall maintain a record that accurately identifies the receipt and expenditure of all revenue
derived from the tax imposed by this article.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.305; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.006 Tax collection on purchase of a hotel
(a) If a person liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the
successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the
tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the city manager showing that the amount has been paid or a
certificate stating that no tax is due.
(b) The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is
liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
(c) The purchaser of a hotel may request that the city manager issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or
issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The city manager shall
issue a certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving the request.
(d) If the city manager fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c)
above, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.306; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.007 Rules and regulations
The city manager is authorized to make any rules and regulations necessary to effectively collect the tax. The city
manager shall, upon giving reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable the city
manager to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due
under this article. (Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.307; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.008 Use and allocation of revenue
(a) The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to
promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry and that use is limited to the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing,
operation and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both;
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or
registrants;
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and
convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including instrumental
and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting,
sculpture, photography, graphic and draft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound
recording, and other arts relating to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these
major art forms;
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting
solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit
preserved historic sites or museums:
(A) At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or
(B) Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and
convention delegates;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/435
(6) Funding costs in counties of under one (1) million population to hold sporting events that
substantially increase hotel activity;
(7) Funding transportation systems for tourists; and
(8) Signage directing tourists to sights and attractions that are visited frequently by hotel guests in
the municipality.
(b) Revenue from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may not be used for the general
revenue purposes from [or] general operations of the city.
(c) Allocations of the hotel occupancy tax revenue by the city for the purposes set out by subsection (a) above
must comply with the provisions of chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code.
(d) Hotel occupancy tax funds will be allocated according to the following percentages:
(1) Twenty-five (25) percent to the chamber of commerce;
(2) Seventy-five (75) percent to Main Street, Bridgeport Stage, future city projects, and
charitable/nonprofit/community organizations as requested and approved by the application process.
(e) Allocations of the hotel occupancy tax revenue will be funded through an application process. Applications
will be accepted annually with a deadline that coincides with the beginning of the budget process for the next fiscal
year. Multiple applications will be accepted from one board or group on an annual basis. The applications will then
be reviewed by a committee that is made up of two members of the business community, one hotel owner, and two
city staff members. This committee will review the applications. After all of the applications are reviewed, the
committee will make recommendations on funding. Funding recommendations may be less than the amount
requested. The recommendations will then be forwarded to the city council for final approval. If approved by the
council, funds will be distributed as a reimbursable grant. Any individual or organization that owes tax dollars to the
city will not receive funds until their debt is paid off to the city.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; Ordinance 2011-18 adopted 5/17/11; 2001 Code, sec. 11.308)
Sec. 11.04.009 Offenses; penalties
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Fails to collect the tax imposed by this article;
(2) Fails to file a report as required by this article;
(3) Fails to pay the city manager the tax when payment is due;
(4) Files a false report; or
(5) Fails to comply with section 11.04.006(a) when purchasing a hotel.
(b) An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(c) In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section, a person failing to pay the
tax to the city manager by the 25th day of the month following the month in which the tax is required by this article
to be collected shall pay an amount equal to 15 percent of the tax due as a penalty. Delinquent taxes draw interest
at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning 30 days from the date the tax is due to the city manager.
(d) In addition, the city is authorized to file legal proceedings against the hotel for noncompliance seeking any
other remedies provided by state law.
(e) In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the city in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under
this article.
(Ordinance 01-31 adopted 10/2/01; 2001 Code, sec. 11.309; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/435
ARTICLE 11.05 TAX REINVESTMENT ZONES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 11.05.001–11.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One
Sec. 11.05.031 Findings and determinations
(a) The public hearing on adoption of the reinvestment zone has been properly called, held, and conducted and
notice of such hearing has been published as required by law and delivered to all taxing units overlapping the
territory inside the proposed reinvestment zone.
(b) Creation of the proposed reinvestment zone with boundaries as described in exhibits “A” and “B” attached to
Ordinance 07-62 will result in benefits to the city, its residents and property owners, in general, and to the property,
residents and property owners in the reinvestment zone.
(c) The reinvestment zone, as defined in exhibits “A” and “B” attached to Ordinance 07-62, meets the criteria for
the creation of a reinvestment zone set forth in the Tax Increment Financing Act (the act) in that:
(1) It is a contiguous geographic area located wholly within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) The area is predominately open and because of obsolete platting or lack of site improvements, or
other factors, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of the city.
(d) Ten percent or less of the property in the proposed reinvestment zone, excluding property dedicated to public
use, is used for residential purposes, which is defined in the act as any property occupied by a house which has
less than five living units.
(e) The total appraised value of all taxable real property in the proposed reinvestment zone according to the
most recent appraisal rolls of the city, together with the total appraised value of taxable real property in all other
existing reinvestment zones within the city, according to the most recent appraisal rolls of the city, does not exceed
15 percent of the current total appraised value of taxable real property in the city and in the industrial districts
created by the city, if any.
(f) The proposed reinvestment zone does not contain more than 15 percent of the total appraised value of real
property taxable by a county or school district.
(g) The improvements in the reinvestment zone will significantly enhance the value of all taxable real property in
the reinvestment zone.
(h) The development or redevelopment of the property in the proposed reinvestment zone will not occur solely
through private investment in the reasonably foreseeable future.
(Ordinance 07-62, sec. 2, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.411)
Sec. 11.05.032 Created
The city hereby creates a reinvestment zone over the area described in exhibit “A” and depicted in the map as
exhibit “B” attached to Ordinance 07-62, and such reinvestment zone shall hereafter be identified as Tax Increment
Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One, City of Bridgeport, Texas (the “zone” or “reinvestment zone”).
(Ordinance 07-62, sec. 3, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.412)
Sec. 11.05.033 Board of directors
There is hereby established a board of directors for the zone that shall consist of five members. The board of
directors of Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One shall be appointed as follows:
(1) Appointment of members. Three members shall be appointed by the city council, and two
members shall be appointed by the commissioners court of the county. The initial board of directors
shall be appointed by resolution of each of the participating jurisdictions within sixty (60) days of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/435
passage of this division or within a reasonable time thereafter. All members appointed to the board shall
meet the eligibility requirements set forth in the act. The governing bodies of other taxing units that levy
taxes on real property in Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One have chosen not to
pay any of their taxes into the tax increment fund and have waived their right to appoint board
members.
(2) Terms; officers. The terms of the board members shall be two-year terms. The city council shall
designate a member of the board to serve as chairman of the board of directors, and the board shall
elect from its members a vice-chairman and other officers as it sees fit.
(3) Powers and duties. The board of directors shall make recommendations to the city council
concerning the administration of the zone. It shall prepare and adopt a project plan and reinvestment
zone financing plan for the zone and must submit such plans to the city council for its approval. The
board of directors shall possess all powers necessary to prepare, implement and monitor such project
plan and financing plan for the reinvestment zone as the city council considers advisable, including the
submission of an annual report on the status of the zone.
(Ordinance 07-62, sec. 4, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.413)
Sec. 11.05.034 Effective date; termination
The zone shall take effect on January 1, 2007, and the termination of the zone shall occur on December 31, 2036,
or at an earlier time designated by subsequent ordinance of the city council in the event the city determines that
the zone should be terminated due to insufficient private investment, accelerated private investment or other good
cause, or at such time as all project costs and tax increment bonds, if any, and the interest thereon, have been
paid in full. (Ordinance 07-62, sec. 5, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.414)
Sec. 11.05.035 Tax increment base
The tax increment base for the zone, which is the total appraised value of all taxable real property located in the
zone, is to be determined as of January 1, 2007, the year in which the zone was designated a reinvestment zone.
(Ordinance 07-62, sec. 6, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.415)
Sec. 11.05.036 Tax increment fund
There is hereby created and established a tax increment fund for the zone, which may be divided into such
subaccounts as may be authorized by subsequent resolution or ordinance, into which all tax increments, less any
of the amounts not required to be paid into the tax increment fund pursuant to the act, are to be deposited. The tax
increment fund and any subaccounts are to be maintained in an account at the city treasurer's affiliated depository
bank of the city and shall be secured in the manner prescribed by law for funds of Texas cities. In addition, all
revenues from the sale of any tax increment bonds and notes hereafter issued by the city, revenues from the sale
of any property acquired as part of the tax increment financing plan and other revenues to be dedicated to and
used in the zone shall be deposited into such fund or subaccount from which money will be disbursed to pay
project costs for the zone or to satisfy the claims of holders of tax increment bonds or notes issued for the zone.
(Ordinance 07-62, sec. 7, adopted 12/18/07; 2001 Code, sec. 11.416)
Secs. 11.05.037–11.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number Two
Sec. 11.05.061 Findings and determinations
(a) The public hearing on creation of the reinvestment zone has been properly called, held and conducted and
notice of such hearing has been published as required by law and delivered to all taxing units overlapping the
territory inside the proposed reinvestment zone.
(b) Creation of the proposed reinvestment zone with boundaries as described in exhibit “A” and depicted in
exhibit “B” attached to Ordinance 10-39 will result in benefits to the city, its residents and property owners, in
general, and to the property, residents and property owners in the reinvestment zone.
(c) The reinvestment zone, as described in exhibit “A” and depicted in exhibit “B” attached to Ordinance 10-39,
meets the criteria for the creation of a reinvestment zone set forth in the act [Tax Increment Financing Act] in that:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/435
(1) It is a contiguous geographic area located wholly within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) The area is predominately open and because of obsolete platting or lack of site improvements, or
other factors, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of the city.
(d) Ten percent or less of the property in the proposed reinvestment zone, excluding property dedicated to public
use, is used for residential purposes, which is defined in the act as any property occupied by a house which has
less than five living units.
(e) The total appraised value of all taxable real property in the proposed reinvestment zone according to the
most recent appraisal rolls of the city, together with the total appraised value of taxable real property in all other
existing reinvestment zones within the city, according to the most recent appraisal rolls of the city, does not exceed
15 percent of the current total appraised value of taxable real property in the city and in the industrial districts
created by the city, if any.
(f) The proposed reinvestment zone does not contain more than 15 percent of the total appraised value of real
property taxable by a county or school district.
(g) The improvements in the reinvestment zone will significantly enhance the value of all taxable real property in
the reinvestment zone.
(h) The development or redevelopment of the property in the proposed reinvestment zone will not occur solely
through private investment in the reasonably foreseeable future.
(Ordinance 10-39 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.426)
Sec. 11.05.062 Created
The city hereby creates a reinvestment zone over the area described in exhibit “A” and depicted in exhibit “B”
attached to Ordinance 10-39, and such reinvestment zone shall hereafter be identified as Tax Increment Financing
Reinvestment Zone Number Two, City of Bridgeport, Texas (the zone or reinvestment zone). (Ordinance 10-39
adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.427)
Sec. 11.05.063 Board of directors
There is hereby established a board of directors for the zone that shall consist of five members. The board of
directors of Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number Two shall be appointed as follows:
(1) Appointment of members. Three members shall be appointed by the city council, and two
members shall be appointed by the commissioners court of the county. The initial board of directors
shall be appointed by resolution of each of the participating jurisdictions within sixty (60) days of the
passage of this division or within a reasonable time thereafter. All members appointed to the board shall
meet the eligibility requirements set forth in the act. The governing bodies of other taxing units that levy
taxes on real property in Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number Two have chosen not to
pay any of their taxes into the tax increment fund and have waived their right to appoint board
members.
(2) Terms; officers. The terms of the board members shall be two-year terms. The city council shall
designate a member of the board to serve as chairman of the board of directors, and the board shall
elect from its members a vice-chairman and other officers as it sees fit.
(3) Powers and duties. The board of directors shall make recommendations to the city council
concerning the administration of the zone. It shall prepare and adopt a project plan and reinvestment
zone financing plan for the zone and must submit such plans to the city council for its approval. The
board of directors shall possess all powers necessary to prepare, implement and monitor such project
plan and financing plan for the reinvestment zone as the city council considers advisable, including the
submission of an annual report on the status of the zone.
(Ordinance 10-39 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.428)
Sec. 11.05.064 Effective date; termination
The zone shall take effect on January 1, 2010, and the termination of the zone shall occur on December 31, 2039,
or at an earlier time designated by subsequent ordinance of the city council in the event the city determines that
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/435
the zone should be terminated due to insufficient private investment, accelerated private investment or other good
cause, or at such time as all project costs and tax increment bonds, if any, and the interest thereon, have been
paid in full. (Ordinance 10-39 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.429)
Sec. 11.05.065 Tax increment base
The tax increment base for the zone, which is the total appraised value of all taxable real property located in the
zone, is to be determined as of January 1, 2010, the year in which the zone was designated a reinvestment zone.
(Ordinance 10-39 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.430)
Sec. 11.05.066 Tax increment fund
There is hereby created and established a tax increment fund for the zone, which may be divided into such
subaccounts as may be authorized by subsequent resolution or ordinance, into which all tax increments, less any
of the amounts not required to be paid into the tax increment fund pursuant to the act, are to be deposited. The tax
increment fund and any subaccounts are to be maintained in an account at the affiliated depository bank of the city
and shall be secured in the manner prescribed by law for funds of Texas cities. In addition, all revenues from the
sale of any tax increment bonds and notes if issued by the city in the future, revenues from the sale of any property
acquired as part of the tax increment financing plan and other revenues to be dedicated to and used in the zone
shall be deposited into such fund or subaccount from which money will be disbursed to pay project costs for the
zone or to satisfy the claims of holders of tax increment bonds or notes issued for the zone. (Ordinance 10-39
adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 11.431)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 State motor vehicle laws adopted
For the purpose of regulating traffic on the streets, alleys, and thoroughfares of the city, there is hereby adopted
the state Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as codified in the Texas Transportation Code, and all other
state motor vehicle laws, which act and laws, together with the provisions contained in this chapter, shall be
controlling in the regulation of traffic in the city. A violation of said act or any state motor vehicle law for which the
municipal court has jurisdiction shall constitute and be punishable as a violation of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.101(a))
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformance with state manual
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications adopted
by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All signs,
signals and markings erected or used by the city must conform to the manual and specifications adopted under
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future
by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section shall be official trafficcontrol
devices. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.101(b); Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Unauthorized devices
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street, or alley any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/435
(b) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city
manager or his designee is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets,
or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official trafficcontrol
signs, when erected in accordance with city sign regulations.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.201; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.006.
Sec. 12.02.003 Tampering with devices or street name signs
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic-control device, sign, or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereof, or any street name sign or any part thereof. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.202)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
544.005.
Sec. 12.02.004 Authorization and installation
The city council shall, by ordinance, direct the location of all future traffic-control signs, signals, and markings. The
city manager or his designee shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along, or beside any highway,
street, or alley, signs, signals, and markings, as are necessary to enforce such ordinances, or causing the same to
be erected, installed, or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. Said traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately upon authorization by the city council, or
as soon as such specific device, sign, or signal can be procured. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code,
sec. 12.203; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.02.005 Prima facie evidence of authorized installation
It being unlawful for any person other than the city manager or his designee, acting pursuant to an ordinance of
the city, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign, or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the
activities on those streets of pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of
this chapter, or any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal, or marking was actually
in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the city manager or his
designee pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device,
signal or marking. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.204; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.02.006 Obedience to instructions
The driver or operator of any vehicle, motor vehicle, bicycle, or animal shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, unless
otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle as provided for in the state motor vehicle laws. It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with the directions of any traffic-control device erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this
article. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.205)
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 12.02.007 Emergency installation
The city manager or his designee is hereby empowered and directed to install or erect temporary traffic-control
devices to protect the public in case of emergencies and special situations. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06;
2001 Code, sec. 12.206; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.02.008 Ratification of existing devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this article and in
use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding vehicles or pedestrian traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified,
and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article or state law. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.207)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/435
Sec. 12.02.009 Inventory
A list or inventory of the official traffic-control devices is not codified in this article, but is on file in the office of the
city secretary. The chief of police or his designee shall maintain inventories of all traffic-control devices by type. As
each new traffic-control sign or signal is added to one of the inventories a notation shall be made to indicate the
date of installation and number of the ordinance authorizing the traffic-control device. A copy of such updated
inventory shall be placed on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code,
sec. 12.208)
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Prohibition on use of wireless communication devices in school zones
For any school crossing zone designated in section 12.03.035 of this chapter, the police chief, or his designee, is
hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate signage to implement the prohibitions on the use of wireless
communication devices while operating a motor vehicles in a school crossing zone contained in section 545.425 of
the Texas Transportation Code. (Ordinance 09-55, sec. 2, adopted 9/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 12.103)
State law reference–Use of wireless communication device in school crossing zone, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
545.425.
Secs. 12.03.002–12.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.03.031 Generally
(a) Reasonable and prudent speed required. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or
highway in the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions, having regard
for the actual and potential hazards when approaching a crossing or intersection, when approaching or going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when
special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions. In
every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other
conveyance on or entering a highway in compliance with legal requirements, and it shall be the duty of all persons
to use due care.
(b) Prima facie speed limit. If any person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle within the
corporate limits of the city on any street or highway at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, it shall be
prima facie evidence of violation of this section, unless a special speed limit has been established and signs are
erected designating another speed limit.
(c) Speed limit in school zones. Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with
subsection (a) above, the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour in a posted “school zone” during school or
designated hours shall be lawful and any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour shall be unlawful.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.301; Ordinance 2015-11, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/15)
State law references–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351; prima facie speed limits,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 12.03.032 Procedure for establishing special speed limits
(a) The city council retains the authority to alter the speed limits on streets and roads within the city which are
not part of the state highway system as established in the Texas Transportation Code.
(b) Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the thirty
(30) miles per hour speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of any street or highway, the city
manager or his designee shall, upon authorization by the city council by appropriate ordinance, establish such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/435
special speed limit as shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at
such intersection or other place or part of said highway or street.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.302; Ordinance 2015-11, sec. 2, adopted 7/21/15;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.03.033 Driving at slow speed
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction of
a law enforcement officer. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.303)
State law reference–Minimum speed regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.363.
Sec. 12.03.034 Inventory or speed limit map
The regulations regarding speed limits are not codified in this article, but are on file in the office of the city
secretary. The chief of police or his designee shall maintain an inventory or map to indicate that location of streets,
or portions thereof, where a special speed limit has been established. When the city council authorizes a new
special speed limit, the chief of police shall update the inventory or speed limit map and indicate the date the new
speed limit signs were erected and the number of the ordinance authorizing the speed limit. A copy of such
updated inventory or speed limit map shall be placed on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 06-50
adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.304)
Sec. 12.03.035 Limits for school crossing zones
(a) The prima facie maximum reasonable and prudent speed on the portion of the streets or highways
designated in this section shall be the speed in miles per hour designated, between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., both
inclusive, and 2:30 p.m. and 4.30 p.m., both inclusive, Monday through Friday, when school is in session, provided
that an appropriate sign giving notice of such speed zone is erected. The reduced speed limits established in this
section shall only be enforced between the signs which are erected designating the beginning and end of each
school crossing zone. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of exceeding the prima facie maximum speed
established as follows that the day in question was a day when there were no classes in session at the nearest
school.
School Crossing Zone Street Speed Limit
Bridgeport Elementary
School
From the 500 block of 14th Street through the 1400
block of Elementary Drive.
20 mph
From the 1400 block of Elementary Drive through
the 1200 block of 17th Street.
Bridgeport Intermediate
School
From the 1500 block of Lawdwin Avenue through
the 900 block of Lawdwin Avenue.
20 mph
From the 2000 block of 15th Street through the
2300 block of 15th Street.
From the 1300 block of Newby Avenue through the
1400 block of Lawdwin Avenue.
From the 1000 block of Davies Street through 1300
block of Davies Street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/435
Bridgeport Middle School
From the 1600 block of Harwood Street through the
500 block of 17th Street.
20 mph
From the 1600 block of Vine Street through the 600
block of 17th Street.
From the 1600 block of Brush Street through the
700 block of 17th Street.
From the 1600 block of Cobb Street through the 800
block of 17th Street.
From the 1700 block of Boston Avenue through the
900 block of 17th Street.
From the 1700 block of Kay Avenue through the
1000 block of 17th Street.
From the 1700 block of Lanice Avenue through the
1100 block of 17th Street.
Bridgeport Alternative
Learning Center
From the 1500 block of Cates Street through the
1800 block of Cates Street.
20 mph
From the 1300 block of 17th Street through the
1400 block of Elementary Drive.
Bridgeport High School
From the 100 block of Cuba Road through the 300
block of Cuba Road.
From the 2300 block of Stevens Street through the 20 mph
1100 block of Overland Drive.
From the 1600 block of Overland Drive through the
100 block of Cuba Road.
(Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 7/23/18)
(b) The police chief, or his designee, is hereby directed to ensure that appropriate signs are erected giving
notice of the speed limits adopted herein. (Ordinance 09-55, sec. 1, adopted 9/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 12.305)
ARTICLE 12.04 PARKING*
Sec. 12.04.001 Establishment of parking regulations; installation of signs or markings
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/435
(a) The city manager or his designee shall conduct studies and investigations of the public streets, highways,
and alleys within the city and shall study the needs of the public for parking vehicles on public streets, the needs of
business and commercial establishments to have regulated parking or loading zones on public streets, and the
needs of emergency vehicles to have access to use of the public streets. The city manager or his designee shall,
as a result of such studies and investigations, make recommendations to the city council where on such public
streets, highways, and alleys the city should restrict or ban the parking, standing, or stopping of vehicles, where
loading zones should be established, or where time limits should be established.
(b) The city council shall consider such recommendation of the city manager or his designee and shall, by
ordinance, approve such restrictions or ban on the parking of vehicles as may be deemed necessary.
(c) The city manager or his designee shall install such signs, signals, and markings as may be required to
enforce such parking regulations immediately upon authorization.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.401; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.04.002 Inventory of parking regulations
The chief of police or his designee shall maintain an inventory and map to indicate the location and nature of all
restrictions and bans on the parking of vehicles in the city. As each new parking regulation is authorized, the
inventory and map shall be updated to indicate the date signs, signals, and markings were installed along with the
number of the ordinance authorizing the parking regulations. A copy of such updated inventory and map shall be
placed on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.402)
Sec. 12.04.003 Privileged parking for disabled persons
(a) Designation of parking spaces. The city council or a person who owns or controls property within the city
used for parking may designate one (1) or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles
transporting persons temporarily or permanently disabled by reason of mobility problems that substantially impair
the person's ability to ambulate, or who are legally blind. The city council or person who owns or controls property
within the city used for parking that designates parking spaces for disabled persons shall erect vertical signs that
substantially conform to the design established and approved or which may hereafter be established and approved
or which may hereafter be established and approved [sic] by the state department of transportation.
(b) Identification of vehicles; parking privileges. Any vehicle displaying a symbol, tab, or other device authorized
by the state department of transportation attached to the license plate or in which a disabled identification card
issued by the state department of transportation is properly located and placed, when operated by or for the
transportation of a disabled person, shall be allowed to park for unlimited periods in any parking space or parking
area designated specifically for the physically handicapped. A vehicle properly displaying the above symbol, tab,
device attached to the license plate or identification card is exempt from the payment of any penalties imposed by
city ordinances which regulate parking in spaces which have a limit on the length of time allowed for parking.
However, to qualify for this exemption, the vehicle must be parked at the time by or for the transportation of a
handicapped person. This exemption does not apply to fees or penalties imposed by a branch of the United States
government. This subsection does not permit parking a vehicle at a place or time that parking is prohibited.
(c) Offenses. A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor
transporting a temporary or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with such special device or
displaying a temporarily disabled person identification card in any parking space or parking area designated
specifically for the disabled. A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle neither displaying the
special device nor displaying a temporarily disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area
designated specifically for the disabled. A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that the
vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. A
person commits an offense if he lends an identification card issued to him V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter
681, as amended, to a person who uses the identification card in violation of this subsection. An offense under this
section is punishable by a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.403)
State law reference–Privileged parking for persons with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
Sec. 12.04.004 Parking of trucks and trailers
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/435
No person shall park any vehicle with a rated capacity of 12,000 pounds or more according to the manufacturer's
classification, or any tractor/trailer rig, or trailer, or allow such vehicle, truck, rig or trailer to remain standing
overnight, on any premises not in a commercial or industrial zoning district, or within 200 feet of any residence not
located on a truck route specifically designated in article 12.06. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that said vehicle was involved in a commercial delivery from such truck to a home or business adjacent to
such premises. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.404)
Sec. 12.04.005 Overnight parking
(a) Overnight parking of any of the following upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or any other public
place within 200 feet of any residence is hereby prohibited:
(1) A vehicle with a rated capacity of 12,000 pounds or more according to the manufacturer's
classification;
(2) A trailer;
(3) Any combination of connected vehicles, including trailers, whose combined length exceeds 30
feet;
(4) Recreational vehicles, including motor homes, travel trailers, boats, jet skis, ATVs and trailers for
such recreational vehicles.
(b) Overnight parking of any of the following upon any commercial or industrial zoned area within 200 feet of any
residence not located on a truck route specifically designated in article 12.06 is hereby prohibited:
(1) A vehicle with a rated capacity of 12,000 pounds or more according to the manufacturer's
classification;
(2) A trailer;
(3) Any combination of connected vehicles, including trailers, whose combined length exceeds 30
feet;
(4) Recreational vehicles, including motor homes, travel trailers, boats, jet skis, ATVs and trailers for
such recreational vehicles.
(c) Overnight parking is hereby defined as parking during the hours from sundown to sun-up, except for the
parking or standing of the above-described vehicles for the purpose of expeditious loading and unloading of
passengers, freight or merchandise. This term shall not be deemed to include those required for construction of
public projects or for any work done pursuant to a permit issued by the city.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that a recreational vehicle was parked within 200 feet
of a residence for purposes of loading, unloading, cleaning or visitation; provided that such recreational vehicle is
parked for less than 48 hours, and provided that the property owner responsible for such overnight parking has
previously notified the police department of the recreational vehicle's arrival date and time, and departure date and
time.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.405)
Sec. 12.04.006 Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense
In a prosecution for an offense involving the stopping, standing, or parking of an unattended motor vehicle, it shall
be presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parking the vehicle at
the time and place the offense occurred. The registered owner of the vehicle may rebut this presumption by
showing that he or she did not stop, stand or park the vehicle. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec.
12.406)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
545.308.
Sec. 12.04.007 Parking on private property
(a) Offense.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/435
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on private property where a sign has been posted that
prohibits such parking and contains the language of subsections (A), (B), (C), or (D) below or language
substantially similar thereto:
(A) “Parking prohibited at all times up to $500.00 fine. Vehicles may be impounded at owner's
expense. By city ordinance.”
(B) “Parking prohibited from (the hour indicated) to (the hour indicated). Up to $500.00 fine.
Vehicles may be impounded at owner's expense. By city ordinance.”
(C) “Parking of (the type(s) of motor vehicle(s) indicated) prohibited at all times. Up to $500.00
fine. Vehicles may be impounded at owner's expense. By city ordinance.”
(D) “Parking of (the type(s) of motor vehicle(s) indicated) prohibited from (the hour indicated) to
(the hour indicated). Up to $500.00 fine. Vehicles may be impounded at owner's expense. By city
ordinance.”
A sign described by this subsection may specify the day or days during which parking is
prohibited.
(2) The definition of an offense under this section does not require a culpable mental state. The
definition of an offense under this section plainly dispenses with any mental element as authorized by
section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code. It is hereby declared that for an offense under this section, the
culpable mental state required by section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is specifically negated and
clearly dispensed with.
(b) Punishment.
(1) A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00.
(2) For purposes of this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the
person who parked the motor vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred.
(3) For purposes of this section, it is presumed that the following person or entity owns the property
on which the motor vehicle is parked:
(A) The person or entity whose name is on the city utility billing records for the property;
(8) The person or entity who is paying the taxes or owns the property according to records of
the county appraisal district; or
(C) The person or entity who is paying the taxes or owns the property according to records of
the county.
(4) The city's municipal court upon its own motion may, or upon the motion of a party shall, take
judicial notice of this section, all records of the city, including utility billing records, all records of the
county appraisal district, and all records of the county.
(c) Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of any violation under subsection (a):
(1) That the required signage was not conspicuously located at all paved, curb cut entrances to the
property where the violation is alleged to have occurred.
(2) That the motor vehicle was parked for a purpose specifically associated with the private property,
including, but not limited to loading, unloading, delivery, or security purposes, or for a demonstrable
emergency purpose.
(d) Impoundment. A motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded only by or under the
direction of a peace officer.
(Ordinance 2019-03 adopted 1/28/19)
ARTICLE 12.05 CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/435
Sec. 12.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article:
Parking area. A privately owned access way and parking area commonly used by the general public without
charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, or patrons of one or more business establishments
or offices.
Notice.
(1) Oral or written communication by the owner or someone with apparent authority to act for the
owner;
(2) Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude intruders or to contain livestock; or
(3) A sign or signs posted on the property or at the entrance to the building, reasonably likely to come
to the attention of intruders, indicating that entry is forbidden.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.501)
Sec. 12.05.002 Penalty
A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by
fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 06-50
adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.505)
Sec. 12.05.003 Unlawful entry
A person commits an offense if he enters or remains on property or in a building of another or on a parking area
without effective consent and he:
(1) Had notice that the entry was forbidden; or
(2) Received notice to depart but failed to do so.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.502)
Sec. 12.05.004 Conduct using vehicles
No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may:
(1) Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to
disturb the person or persons present, or within hearing distance;
(2) Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no
necessity for the protection of a person, or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the person
or persons present, or within hearing distance;
(3) Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles;
(4) Operate any motorcycle or any other motor vehicle on any property, public or private, in such a
manner that it could reasonably be expected to disturb any other person if the property in which the
motorcycle or other motor vehicle is operated is open to public view or within hearing of any private
residence, place of business, public or private school, church, clinic, or hospital or is adjacent to any
public street or highway; or
(5) Sit in their vehicles on any parking area to visit or talk with each other, or park in parking areas as
to block the entrance or exit of the parking area.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.503)
Sec. 12.05.005 Conduct generally
(a) No person in a parking area may:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/435
(1) Fight with another person;
(2) Use loud, obscene, vulgar, indecent language, swear, curse, yell or shriek in such a manner
calculated to disturb the person or persons present, or within hearing of any private residence, place of
business, public or private school, church, clinic or hospital or adjacent to any public street or highway;
(3) Throw any object capable of causing bodily harm or property damage at another person or
property with intent to injure or damage;
(4) Leave vehicles unattended in any parking area that is not legally parked in a parking space. Any
vehicle left unattended in any parking area illegally parked, or that is blocking the entrance or exit of the
parking area, may be towed away by the property owner or city police department at the property
owner's request, and the owner shall thereby become liable for any towing charge in addition to any
other penalties prescribed by this article;
(5) Throw or deposit any trash, litter, or other waste on a parking lot, area, streets or alleyways; or
(6) Congregate in crowds or loiter in any parking area of a place of business that is not open for
business at the time or on any property, publicly or privately owned, if the property is commonly open
for the use of the public, is adjacent to any public street or highway, or is within view or hearing of any
person that might reasonably be expected to be disturbed by such congregation.
(b) Any assembly of three or more persons on any property described in subsection (a)(6) above is declared a
public nuisance and unlawful assembly if any of the following conditions exist:
(1) Any person in the group is in possession of, under the influence of or using any substance listed
in the Texas Controlled Substance Act;
(2) Any person in the group is in possession of, under the influence of or using any substance
described in Texas Penal Code under public intoxication; or
(3) Any person in the group violates any penal law of the United States or the state or any ordinance
of the city.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.504)
ARTICLE 12.06 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.06.001 Definitions
Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle which is described as a truck tractor, pole trailer, semitrailer, or trailer as
described below.
Local commercial vehicle. Any commercial vehicle whose origin and/or destination is within the city and any locally
operated commercial vehicle.
Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members
capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between supporting connections.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
Through commercial vehicle. Any commercial vehicle whose origin and destination is other than the city.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Truck route. A street, road or highway designated by the city council upon which it shall be lawful for all through
commercial vehicles and local commercial vehicles to travel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/435
Truck tractor. Every vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed so as to
carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.601)
Sec. 12.06.002 Regulations
(a) Through commercial vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a through commercial vehicle
upon any highway, street, boulevard, alley or avenue within the limits of the city, except that such commercial
vehicle may travel or be operated upon any highway, street, boulevard or avenue designated as a truck route.
(b) Local commercial vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any local commercial vehicle upon
any highway, street, boulevard, alley or avenue within the limits of the city, except as follows:
(1) A local commercial vehicle may travel or be operated upon any highway, street, boulevard, or
avenue designated as a truck route.
(2) A local commercial vehicle may be off of a designated truck route in order to travel directly to or
from a point of destination as a truck route.
(3) A local commercial vehicle may leave a truck route for the purpose of delivery or picking up of
materials or goods at a location not on a truck route, but then return to the nearest truck route to exit
the location. If additional deliveries or pickups are required within the city, the vehicle is not required to
return to a designated truck route after each individual delivery/pickup, but shall return to a designated
truck route upon completion of deliveries/pickups.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.602)
Sec. 12.06.003 Designated truck routes
The following streets, roads and highways are hereby designated commercial vehicle truck routes within the city
limits:
(1) All of U.S. Highway 380;
(2) All of State Highway 114 and Business State Highway 114; and
(3) All of F.M. 1658 and F.M. 920.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.603)
Sec. 12.06.004 Marking of truck routes
(a) The city will erect appropriate truck route signage on all streets within the corporate limits of the city other
than state-maintained roadways.
(b) The state department of transportation will erect such appropriate signage as they deem necessary on all
state roadways maintained by their agency.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.604)
ARTICLE 12.07 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES
Sec. 12.07.001 Riding skateboard on street at night
Whosoever shall skate on a skateboard or shall propel himself/herself or another on a skateboard on any public
street at nighttime or when light is insufficient so that a person or vehicle is not clearly discernible at a distance of
1,000 feet ahead shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be punished in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code,
sec. 12.102(b))
Sec. 12.07.002 Restrictions in downtown historic area
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/435
Whosoever shall skate on roller skates or a skateboard, or ride a bicycle, or shall propel himself/herself or another
on roller skates, a skateboard or bicycle, on any public street, sidewalk or other passageway used by the public
within the city's historic downtown area, being that portion of Halsell Street between 7th Street and 13th Street,
other than bicycles on public streets, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be punished in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 06-50 adopted
9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.102(a))
Sec. 12.07.003 Riding on sidewalks of Halsell Street and Harwood Park Pavilion
(a) Offenses. The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this section, but
such enumeration shall not be determined to be exclusive:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate wheeled equipment on the
sidewalks of Halsell Street and on the Harwood Park Pavilion, and said restriction shall be applicable to
the sidewalks on Halsell Street bounded by the platted intersections of 16th Street on the east and to
8th Street on the west and on the Harwood Park Pavilion.
(b) Definition. Wheeled equipment, for the purpose of this section, shall include bicycles or tricycles, peddled or
propelled, skateboards, roller blades or anything that can be attached or not to one's anatomy to glide, roll or move
on the surface of said sidewalks, whether designed for a mode of movement of persons or not, but shall not
include wheelchairs or other devices to aid the movement of handicapped persons.
(c) Exceptions. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply during city permitted or sponsored festivals,
parades or similar events.
(d) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof and [shall] be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each occurrence that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ordinance 06-50 adopted 9/19/06; 2001 Code, sec. 12.801)
ARTICLE 12.08 SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.08.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to ensure advance notice of certain special events is provided to the appropriate city
departments in an effort to serve and protect citizens and city property. A special event permit shall be required for
a temporary gathering or organized activity, including but not limited to parades, block parties, bike races,
marathons, walk-a-thons, firework displays, concerts, carnivals, other types of races or festivals, or any similar
activity requiring any street closure or use of city-owned property or personnel. (Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08;
2001 Code, sec. 12.901)
Sec. 12.08.002 Operating procedures
(a) A special event shall not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near the special
event.
(b) A parade shall move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays en route.
(c) A special event shall not interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
near the special event, or unreasonably require the diversion of police and fire protection and ambulance service
from other parts of the city.
(d) A permit holder shall comply with all directions and conditions contained within the permit and with all city
ordinances and other applicable laws.
(e) The city when reasonably necessary may prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway
or part thereof on a parade route or part thereof or on the approach to a special event.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/435
(f) The promoter shall return all city or public property to at least as good a condition as before the event. The
promoter shall be liable for the costs of any damage to property or waste removal not performed by the promoter
at the conclusion of the event.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 12.907)
Sec. 12.08.003 Indemnification and release of liability
An applicant for a special event permit shall execute a written release of liability and agreement to indemnify the
city and its officers and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property, whether public or
private, arising out of the special event, as contained in the application form. (Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08;
2001 Code, sec. 12.908)
Sec. 12.08.004 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Commences or conducts a special event without the appropriate permit or fails to comply with
any requirement or condition of a permit or this article.
(2) Participates in a special event for which a permit has not been granted.
(b) If conduct that would otherwise violate this section consists of speech or other communication, in a gathering
with others to hear or observe such speech or communication, or in a gathering with others to picket or otherwise
express in a non-violent manner a position on social, economic, political, or religious questions, the person may
not be arrested or cited unless the person has first been ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the
violation.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 12.909)
Sec. 12.08.005 Administrative approval of temporary street closures
(a) Any request for temporary closure of all or a part of any city street as part of a special event shall first be
considered by the special events committee of the city. Upon a positive recommendation from the special events
committee, the request for temporary street closure shall be forwarded to the city manager or mayor for
administrative approval.
(b) The city manager or the mayor shall consider the request for temporary street closure for the special event,
and either may administratively approve the request for temporary street closure. Alternatively, the city manager or
the mayor may choose to send any request for temporary street closure to the city council for consideration and
action.
(c) If the city manager or mayor denies administrative approval of the request for temporary street closure, the
applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written appeal to the city secretary within three (3)
days of the denial. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ordinance 2016-02 adopted 1/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 12.08.006–12.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 12.08.031 Required; exemptions; sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
(a) Permit required. A person engaging in or sponsoring a special event shall apply for and receive a special
event permit from the city.
(b) Exemptions. No permits shall be required under this article for the following:
(1) The armed forces of the United States of America, the military forces of the state, political
subdivisions of the state, and the forces of the police and fire departments acting within the scope of
their duties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/435
(2) A funeral procession proceeding by vehicle under the most reasonable route from a funeral
home, church, or residence to the place of service or place of interment.
(3) A peaceful demonstration at a fixed location which is not a street.
(4) A sidewalk procession which observes and complies with the traffic regulations and traffic-control
devices, using that portion of a sidewalk nearest the street, but at no time using more than one-half of
the sidewalk.
(5) City-sponsored activities.
(c) Sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(1) The sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages at a special event requires
approval in the special event permit. An applicant must obtain all required temporary permits and/or
licenses from the state alcoholic beverage commission prior to the city's issuance of a permit to sell,
distribute or consume alcohol at a special event. Additionally, the sale, distribution and consumption of
alcoholic beverages on city-owned property is governed by section 8.01.004 of this code, and is limited
to the following facilities or locations:
(A) Bridgeport Stage Theater;
(B) Bridgeport Community Center;
(C) The right-of-way of Halsell Street between 13th Street and SH 114;
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; Ordinance 10-05 adopted 2/16/10; 2001 Code, sec. 12.902; Ordinance adopting
2017 Code)
(D) The rights-of-way of 9th Street, 10th Street, 11th Street, or 12th Street, located south of
Stevens Street and north of Cates Street;
(E) Harwood Park; and
(F) 1107 8th Street.
(Ordinance 2018-11, sec. 2, adopted 4/9/18)
(2) Approval of a special event permit to include the sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic
beverages at the Bridgeport Stage Theater or the Bridgeport Community Center shall be approved,
denied or revoked administratively by the parks and recreation director in accordance with the
provisions of section 12.08.034. Approval of a special event permit to include the sale, distribution and
consumption of alcoholic beverages within the defined right-of-way of Halsell Street shall be approved,
denied or revoked by the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 12.08.034.
(3) Special events permits to include the sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages at
the Bridgeport Stage Theater or the Bridgeport Community Center are required to have licensed police
officers at each event. The event organizer is required to pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code to the officer working the event before the start of each event.
(4) Any alcoholic beverages must be purchased at such special event from the holder of the
temporary license or permit granted by the state alcoholic beverage commission.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; Ordinance 10-05 adopted 2/16/10; 2001 Code, sec. 12.902; Ordinance adopting
2017 Code)
Sec. 12.08.032 Application
(a) A person desiring to hold a special event shall apply for a special event permit with the city parks and
recreation department. An application for a special event permit shall be made not less than ten (10) business
days prior to the event. In the event a street closure is required, the application for the special event permit shall be
made no less than twenty (20) days prior to the event. Due to TxDOT requirements, closure of any state highway
for more than six (6) hours will require sixty (60) days' advance notification to the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/435
(b) An application shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city parks and recreation department.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 12.903)
Sec. 12.08.033 Approval of plans
(a) An application for a special event permit will either be approved, approved with conditions, denied, or more
information will be requested from the applicant within five (5) business days of submission to the parks and
recreation department. Due to the nature of some events, the following additional information or plans may be
required where applicable to the event type:
(1) Facilities. A set of plans and specifications relating to all temporary facilities to be constructed or
utilized for the special event.
(2) Fire protection. A plan for prevention of fires and for adequate protection of persons and property
in the event of a fire, including, without limitation, adequate exits, fire extinguishers, and adequate
access for fire trucks and emergency vehicles.
(3) Concession service. A plan to provide food and beverages.
(4) Emergency medical service. A plan to provide adequate emergency medical services at the
special event.
(5) Parking. A plan to provide adequate parking for the proposed special event, including written
permission in the form provided by the city executed by all of the owners of the land to be used for the
special event.
(6) Event security. A plan providing for adequate safety, security, traffic and crowd control in
connection with the special event. When security officers are deemed necessary, the applicant must
use licensed TCLEOSE officers. The city police department must approve the security officers before
the event application will be approved.
(7) Promotional plan. If applicable, a plan to promote, market and advertise the special event.
(8) Sanitation plan. A plan to ensure that the highest standards of cleanliness and sanitation are
maintained at the special event, including adequate restroom facilities, and a plan to empty refuse
containers frequently so as to prevent overflow.
(b) City staff shall determine whether the application and plans meet city safety and other requirements, and an
applicant may be requested to modify an application to meet these requirements. Should any of the submitted
plans fail to give, and after notice, the applicant is unable to provide for, adequate assurances that the plans will be
implemented and carried out, the permit application may be denied.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 12.904)
Sec. 12.08.034 Issuance or denial; revocation
(a) Upon receipt of an application for a special event, the city shall forward a copy of the application to the city
departments involved, and the parks and recreation director, or his designee, shall issue its approval or denial of
the application within five (5) business days of receipt.
(b) The parks and recreation director may impose conditions and restrictions necessary for the safe and orderly
conduct of a special event, to be incorporated into the permit before issuance. To the extent of any conflict, such
conditions, restrictions, or costs incorporated into each permit shall supersede the provisions set forth herein.
(c) The city may deny or revoke a special event permit if:
(1) A special event permit has been granted for another special event at the same place and time or
within two hours of the end of a previously permitted special event, unless waived by the parks and
recreation director or his designee;
(2) The proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no reasonable
means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/435
(3) The applicant fails to comply with or the proposed special event will violate a city ordinance or
other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this article;
(4) The applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event
permit;
(5) The applicant has had a special event permit revoked or the applicant has violated a condition or
provision of a special event permit or of this article within the preceding 12 months;
(6) The applicant fails to adequately arrange for:
(A) The protection of event participants;
(B) Maintenance of public order in and around the special event location;
(C) Crowd security, taking into consideration the size and character of the event;
(D) Emergency vehicle access; or
(E) Safe, sanitary conditions for preparation or operation of food concessions;
(7) The proposed special event would unduly burden city services; or
(8) Said special event begins or ends outside the city limits, unless the applicant supplies proof of
approval of any other affected governmental entity.
(Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code, sec. 12.905)
Sec. 12.08.035 Appeals
If the city denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit, it shall send to the applicant by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of the denial or revocation and of the right to appeal. The applicant must appeal
the decision within three days to the city manager in writing. The city manager shall consider all the evidence in
support of or against the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining, modifying, or reversing the
denial or revocation. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ordinance 08-64 adopted 9/2/08; 2001 Code,
sec. 12.906; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon final conviction thereof fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code. This section shall not be deemed to prevent the discontinuation of utility service nor
the obtaining of further relief in civil court. (1976 Code, sec. 16-41; 2001 Code, art. 13.400)
ARTICLE 13.02 RATES, CHARGES AND SERVICE POLICIES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Provisions deemed incorporated in contracts
All of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the city and its
customers, and each customer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of this article, and by applying
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/435
and accepting utility service from the city to have assented to the provisions hereof. (Ordinance 98-10 adopted
4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.101)
Sec. 13.02.002 General regulations for providing water, wastewater and electric service
(a) Provision of service. The city shall provide services to the customer in accordance with the provisions of the
city's various rate schedules and service policies and as herein stated.
(b) Application for service; deposit. When a customer wishes to obtain utility services from the city, the customer
shall complete a credit application at city hall. The amount of deposit for residential services shall be dictated by
customer credit history; for commercial, the amount shall be based on credit history, historical or anticipated
usage. If the customer is renting or leasing property, the owner's name, address and telephone number shall be
provided. If the customer has an outstanding balance due the city, said amount shall be paid in full plus deposit
prior to the city activating another account.
(c) Service outside city limits. The city shall provide water or wastewater utilities to lots, blocks or tracts that are
outside the corporate city limits; providing, however, such water distribution or wastewater collection lines are
available. Should any individual, firm or corporation wish to connect to such lines a petition for annexation along
with a plot of description by metes and bounds shall be submitted to the city. Following city council action to accept
or reject said petition, such person, firm or corporation shall proceed to file the necessary application for services
and pay the fees. Separate agreements for service may be required and on a case-by-case basis and all petitions
for annexation shall be in accordance with the state statutes.
(d) Special agreements. The city shall require special contractual arrangements, which may include additional
charges, prior to the city's providing service. If the service requested by the customer is not available at the service
location or is other than that which the city usually provides, or if the service requested is not adequately
compensated for by the applicable rate schedule, additional charges shall be imposed and such additional charges
shall be paid in advance to the city by the customer.
(e) Free service prohibited; required use of service. No free utility service shall be allowed to any person, firm,
corporation or association whatsoever. Should the city or any of its agents or instrumentalities make use of the
services or facilities of the city's system, the city shall account therefor. Where both water and wastewater services
are available from the city, single service shall not be permitted. The customer shall connect to water or
wastewater services within thirty (30) days of availability. There is no requirement that water or wastewater
customers use the city's electricity nor that the electricity customers use the city's water and wastewater service as
a condition of service, unless, however, all of the city's services are available and within the city's certified areas.
(f) Capacity of service. The customer shall obtain from the city the phase and voltage of the service available
before committing to the purchase of motors or other equipment. It shall also be the customer's responsibility to
ascertain from the city the size, capacity and capability of service lines for water and wastewater prior to
construction, renovation, relocation or enlarging to or in a facility. Should any or all of the existing service lines
prove to be inadequate, the expense for oversizing shall be in accordance with the terms of this article as herein
stated, the city's subdivision ordinance and/or the city's standards and specifications.
(g) Payment for services; delinquency; exemption from late charges.
(1) Bills rendered by the city utility system and payable to the city are due when rendered. Any
amount unpaid after twenty (20) days from the date the bill is rendered shall be considered delinquent.
Such past due date shall be provided on all bills.
(2) Residential customers may apply for a permanent exemption of late charges if they meet all of
the following criteria:
(A) Must prove to be a low to moderate fixed income household as identified by current figures
obtained from the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD);
(B) Must prove to be either permanently disabled or over 65 years of age;
(C) Must prove that timing of the receipt of income checks makes it difficult to pay utility bills
prior to delinquency; and
(D) Have a satisfactory 12-month history of on-time payments for utilities with the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/435
(3) Residential customers may apply for a temporary exemption of late charges if they meet all of the
following criteria:
(A) Must prove to have a household income of low to moderate standards or a temporary
disability, prohibiting work, which reduces household income to low to moderate standards as
identified by HUD.
(B) Must prove to have medical bills which erode the ability to provide other essential
household needs.
(C) Have a satisfactory 12-month history of on-time payments for utilities with the city, or prove
to have extenuating circumstances which have hindered on-time payment.
(4) Should the past due date provided on the bill be Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the past due date
shall be deemed to be the first succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
(5) Any person, firm, or corporation who refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this article shall be subject to disconnection of utility services provided by the city.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; Ordinance 98-15 adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 00-13 adopted 6/27/00;
Ordinance 09-35, sec. 1, adopted 8/18/09; Ordinance 2011-05, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.102)
Sec. 13.02.003 Continuity and quality of service
(a) The city shall use reasonable diligence to provide continuous service but does not guarantee against
irregularities or interruptions. The customer shall be responsible for installing and maintaining protective devices as
are necessary to protect the customer's equipment or process during irregular or interrupted service, including, but
not limited to, voltage and wave form irregularities, or the failure in part or all of the electric service. Customers
shall not be guaranteed a specific amount of electricity or water nor shall any specific water pressure or electric
voltage be guaranteed. The city shall not be liable for any damages due to power outages, loss of water or water
pressure, nor for wastewater stoppages or backups.
(b) In those instances where a customer experiences irregularities or interruptions to any of the services and the
report of same to the city prompts a visit to the customer's premises at the customer's request and it shall be
determined that the interruption or irregularity resulted from the customer's installation, the city shall charge the
customer an amount based on the cost to the city for such a visit.
(c) The city shall without notice and without liability to the customer interrupt service to the customer when in the
city's sole judgment such interruption:
(1) Shall prevent or alleviate an emergency threatening to disrupt the operation of the city's system;
(2) Shall lessen or remove possible danger to life, public health, welfare or to property;
(3) Shall aid in the restoration of service to other customers;
(4) Is required to make necessary repairs to or changes in the city's facilities; or
(5) When interruption is authorized elsewhere in this article.
The city shall attempt to see that, insofar as practicable, the interruption is made at a time which is most
convenient to the customer, and, where feasible, the customer is notified in advance.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.103)
Sec. 13.02.004 Liability for damage or injury; disclaimer of warranties
(a) The city shall assume all responsibility for electric, water and/or wastewater services and facilities up to and
including the point of delivery or wastewater collection. The customer shall assume all responsibility for service
and facilities beyond the point of delivery or to the point of the wastewater tap. The city and the customer shall
agree to indemnify and save the other harmless from and against all claims, demands or causes of action of any
type whether sounding in tort or in contract, for costs or expenses for loss, damage or injury to persons or property
in any manner arising, directly or indirectly, from service or from facilities on their respective sides of the point of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/435
delivery or discharge except where such claimed loss, damage or injury shall be shown to have been solely
caused by the negligence of the other. In no event shall the city be liable for any consequential damages.
(b) The city shall not be liable to the customer for damages occasioned by interruptions, irregularities or failure
to commence service caused by or contributed to by governmental or municipal action of authority, litigation, public
enemies strikes, acts of God, order of any court or judge granted in any bona fide adverse legal proceeding or
action in any order of any commission or tribunal having jurisdiction in the premises, any other act or thing
reasonably beyond the control of the city, or as authorized elsewhere in this article.
(c) The city shall make no warranties whatsoever with regard to the provision of service and disclaims any and
all warranties, express or implied, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.104)
Sec. 13.02.005 Customer complaints
The city shall make an appropriate investigation of a complaint made by a customer in person, by letter or by
telephone, and advise the customer of results when applicable. (Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code,
sec. 13.105)
Sec. 13.02.006 Location of point of delivery or collection
(a) The point of delivery of electric service shall be the point where the city's conductors are connected to the
customer's conductors. The customer's installation must be arranged so that the location of the point of delivery is
acceptable to the city, taking into consideration location of existing city facilities and construction needed to
connect the customer to the city system.
(b) The point of delivery for the city's water shall be on the customer's side of the city's water meter. For
wastewater, the point of collection shall be on the customer's side of the main tap as provided by the city or as
provided by the original developer.
(c) Any change from the city designated point of delivery of wastewater collection shall be subject to payment by
the customer based on any added costs to reach the new designated point.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.106)
Sec. 13.02.007 Furnishing and installation of meters and taps
(a) All meters, bases and taps to city mains and lines shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the city. For
electrical service, the customer shall provide pad-mounted instrument transformer enclosures in accordance with
the city's requirements, and the customer shall install and maintain those facilities, including replacement due to
overload or damage. The customer shall provide space, without cost to the city, which is suitable for installation of
the city's meter and metering equipment. The customer shall install only an approved meter socket or meter
enclosure as specified by the city.
(b) Note: No metering equipment shall be bypassed for any reason without prior approval of the city.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.107)
Sec. 13.02.008 Location of meter
(a) Meters and associated equipment shall be installed in a location suitable to the city and in a way that has
clear working space and visibility provided on all sides. The center of the electric meter shall not be less than four
feet and not more than six feet above the ground. For underground electric service, the meter height shall be
reduced to three feet upon city approval.
(b) Meters shall not be installed:
(1) In any area which is inaccessible 24 hours a day or in any hazardous location.
(2) In any place where vibration, moisture, fumes or dust may damage the meter or interfere with its
operation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/435
(3) Directly over or under any stairway, ramp, window or steps.
(4) On any portion of a building which probably, at a later date, will be enclosed and make the meter
inaccessible.
(5) In any location accessible only through a hatchway, trap door or by means of a ladder.
(6) On or recessed in the external surface of any wall that is within three feet of any property line, or
that is over the edge of any walk, alley or driveway which provides access to commercial or industrial
property except when permitted by the city.
Note: Subsections (3) through (5) above apply only to electrical meters.
(c) All water and/or wastewater meters shall be installed in the public right-of-way or in easements dedicated to
the public. All electric meters shall be installed on power poles or on the outer facade of the main structure which is
adjacent to a public easement or right-of-way.
(d) Any meter location not in conformity with this article shall be deemed “nonconforming.” Upon vacation of the
building, structure, lot or tract or any change of occupancy or customer, said meter location shall be brought into
conformity with this article or any other ordinances or codes prior to restoration of service. Also see section
13.02.019(d) of this article.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.108; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.009 Specifications for electrical installations; relocation of installation
(a) The customer's utility service electrical installations for receiving city services shall be installed in accordance
with the city's specifications and codes. The utility services specifications shall be available at the city's business
offices.
(b) In the event the city shall be required by appropriate regulatory authorities to place underground or relocate
any of its facilities, the customer shall, at the customer's expense, relocate or change the customer's utility
installations to accomplish the required change.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.109)
Sec. 13.02.010 Inspection and approval of customer's installation
(a) The city shall not provide service to the customer until the city receives notification of approval of the
customer's installation from the city's code enforcement official.
(b) For the customer's and the city's mutual safety, the city shall decline to provide service to any customer's
installation which the city considers hazardous, unsafe, unsanitary or of such character that satisfactory service
cannot be given pursuant to any other applicable city ordinance or codes.
(c) The providing of service by the city shall not indicate that the city's installation is pronounced to be safe,
sanitary and adequate.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.110)
Sec. 13.02.011 Removal, relocation or retapping of city's facilities
(a) The city shall remove or relocate city facilities at the customer's request provided the customer pays the cost
of removing or relocating such facilities. In the event a problem shall arise on the customer's side of the point of
delivery or collection and shall require the removal of a meter or retapping the main or electric line, only authorized
city personnel shall remove meters or make retaps to the mains or electric lines. A fee for such work shall be
charged to the customer.
(b) The city shall, upon discontinuation of service to the customer, dismantle and remove all lines, mains,
equipment, apparatus or other facilities which the city may have installed to provide utility services to the customer.
The city shall, however, abandon in place, in whole or in part, its underground mains, lines and equipment in lieu of
removing such facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/435
(c) In case of a relocation made necessary due to inaccessibility, hazardous location, or dangerous or
unsanitary conditions for which the customer is responsible, or in order to prevent a recurrence of unauthorized
use of electricity, water or tampering with city equipment, the customer shall be required to pay the cost to relocate
the metering equipment to a location agreeable to the city.
(d) In the event it is deemed necessary by the city to relocate water or wastewater mains or electric lines due to
unsafe, unsanitary, topography or excessive vegetation, the city shall do so at no cost to the customer. In doing
such relocation taps on mains, such taps shall be provided for the customer at no charge; however, it shall be the
customer's responsibility to extend service lines to the new taps at the customer's expense since it is not lawful for
the city to do such work on private property.
(e) Under no circumstances shall any meter installation or tap be moved or relocated except as authorized by
the city.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; Ordinance 09-35, sec. 2, adopted 8/18/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.111)
Sec. 13.02.012 Attachments to city's facilities
(a) The city shall not permit any attachments such as wires, ropes, signs, banners or radio equipment to city
facilities by others except when authorized in writing by the city.
(b) The city shall, without notice and liability, remove unauthorized attachments to city facilities.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.112)
Sec. 13.02.013 Responsibility of customer for water loss or wastewater blockage
(a) The customer shall be held responsible for loss of water due to breakage in pipe or plumbing on the
discharge side of the meter, and if this water is not paid for according to the established rates when it becomes
due, the service shall be discontinued by the city until all charges are paid.
(b) As previously stated herein, the city shall be held harmless for damages resulting from wastewater main
backups or faulty service lines from the customer's structure to the city's main tap.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.113)
Sec. 13.02.014 Space requirements; easements; admittance to premises
(a) The customer or developer grants to or secures for the city, at the customer's or developer's expense, any
right-of-way or easement on property owned or controlled by the customer, developer or adjacent thereto which
shall be necessary to provide or repair service to the customer. It shall also be the customer's or developer's
responsibility to clear the right-of-way or easements of vegetation and/or obstructions in order to receive such new
services.
(b) The customer shall provide, without cost to the city, suitable space on the customer's premises for the
installation and repair of facilities necessary to provide service to the customer and for installation of the city's
metering facilities.
(c) The customer shall admit to the customer's premises at all reasonable hours, except in the case of
emergency, personnel authorized by the city to inspect, install, remove or replace the city's property; to read the
city's meter; to examine pipes, fixtures, wiring and the manner in which the water or electricity is used; also to
perform other activities necessary to provide service, including tree trimming and tree removal where such trees, in
the opinion of the city, constitute a hazard to city personnel or facilities, or the providing of continuous service shall
be required. No city meter shall be allowed to be located in any locked structure or fence and the presence of any
animal that could harm or threaten harm to the city personnel carrying out his duties.
(d) The placement by the customer of any structure or fence in any of the city's right-of-way or easements,
whether plotted or obtained by prescriptive rights, shall continue to be at the customer's risk. Should it become
necessary for city personnel to enter onto such easements or right-of-way to alter, remove or repair the city's
water, wastewater or electric lines, the city shall carefully and diligently move or remove said structure or fence;
however, it shall be the customer's responsibility to restore said facilities.
(e) Refusal on the part of the customer to provide reasonable access for the above purposes shall, at the city's
option, be sufficient cause for discontinuance or refusal to install service and/or relocation of the meter or tap at the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/435
customer's expense.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.114)
Sec. 13.02.015 Nonstandard electric service
(a) If the customer desires electric service which is other than standard electric service and not covered
elsewhere in this article, then the city shall provide such service to the customer based upon the estimated cost of
providing such nonstandard electric service which is in excess of the cost to provide standard electric service.
(b) The city shall terminate the provision of any nonstandard electric service at the end of the contract term, or in
the absence of a contract term, on reasonable notice to the customer.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.115)
Sec. 13.02.016 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 13.02.016 pertaining to streetlights, traffic lights and security lighting and deriving from
Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98 and the 2001 Code, sec. 13.117, was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance
2017-16 adopted 5/8/17.
Sec. 13.02.017 Charges for providing temporary service
(a) The customer shall pay the city, prior to the city's providing temporary service for construction purposes, an
amount equal to the estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities, plus the estimated costs of materials to
be used which are unsalvageable after removal of the installation.
(b) Temporary service shall also be provided to customers for facilities such as multifamily dwellings, rent
property, buildings listed for sale or rent, etc., provided deposits are made with the city.
(c) Note: No building or structure shall be allowed to be occupied by another customer until the customer who
obtained the temporary service for that building or structure has paid any and all amounts due the city. Also see
section 13.02.002 of this article.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.118)
Sec. 13.02.018 Protection of city's facilities
(a) The customer shall use reasonable diligence to protect city facilities on the customer's premises and to
permit only personnel authorized by city, or by law, to have access to such facilities.
(b) In the event of loss of, or damage to, city facilities on the customer's premises caused by or arising out of
carelessness, neglect, or misuse by the customer or an unauthorized person, the city shall require the customer to
reimburse the city for the cost of such loss or damage and/or service shall be discontinued if damages are
assessed by the city.
(c) Where meter boxes or appurtenances or temporary power is provided on a lot, block or tract of land and
such equipment is damaged by a builder or contractor, the damaged equipment shall be replaced, repaired or
reimbursement shall be made to the city for such repairs or replacement prior to occupancy and connection to city
services.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.119)
Sec. 13.02.019 Limitations on use of services
(a) Resale or improper use of electric service. The customer shall not use service provided by the city except for
the purposes specified in the rate schedule under which the customer receives services. The customer shall not
resell or otherwise dispose of services unless provided by statute or as specifically provided for in the rate
schedule or agreement with the city.
(b) Parallel operation. The customer shall not connect lines to another source of electric energy, water supply or
wastewater disposal system in a manner that may permit flow into the city's system from such source without
written agreement with the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/435
(c) Extension of customer's facilities. The customer shall not extend the customer's installation across or under a
public street or alley, or other lands not owned or leased by the customer, without the written consent of the city.
(d) Common lines not permitted.
(1) Each main structure on each lot or plot shall have service lines to the city's source of supply or
collection. Extension of such service lines to secondary or accessory buildings of such main structure
shall be permitted providing said extensions comply with the applicable codes, ordinances, and
inspection by the city.
(2) Note: Common or private lines shall not cross side property lines; however, common or private
lines on private property on a lot or tract for water and wastewater shall be permitted with city approval.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.120)
Sec. 13.02.020 Tampering with city's meters, equipment or other property
(a) No city meters, electric lines, mains or piping, equipment or other property, whether on the customer's
premises or right-of-way or easement, shall be tampered with or interfered with for any reason. The city shall not
be liable for injury to the customer, the customer's employees or others resulting from tampering with or attempting
to repair or maintain any of the city's facilities, and the customer shall agree to indemnify and hold the city
harmless therefrom.
(b) No person except authorized employees of the city shall turn water on or off at the stopcock in the meter box
or halt or stop electricity services through the meter or break any lock on the stopcock in the water meter box or
break the seal on the electric meter.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.121)
Sec. 13.02.021 Unauthorized use of services
(a) In the event of use or evidence of attempted use of the city's services, without the city's authorization,
whether by tampering with the city's meter or equipment, or by any other means, service may be discontinued by
the city. The customer shall pay the service charge for restoring service as provided for in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code. The customer shall be required to pay all charges, including the following, before service
is resumed:
(1) The charge for the estimated amount of usage without city authorization, which shall be estimated
based on amounts used under similar conditions during preceding years. Where no previous usage
history exists or is considered unreliable, consumption shall be estimated on the basis of usage levels
of similar customers and under similar conditions;
(2) The cost of replacement or repair of any damaged meter or associated equipment; and
(3) The cost of installing protective facilities or relocation of meter or lines if determined necessary by
the city.
(b) If service is restored by other than authorized city personnel after being discontinued by the city, the city shall
discontinue service and dismantle and remove all lines, equipment, apparatus or other facilities which the city
installed to provide service to the customer. The city shall, however, abandon in place, in whole or in part, its
underground lines and equipment in lieu of removing such facilities. The city shall file theft of service charges
under the provisions of this article, other ordinances or state and federal laws, rules or regulations.
(c) If it is shown to the satisfaction of the city that the customer or applicant for service had no connection with or
knowledge of unauthorized use, service shall be restored after the condition causing or permitting the
unauthorized use of service is corrected. The city shall charge the customer for the estimated amount of
unauthorized services used.
(d) No travel trailer, motor home or accessory building shall be allowed to be connected to any city utility except
as in accordance with city and state applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations, and shall not be occupied
as a residence.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.122)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/435
Sec. 13.02.022 Discontinuance of service by customer
(a) The customer shall notify the city of the date the customer desires to discontinue the services and the
customer shall not be held responsible for service after such date unless the customer continues to use service or
the terms and conditions of an existing agreement for service have not been met.
(b) The city shall not be obligated, after discontinuance, to again provide services to the customer at the same
service location unless the customer reapplies for and city agrees to provide services.
(c) The city shall charge a disconnection fee to a customer who is located in a multi-certified area and who is
receiving permanent electric, water or wastewater service for the customer's needs and who changes such service
to another utility system. The charge shall be based on the cost to remove meters, lines, poles, taps and other
apparatus plus the cost of unsalvageable material used.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; 2001 Code, sec. 13.123)
Sec. 13.02.023 Discontinuance of service by city
(a) The city, in addition to all other legal remedies, shall discontinue service to a customer or developer without
liability for any of the following reasons:
(1) Nonpayment by the customer of delinquent service bills or failure to comply with terms of a
deferred payment agreement or for payment of service calls and repairs.
(2) Failure of the customer to make application for service or falsifying information thereto.
(3) Failure of the customer, on request, to provide the city with a required deposit or other security.
(4) Failure of the customer to make application for service in the true name of the customer for the
purpose of avoiding payment of an unpaid bill for utilities service.
(5) Refusal by the customer to provide the city reasonable access to its equipment on the customer's
premises.
(6) Failure by the customer to conform to the provisions of this article, the rate under which the
customer is receiving service or the agreement for service.
(7) Violation of or noncompliance with any applicable federal, state, municipal or other local laws,
rules or regulations.
(8) Use by the customer of utility services in such manner as to jeopardize utility services to the
customer or others.
(9) Unauthorized use of service by the customer.
(10) Tampering with city meters or other property.
(11) Failure by the customer to pay an estimated bill rendered by the city when the meter is not read
due to circumstances beyond control of the city.
(12) Failure by the customer to pay a bill resulting from an underbilling due to failure to properly bill
the customer or misapplication of rate schedules less than three months prior to the current bill.
(13) Failure by the customer to pay an estimated bill resulting from an inaccurate or stopped meter or
from a meter having an incorrect register, connection, multiplier or constant.
(14) Failure by the customer to pay a bill or enter into a deferred payment agreement within thirty
(30) days from the date a bill is issued and if proper notice has been given. Proper notice shall consist
of a mailing or hand delivery at least ten (10) days prior to a stated date of disconnection, with the
words “termination notice” or similar language prominently displayed on the notice. Information included
in the notice shall be provided to adequately inform the customer. The cut-off day does not fall on a
holiday or weekend. The city shall discontinue service for nonpayment of bills only during regular
business hours. The city holding a customer deposit or other security shall not prevent discontinuance
of service by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/435
(15) Failure by the customer to comply with a deferred payment agreement previously negotiated
with the city.
(16) When a hazardous or unsanitary condition exists in the customer's installation.
(17) Where service is connected or reconnected without authority of the city.
(18) Theft of service.
(19) Failure of a developer to conform to this article, the subdivision ordinance, or agreements with
the city and/or nonconformity with city utility specifications.
(b) The city shall have the right to operate any customer-owned disconnect switches and lock switches in the
“off” position as necessary to discontinue utility services to the customer.
(c) When the city discontinues utility services to a customer for failure in the performance of the customer under
the provisions of this article, the rate schedule under which the customer is receiving service, or the agreement for
service, the customer shall correct to the satisfaction of the city all defaults which caused service to be
discontinued before the city restores utility service.
(d) When the city discontinues services to a customer, the customer's obligation specified in this article, the rate
schedule under which the customer was receiving service or the agreement for service shall not be lessened or
changed nor shall the amount of money due and payable to the city affected in any manner.
(e) Failure of the city to discontinue service at any time, resorting to any legal remedy or its exercise of any one
or more of such remedies after default or breach of this article, the rate schedule under which the customer is
receiving service, or the agreement for service shall in no way reflect approval, acceptance or permissiveness by
the city.
(f) When the city discontinues utility services to customers for the receipt of a bad check or draft for payment,
the city shall notify the customer by placement of a door hanger at the service address. The city shall specify on
the door hanger the time on the following business day that the utility services will be disconnected. Payment
made by cash or credit for the delinquent utility bill amount, the returned check processing fee, and the service
charge for disconnection shall be required to restore utility services.
(Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98; Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 6/5/12; 2001 Code, sec. 13.124)
Sec. 13.02.024 Authority to waive requirements
The mayor and city council shall waive certain of these requirements for good cause determined solely by the
council and such waiver shall be submitted in writing to the utility department. (Ordinance 98-10 adopted 4/21/98;
2001 Code, sec. 13.126)
Secs. 13.02.025–13.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.02.051 Security deposits
(a) Applicants for permanent city utility service shall be required to pay to the city a security deposit, as
determined herein, to guarantee all amounts which may become due to the city for water, sewer, garbage, and/or
electric service.
(1) Property owners, renters and/or applicants with no history presenting a credit reference from
another public utility with no more than one (1) delinquent bill in a twenty-four-month period or zero (0)
in a twelve-month period will not be required to pay a deposit.
(2) Property owners, renters and/or applicants with no history presenting a credit reference from
another public utility with more than one (1) delinquent bill in a twenty-four-month period or zero (0) in a
twelve-month period will be required to pay a minimum deposit as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/435
(3) Any applicant with unfavorable credit history will be required to pay a minimum deposit as set
forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(4) Any applicant who has previously had service with the city, but left an unpaid balance owing to
the city, will be required to pay a deposit as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code plus
all outstanding amounts.
(5) Contractors and landlords will be required to pay a minimum deposit as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code for temporary service, not to exceed a maximum of 14 days for
single-family structures. Landlords and property owners of multifamily structures will be required to pay
a permanent minimum deposit as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code to be applied
to a landlord account as agreed upon in a landlord agreement subject to approval by the director of
financial services.
(6) Garbage-only customers will be required to pay a minimum deposit as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(7) A commercial customer's security deposit will be decided based on estimated usage of the
utilities; however, in no event shall the deposit be less than as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A of this code or the estimated monthly bill, whichever is greater.
(8) New customers may have the required security deposit reduced by fifty (50) percent upon
enrollment in the automatic bank draft program for a period of at least twenty-four (24) months. In the
event there are insufficient funds in the customer's bank account to complete the draft or if the
customer terminates the automatic bank draft prior to the completion of the twenty-four (24) month
period, the customer will be required to pay the difference of the required security deposit minus the
previously applied discount plus all outstanding amounts.
(9) Existing customers with less than two (2) years of continuous service will receive a refund of their
security deposit upon enrollment in the automatic bank draft program for a period of at least twenty-four
(24) months if a review of their service account indicates there have been no delinquent bills in the
preceding six (6) month period. In the event there are insufficient funds in the customer's bank account
to complete the draft or if the customer terminates the automatic bank draft prior to the completion of
the twenty-four (24) month period, the customer will be required to pay the difference of the required
security deposit minus the previously applied discount plus all outstanding amounts.
(10) Existing customers with less than two (2) years of continuous service will receive a refund of fifty
(50) percent of their security deposit upon enrollment in the automatic bank draft program for a period
of at least twenty-four (24) months if a review of the service account indicates there has been no more
than one (1) delinquent bill in the preceding six (6) month period. In the event there are insufficient
funds in the customer's bank account to complete the draft or if the customer terminates the automatic
bank draft prior to the completion of the twenty-four (24) month period, the customer will be required to
pay the difference of the required security deposit minus the previously applied discount plus all
outstanding amounts.
(b) If the applicant for water and/or electric service is a member of a household that has relocated to a different
address within the city with the intent to establish a new utility account with the city under another household
member's name, the city may require a utility deposit from the applicant in the minimum amount set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code if (i) a utility account in the name of a household member remains unpaid at
the time of relocation, and (ii) the person in whose name the unpaid utility account was established remains a
member of the household after the household has relocated to a different address. For purposes of this section, a
household consists of any number of persons, whether related or not, residing together in a single-family dwelling
unit.
(c) Any residential customer who has maintained a security deposit for a period of more than two (2) years shall
be refunded such security deposit if a review of such individual's service account does not indicate that there have
been any delinquencies for a period of 12 continuous months.
(d) Any commercial customer who has maintained a security deposit for a period of more than two (2) years
shall be refunded such security deposit if a review of such commercial service account does not indicate that there
have been any delinquencies for a period of 12 continuous months.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/435
(e) No security deposit shall be required for occupied single-family detached housing accounts if one or more of
the occupants is 65 years of age or older, unless either the occupant or the applicant has ever had utility service
terminated due to late payment. In such event, the deposit amount shall be determined with subsection (a) hereof.
Proof of age and occupancy shall be required.
(f) A security deposit for an applicant for service from a fire hydrant or standpipe for water, if placed in a tank,
truck or other container, shall be equal to the cost of the meter, valve, coupling and freight.
(g) After review of any account, the utility division has the discretion to increase deposits based on history of
payments. If service is terminated due to nonpayment, upon restoring service it is the discretion of the utility
division to charge deposits in an amount equal to 150% of what otherwise would be due.
(Ordinance 09-35, sec. 4, adopted 8/18/09; Ordinance 2011-30 adopted 9/6/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.201;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.052 Charge for testing meter accuracy
(a) Water meter. Should a customer demand that a water meter under one and one-half inches (1-1/2") be
tested for accuracy, the customer must request in writing and the meter shall be removed and sent for testing. If
the test shows the meter is registering within the warranty of the meter manufacturer, the customer shall be billed
the actual cost of testing. If the test shows the meter is registering more water than is actually going through the
meter, the cost of testing will be at the city's expense. For larger meters the cost shall be the amount required to
test the meter.
(b) Electric meter. Should a customer demand that a single-family residential electric meter be tested for
accuracy, the customer must request in writing and the meter shall be removed and sent for testing. If the test
shows the meter is registering within the warranty of the meter manufacturer, the customer will be billed the actual
cost of testing. If the test shows the meter is registering more electricity than is actually going through the meter,
the cost of testing will be at the city's expense. For larger meters the cost shall be the amount required to test the
meter.
(Ordinance 01-08 adopted 3/6/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.202)
Sec. 13.02.053 Water rates
Water rates for residential and commercial customers shall be as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code. (Ordinance 99-9 adopted 9/14/99; 2001 Code, sec. 13.301)
Sec. 13.02.054 Sewer rates
Monthly rates for wastewater service shall be based on monthly metered water consumption and shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 99-9 adopted 9/14/99; 2001 Code, sec.
13.302)
Sec. 13.02.055 Multiple customers on single water meter
(a) Where more than one user or usage is served by one water meter, each such user or usage shall be
deemed a separate customer and a separate monthly charge shall be made therefor for water and wastewater
service provided wastewater service is available.
(b) Examples:
(1) Residential: Residential customer one billed by metered usage and the second and all others
billed at minimum water and wastewater rates.
(2) Commercial: Commercial or commercial/residential, billed the same as provided above with the
higher user billed by metered usage and the secondary billed at minimum rates.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 9/14/99; 2001 Code, sec. 13.303)
Sec. 13.02.056 Water and sewer taps
(a) Water taps. The charge for tapping the water mains within the city limits and conveying water up to and
including the curb-stop, water meter and box at or about the property line shall be as provided for in the fee
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/435
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Sanitary sewer taps. The sewer tap fee for all sewer connections within the city limits shall be as provided for
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(c) Fees where main not in place. Where water and/or sewer mains are not in place, the fee shall be as follows:
(1) Water: The person requesting service shall bear the entire cost of material and labor plus any
tapping fees.
(2) Wastewater: The person requesting service shall bear the entire cost of material and labor plus
any tapping fees.
(Ordinance 99-10 adopted 9/14/99; Ordinance 09-35, sec. 5, adopted 8/18/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.304)
Sec. 13.02.057 Water and sewer connections outside city
Extensions of city mains outside the city limits and new connections thereto shall be permitted only by means of a
contract, which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 16-34; 2001 Code, sec.
13.305)
Sec. 13.02.058 Electric rates
The monthly rates to be charged consumers for public utility services, namely electrical connections, shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 06-39 adopted 8/15/06; 2001 Code, sec.
13.306)
Sec. 13.02.059 Compliance with Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regulations
(a) The city hereby undertakes to comply with all lawful regulations of the FERC codified in subpart C of 18 CFR
part 292 dealing with arrangements with qualifying cogeneration and small power facilities under section 210 of
PURPA.
(b) The city secretary is authorized and directed to file with the FERC a copy of the ordinance adopting this
section and reflecting the city's compliance with 18 CFR section 292.401(c).
(c) The city secretary is directed to post a notice of the ordinance adopting this section on any and all public
bulletin boards where official notice of the city's governing body's activities are normally posted.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-38; 2001 Code, sec. 13.307)
Sec. 13.02.060 Liens for unpaid charges
(a) Definitions. In this section:
City manager means the city manager or his designee.
City council means the city council of the City of Bridgeport.
Utility service means the city's water, sanitary sewer and electric service.
(b) Lien procedures.
(1) Authority; exception for certain property.
(A) The city is authorized, in accordance with the provisions of section 552.0025, Texas Local
Government Code, to perfect a lien upon property for the purpose of securing the payment of
delinquent charges incurred as a result of utility service to the property.
(B) This section does not apply to homestead property that is protected by the Texas
Constitution.
(C) This section does not apply to delinquent charges for service incurred by a tenant who is
the customer of record, if the charges are incurred after the manager has received written notice
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/435
from the owner of the property served that the property is rental property. The property owner may
deliver the notice personally to the manager or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(2) Notice of lien. Before recording a lien for delinquent charges for utility service, the manager shall
send notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a lien will be filed on the property in
accordance with law. The notice must provide a time, place and means by which the charges causing
the lien may be paid or disputed. The notice must be sent to the customer in whose name the account
for service to the property exists and to the last known record owner of the property according to the tax
rolls of the city, if the customer is not the owner.
(3) Absence of notice. Absence of receipt of notice does not affect the enforceability of a lien.
(4) When lien is perfected. The lien may be perfected when charges incurred by a customer for utility
service become delinquent and other means for collecting the delinquent charges have been
unsuccessful.
(5) Form of lien. The form of the lien must contain:
(A) A statement indicating the purpose of the lien;
(B) The address of the property which is the subject of the lien, if the address is ascertainable;
(C) A legal description of the property which is the subject of the lien;
(D) The amount of delinquent charges, including penalties, interest and collection costs, if any,
incurred in connection with the property as of the date of execution of the lien.
(6) Execution and recording. The lien must be executed by the manager, acknowledged by a notary
public of the state and filed in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located.
(7) Priority of lien. The lien is superior to all other liens except a bona fide mortgage lien recorded
prior to the recording of the city's lien in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is
located.
(8) Additional charges. Should additional delinquent charges be incurred subsequent to the date of
the original lien's execution, a corrected lien may be executed and filed in the same form, documenting
the additional charges. The corrected lien, when filed of record, shall relate back to the date of
recording of the original lien and shall become a part of the original lien.
(9) Suit to foreclose. The city upon direction of the city council may file suit to judicially foreclose the
lien in a state court of competent jurisdiction. The suit may not be filed earlier than 60 days after the
recording date of the lien.
(10) Release of lien. When the manager finds and determines that all delinquent charges which
existed against the property have been fully paid, the manager is authorized to execute a release of the
lien. The release shall be filed in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located.
(11) Cumulative remedies. This section is cumulative of any other remedies, methods of collection or
security available to the manager or the city under the ordinances of the city or under state law. This
section does not affect the manager's authority to refuse to furnish service when delinquent charges
exist.
(Ordinance 01-23 adopted 7/10/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.308; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.061 Refund of credit balance
(a) Definitions.
Credit. The amount owed to a customer due to a payment being larger than the amount of the bill.
Credit balance. A credit on a utility account caused by applying the customer deposit to the final bill that is less
than the deposit amount.
Final bill. The last bill a customer receives after terminating service.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/435
(b) The city shall refund any credit balance greater than two dollars ($2.00) to the person listed as the customer
of record and to the last known address of that customer.
(c) Any amount less than two dollars ($2.00) will be termed a small credit balance and be considered as revenue
in the utility fund.
(d) Any credit balance below the minimum can be refunded upon written request by the customer of record.
(Ordinance 03-41 adopted 11/18/03; 2001 Code, sec. 13.309)
Sec. 13.02.062 Proration of minimum bill
The minimum bill for water, sewer, garbage, and/or electric services will be prorated for all billing periods less than
one (1) month, based upon the date service was established. (Ordinance 09-35, sec. 6, adopted 8/18/09; 2001
Code, sec. 13.310)
Secs. 13.02.063–13.02.090 Reserved
Division 3. Payment Extensions
Sec. 13.02.091 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to establish guidelines for utility payment extensions and to increase consistency
when said extensions are made. (Ordinance 2011-06 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1401)
Sec. 13.02.092 Applicability
Utility payment extensions shall only be made by the city utility billing department if all of the following criteria are
met:
(1) The utility customer represents a single-family residential or commercial account. Payment
extensions are not authorized for multifamily customers (i.e., an apartment complex or other multifamily
structure where all units are billed on one account);
(2) The customer has a minimum of 12 months' account history with the city;
(3) The customer's services are not currently disconnected due to nonpayment nor have been
disconnected for nonpayment during the preceding twelve (12) months; and
(4) The customer has not made another utility payment extension during the current calendar year
(January 1 through December 31).
(Ordinance 2011-06 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1402)
Sec. 13.02.093 Number limited; duration; payment of penalties
(a) A utility customer who meets the criteria outlined in section 13.02.092 above shall only be allowed to make
one (1) payment extension per calendar year. The payment extension shall only be for a maximum of ten (10)
business days.
(b) The acceptance by the city of a payment extension does not preclude the customer from incurring penalties
on their account for late payments. Said penalties shall be assessed and are due in full on the date of the payment
extension.
(Ordinance 2011-06 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1403)
Sec. 13.02.094 Failure to meet terms of extension
(a) If a customer fails to meet the terms of the payment extension, the extension shall be deemed null and void,
and services shall be subject to immediate disconnection, if applicable, without further notice.
(b) If services are disconnected due to a voided payment extension, all delinquent balances and associated fees
and penalties, as well as a new deposit, if applicable, shall be paid in full in order to have utility services reinstated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/435
(Ordinance 2011-06 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1404)
Sec. 13.02.095 Exceptions
Exceptions to this division shall only be made in catastrophic situations. Any exceptions to this division must be
approved in advance of the original payment due date by the mayor or city manager. (Ordinance 2011-06 adopted
3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1405; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Disposal of septic tank waste
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to dump septic waste into any of the city's wastewater
collection system or wastewater treatment plant save and except at such location designated by the city, and such
waste collected from septic systems located within the corporate city limits that is pumped and hauled by city
personnel or the franchisee shall be lawful.
(b) No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to dump anything but residential septic waste into the
wastewater system, and it shall be unlawful to dump waste collected from any type of grease trap or carwash, and
the dumping of petroleum products or byproducts and/or any unknown or hazardous materials shall also be
unlawful.
(c) The superintendent of natural resources or his designee shall be responsible to accept septic waste hauled
by city employees or the city franchisee, to ensure that such acceptable waste be disposed of in the proper dump
site, to inspect the waste while being discharged, to pull samples when deemed necessary, to maintain the
necessary records, to subscribe the proper and necessary documents and to report to the proper individual or
agency any and/or all violations of city ordinances, state or federal rules, regulations and laws.
(d) A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be hereafter charged for each load of
household septic waste that is dumped (a load is defined as a tank capacity not to exceed 4,000 gallons). These
loads of approved septic waste shall be accepted at the designated dump site between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(e) It is not the city's responsibility or desire to maintain employee(s) to be on call for emergency service;
however, should an emergency arise and city personnel can respond to pump and dump residential septic waste
at other times than as set forth in subsection (d) above, a fee twice the amount as prescribed herein shall be due
and payable for such work, providing city personnel is available and can be contacted by police department
dispatch and can respond.
(f) All fees for pumping and disposing of residential septic waste shall become due and payable upon receipt of
the statement from the city utility department.
(g) Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 97-3 adopted 3/4/97; 2001 Code, art. 6.400; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.03.002 Correction of sewer infiltration/inflow
(a) Each property owner shall be notified by hand delivery or certified mail, mailed to the owner's address as
shown on the current tax roll, that an infiltration/inflow condition exists on their property, and such property owner
will be given 30 days to repair said cause of infiltration/inflow. These infiltration/inflow sources are contained in the
sewer system evaluation survey prepared for the city by the firm of Gutierrez, Smouse, Wilmut and Associates,
Inc., or detected by test performed by city personnel.
(b) Should it be determined or detected by the superintendent of public works or his appointed designate that an
infiltration/inflow condition exists that is not set forth in the document described in subsection (a) above, such
employee shall cause to be issued a letter to the owners as prescribed in subsection (a) above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/435
(c) At the conclusion of the 30-day period as set forth in subsection (a) above, the superintendent of public
works or his appointed designate of the city shall cause to be written a citation for failure to comply with this
section. Each day the condition remains to be uncorrected shall constitute a separate offense and violation.
(d) The superintendent of public works or his appointed designate shall not thereby render himself to be
personally liable for trespassing or any damage that might occur to persons or property as a result of discharging
his duties and acting in good faith and without malice in the testing and enforcement of this section, and he shall
be held harmless for any omissions that might occur.
(e) Any person, firm, corporation, company or association who shall violate any provision of this section, or
suffer or allow the same to be violated, shall upon conviction therefor be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 95-4 adopted 7/18/92; 2001 Code, art. 13.600)
Secs. 13.03.003–13.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Water and Sewer Main Extension Policy
Sec. 13.03.031 Applicability and implementation
(a) The owner/developer will extend water and sewer mains to all new development within the city's water or
sewer service area as assigned by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). All utility mains shall be
installed to meet all requirements and standards established in the Texas Administrative Code and the city's
engineering design manual.
(b) The provisions of this division apply to new development and new construction only and are not intended to
apply to water or sewer connection of existing development or construction, or move-ins or move-outs.
(c) The provisions of this division do not apply to developments for which a developer agreement with contrary
provisions has been approved.
(d) Effective immediately, the owner/developer is responsible for 100% of the costs associated with construction
of water and sewer mains and off-site easements.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1301)
Sec. 13.03.032 Responsibilities of developer
(a) Generally. The owner/developer will provide all labor, materials, and equipment required to construct the
water or sewer main to provide service to a new development. This shall also include any right-of-way clearing and
right-of-way acquisition required for construction, and any engineering costs. The owner/developer or builder is
responsible for installing all facilities on the customer's side of the meter.
(b) Developer agreement. The owner/developer of any building larger than 50,000 square feet or a platted
residential subdivision with 25 lots or more shall be required to enter into a developer agreement with the city. For
multi-phased residential subdivisions, the application of this requirement will be based on the total number of lots
contained in all of the phases of the subdivision, as shown on the approved preliminary plat.
(c) Oversizing. The city shall be responsible for compensating the owner/developer the difference in cost
between the water or sewer main size mandated by the city which is over and above the size required to serve the
development, as referenced in section 13.03.071.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1302)
Sec. 13.03.033 Easements
The owner/developer shall provide to the city at no cost all required on-site and off-site easements to install the
water or sewer facilities within the development. Easements shall be recorded by plat or instrument at the county
courthouse by the owner/developer at the owner/developer's expense. (Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 3/1/11; 2001
Code, sec. 13.1303)
Sec. 13.03.034 Line relocation and tap installation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/435
(a) The owner/developer shall reimburse the city 100% of the cost for any water or sewer line relocation or
installation of a new tap. This cost shall include labor, materials, equipment, and engineering fees. The city will
provide an estimated cost of construction for the project to the owner/developer. The owner/developer shall
provide payment for the reimbursement based on this cost estimate. The city will not order material or schedule
construction until payment has been received. If the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, the difference
between the actual and estimated costs will be refunded to the owner/developer. If the actual cost exceeds the
estimated cost, the difference will be billed to the owner/developer.
(b) The owner/developer shall be required to provide to the city at no cost all on-site and off-site easements
required for the line relocation or service upgrade.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1304)
Sec. 13.03.035 Location of meters
Meters shall be installed as prescribed by the city and will be readily accessible for reading, testing, and inspection
and where such activities will cause minimum interference and inconvenience to the customer. These meters shall
be provided at a location which is easily accessible to duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification. Such employees are authorized to enter any public or private property at any
reasonable time for reading, testing, and inspecting all meter installations. If locked gates, vicious animals or other
impediments prevent the employees from gaining access to the meter installation, the city shall estimate the water
or sewer usage for a maximum of two (2) months. After two (2) months, service shall be disconnected at the meter
until the problem is resolved. (Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1305)
Secs. 13.03.036–13.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Water and Sewer Pro Rata
Sec. 13.03.061 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them. Words and terms
used in this division, but not defined in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the subdivision
ordinance. Words and terms defined in both ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there exists an
irreconcilable conflict, in which case the definition contained in this division shall control.
Developer. The owner of land proposed to be developed, or the person or entity filing an application for
development of land, or their representatives.
Development. Any activity that requires the submission of a subdivision plat (excluding a one-lot replat),
development plan or the securing of a building permit.
Escrow. Money placed in the possession of the city to accomplish the purposes set out in this division, including,
but not limited to, the following: purchase of right-of-way and the design and construction of public utilities and
streets.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.901)
Sec. 13.03.062 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthy development of the area both within the
city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
community. It is also the purpose of this division to establish responsibilities for the extension of water and sewer
mains and other public utility improvements into the various drainage basins located within the city limits and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, to provide a procedure for acquiring necessary easements and rights-of-way, and to
establish responsibilities for paying for the cost of constructing the water and sewer improvements, preparing the
engineering and survey work necessary to design and install the water and sewer improvements and the cost of
inspecting any and all construction undertaken pursuant to this division. This division is designed to be used in
conjunction with the subdivision ordinance to ensure an orderly development plan for the growth of the community,
and to ensure the creation and effective operation of a utility infrastructure appropriate in size and character to
support reasonable levels of development within the community. (Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code,
sec. 13.902)
Sec. 13.03.063 Basic policy
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/435
(a) Subdivisions within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction within the city's CCN shall be provided with an
approved water supply and distribution system and with an approved sewage collection and disposal system.
Connection with the city's sanitary sewer system shall be required except where the city manager determines that
such connection will require unreasonable expenditures when compared with other methods of sewage disposal.
(b) The developer shall pay all costs attributable to the installation of water and sewer facilities as are needed to
fulfill the basic criteria requirements of the city for service within the subdivision.
(c) The construction of all water and sewer infrastructure for a subdivision shall be covered by a written
agreement prepared or approved by the city attorney which clearly defines the scope and details of the proposed
improvements and particularly contains the developer's agreement to abide by all regulations of the city and to
deliver to the city clear and unencumbered title to all the proposed improvements at the time of acceptance by the
city, which must be prior to commencing service.
(d) The city intends to extend public utility service to all areas within its corporate limits and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction within the city's CCN at some point in the future. Public utility system extensions will be made in
conformance with the city's adopted capital improvement program and are projected to occur over many years
based upon the fiscal capability of the city and the growth characteristics of each area of the city.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.903; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.03.064 Platting required
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide water or sewer service to any lot or tract of land or any part thereof
unless and until a plat of such lot or tract of land, meeting the platting requirements of the city, has been approved
by the planning and zoning commission and has been filed for record with the county. Before consideration of a
final plat by the planning and zoning commission, the developer of the tract or subdivision shall submit to the
director of infrastructure services or the city engineer for his approval a map or plat showing the location of water
and sanitary sewer mains which will be required to ensure adequate service and fire protection for the lots
specified in the proposed tract or subdivision. (Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.904)
Sec. 13.03.065 Extension of utilities by developer
(a) In the event that a development proposal is submitted which will require the use of a public water and/or
sewer system, and no such public system has yet been extended into the area where the proposed development
is located, it will be the responsibility of the developer to comply with the terms and conditions of this division in
order to ensure the immediate availability of service.
(b) It is, and shall remain, the responsibility of each individual developer to undertake those construction
activities necessary to tie his or her development project into the water or sewer main serving that specific
drainage basin or service area. Should a lift station and/or force main be required in order to utilize a proposed offsite
service location, such lift station and/or force main shall be installed at the developer's cost. In order to
promote economic development, the city may participate in construction of water and sewer mains and
infrastructure, provided that the city may share in pro rata reimbursement described in section 13.03.069.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.905)
Sec. 13.03.066 Determination of system availability
(a) When a developer plans to undertake a specific development project within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction and the development will require service through a public water and/or sewer system, it will be the
responsibility of the developer to contact the city engineer to determine system availability. The developer will
advise the city engineer in writing of the specific location of his development, the total size of the development in
acreage, living units and/or square feet of commercial or industrial space, the type of development and land use to
occur within the subdivision and the approximate time when public utilities will be required. The information may be
incorporated into a preliminary plat or development plan application submitted to the city engineer.
(b) The city engineer shall review the city's current water and sanitary sewer system and determine whether
service is currently available to the development. If service is available through an existing main, the city engineer
shall identify the point on that main where the development will be permitted to tie into the system and will advise
the developer in writing of the location where a tie-in will be permitted. The city engineer shall support such written
notice with such map exhibits as are necessary to clearly delineate the point of tie-in.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/435
(c) In the event that a connection to an existing utility main is possible, the city manager will determine if the
utility main has been installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program or whether it was installed
by a prior developer under the approach main extension policies of this division. In the event that the utility main
was installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program, the developer will be advised that there
will be no pro rata reimbursement charge to tie into the utility main. The developer will be responsible for the entire
cost of the approach main or service line connecting his development to the utility main.
(d) If the utility main or a portion of the utility system serving the development was installed by a prior developer
under the approach main extension policy outlined in this division, the city engineer will advise the developer of his
pro rata share of costs for connection to this line. The developer shall pay the pro rata charge into the pro rata
escrow account of the city prior to making a tie-in to the system.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.906; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.03.067 Construction of approach mains
If the city engineer should determine that utility service to a proposed development is not available at the present
time, the developer will be so advised in writing. In this situation, the developer must select among the following
alternatives:
(1) Discontinue his proposed development until such time as a utility system has been installed
within the drainage basin or service area;
(2) Petition the city council to expedite the construction of a utility system capable of serving the
proposed development under its regular capital improvement program; or
(3) Install the necessary utilities to the point necessary to serve the development. The developer will
be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of necessary utilities, including but not
limited to engineering, attorney fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement acquisition,
construction and inspection. The public utilities will be designed and constructed to city standards and
specifications as the city engineer determines to be applicable. The developer may install the public
utilities himself or may contract with the city to secure construction of the utilities by the city. All financial
arrangements, including any necessary bonding, shall be completed prior to the execution of a
developer agreement. In the event that a developer elects to pursue this alternative, he will be eligible
to receive a pro rata reimbursement, for a period of ten (10) years, from future developers who tie into
these specific utilities.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.907)
Sec. 13.03.068 Ownership and maintenance of system
All water and sewer systems constructed within dedicated public right-of-way in connection with the development
shall be and shall remain the property of the city and, after expiration of the maintenance bonds, shall be
maintained by the city. Maintenance bonds shall be required for a period of two (2) years after acceptance of the
water and sewer system. (Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.908)
Sec. 13.03.069 Pro rata cost allocation where utilities are financed by initial developer
(a) If a public utility system is installed within a drainage basin or service area by a developer, each subsequent
development within the drainage basin or service area which ties into the public utility system shall pay a pro rata
share of the cost of the utility system installed by the initial developer. The pro rata fee shall be paid prior to
connection to the utility system. The pro rata fee for each subsequent development seeking service shall be
determined on a cost per acre basis by calculating the proportional area of the new development to the total area
within the drainage basin or service area served by the public utility system, multiplied by the total cost of the
public utility system installed by the initial developer. Total cost of the utilities shall include construction,
engineering, attorney fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement acquisition, and inspection costs.
(b) Provided the city collects the funds, each initial developer shall be entitled to a rebate of the pro rata charge
against subsequent developers for a period of ten (10) years following completion and acceptance of the utilities,
or until the initial developer has been paid all allowable reimbursable charges, whichever occurs first. At the
expiration of the tenth year, the developer will no longer be entitled to receive any reimbursement.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.909)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/435
Sec. 13.03.070 Management of escrow account
(a) The city shall establish an escrow account in the water/sewer fund for the deposit of all pro rata payments
made by subsequent developers. A separate escrow account shall be established for each public utility system
constructed by an initial developer. All pro rata fees received from subsequent developments or subdivisions in
that drainage basin or service area shall be deposited into that specific escrow account.
(b) A minimum of twice each year, on January 30 and on July 31, the director of financial services, or the person
designated by the city manager, shall inventory each escrow account to determine what percentage of those
monies is allocable to reimbursable oversizing costs owed by the city as determined under section 13.03.071
below. This allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that the cost of the oversized line bears to the
cost of the line size that is necessary to serve the development. For other utility system improvements, the
allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that the cost of the oversized improvements bears to the cost
of the minimum improvements required by city ordinances to serve the development, as determined by the city
engineer. Upon completion of such inventory, the director of financial services, or designated person, shall transmit
all escrow funds due and owing to the initial developer. Upon payment of these funds, the city will receive a credit
for the amount of money allocable toward its reimbursable oversizing requirements as set forth in section
13.03.071 below.
(c) The developer shall be responsible for providing to the city, and maintaining with the city, an accurate current
address. When escrowed funds are available for disbursement, the city shall notify the developer at the address on
file with the city. If the developer fails to withdraw the funds within six (6) months, the funds shall be forfeited to the
city's water and sewer fund.
(d) At no time shall the developer be entitled to receive reimbursement for a sum greater than the initial cost of
the public utilities less the pro rata share of capacity of that utility system that would have been attributable to the
initial development for its proportionate share of capacity in the system.
(Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.910; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.03.071 Oversizing
In order to provide appropriate capacity for reasonably anticipated development in a drainage basin or service
area, the city engineer, with the approval of the city council, may require a developer to install a utility line or
system improvement larger than necessary to support the developer's specific development. In the event that the
city engineer, with the approval of the city council, requires the installation of a utility line or system improvement
larger than required to serve the development, the developer installing the line will be reimbursed by the city for the
difference in cost between the size of the line required by the city engineer and the line size or system
improvement required to serve the development. The size of the facilities required to serve the development shall
be determined by the city engineer. The city may compensate the developer for the difference in cost mandated by
oversizing through the process of allowing the developer credits of up to fifty (50) percent of all development fees
charged against any portion or phase of the development. Upon written request of the developer, credit for
development fees may be transferred from the current development project to subsequent development projects,
subdivisions or phases undertaken by the developer. (Ordinance 09-76 adopted 12/15/09; 2001 Code, sec.
13.911)
ARTICLE 13.04 ELECTRICITY*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.04.001–13.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Registration of Retail Electrical Providers†
Sec. 13.04.031 Definitions
In this division, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning ascribed to them, unless the
context indicates otherwise:
Certification of retail electric provider means the person, firm, corporation, entity or partnership otherwise certified
by the state in accordance with section 39.352 of the Texas Utilities Code, as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/435
Public utility commission means the state public utility commission.
Retail customer means the separately metered end use customer who purchases and ultimately consumes
electricity.
Retail electrical provider means a person that sells electric energy to retail customers in this state. A retail electric
provider may not own or operate generation assets.
(Ordinance 01-46 adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.801)
Sec. 13.04.032 Registration required; fee
All retail electrical providers providing commercial or residential electrical service within the corporate limits of the
city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall register with the city manager or his designee. The city shall assess
a reasonable administrative fee as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for the registration,
which fee shall be assessed on an annual basis. Registration shall be made using the local registration of retail
electrical provider form as on file with the city secretary. A retail electrical provider shall register by January 1,
2002, or fifteen (15) days from the date the public utility commission enters an order granting certification of the
retail electrical provider, whichever is later. (Ordinance 01-46 adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.802;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.033 Suspension or revocation; operational regulations
(a) The city manager or his designee may establish such reasonable regulations governing the operation,
suspension or revocation of retail electrical providers service within the city limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city.
(b) The city manager or his designee will recommend to the city council that a retail electrical provider's
registration and operation within the city be revoked for significant violations of Texas Utilities Code, title 2, chapter
39, as amended, or rules adopted thereunder.
(c) The city manager or his designee may suspend the retail electrical provider's registration for a period of not
to exceed one (1) month for significant violations of Texas Utilities Code, title 2, chapter 39, as amended, or rules
adopted thereunder, until a formal recommendation regarding revocation is presented to the city council.
(d) The city manager or his designee may contract with an outside consulting firm to perform any services the
city requires herein and provided for by this section or any other applicable state law relative to the Texas Utilities
Code.
(Ordinance 01-46 adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.803; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.034 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this division shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 01-46 adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, sec. 13.804)
Secs. 13.04.035–13.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Electric Distribution Line Extension Policy
Sec. 13.04.061 Applicability and implementation
(a) The city will extend electric distribution facilities to all new development within its electric service area as
assigned by the state public utility commission (PUCT). Electric distribution facilities shall be installed to meet all
requirements and standards according to the Electric Distribution Line Extension Policy NEC (National Electrical
Code), NESC (National Electrical Safety Code), and IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
(b) The provisions of this division apply to new development and new construction only and are not intended to
apply to electrical connection of existing development or construction, or move-ins or move-outs.
(c) The provisions of this division do not apply to the following residential, commercial or industrial
developments:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/435
(1) Developments for which a preliminary plat has been approved prior to January 1, 2011, provided
that construction of all public infrastructure for such development has been completed and accepted by
the city by January 1, 2013;
(2) Developments for which a final plat has been approved and filed prior to January 1, 2011,
provided that construction of all public infrastructure for such development has been completed and
accepted by the city by January 1, 2013; or
(3) Developments for which a developer agreement with contrary provisions has been approved.
(d) The developer cost reimbursement provisions for overhead line extensions, underground line extensions and
off-site easements of this division shall be implemented in phases in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Residential, commercial or industrial developments for which a preliminary or final plat is
submitted after:
(A) January 1, 2011: 70% developer reimbursement, provided that construction of all public
infrastructure for such development has been completed and accepted by the city by January 1,
2013; otherwise 100% developer reimbursement.
(B) January 1, 2012: 100% developer reimbursement.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1001)
Sec. 13.04.062 Overhead line extensions
(a) The city will provide all labor and materials required to construct overhead electric line to provide service to
new development. The owner/developer shall reimburse the city the applicable percentage of reimbursement as
specified in section 13.04.061 of this division of the cost of construction of all of the on-site overhead electric line to
serve the new development within the development boundaries as well as off-site overhead or underground
electric lines directly attributed to the new development, excluding any facility or feeder upgrades. This
construction cost shall include all normal labor, materials, and equipment to construct an overhead electric
distribution line utilizing standard wood pole construction with anchors and guys. This cost shall also include any
right-of-way clearing and right-of-way acquisition required for construction, any engineering costs, and the cost of
transformers. The owner/developer or builder is responsible for installing all facilities on the customer's side of the
meter.
(b) In addition to the applicable percentage of reimbursement as specified in section 13.04.061 of this division
required herein, if any nonstandard designs, such as concrete or steel poles, are requested, the owner/developer
shall reimburse the city 100% of the cost difference for labor and materials between the standard wood pole
design and the concrete or steel pole design. The owner/developer shall also reimburse the city for the
engineering cost for the concrete or steel pole design.
(c) The city will provide an estimated cost of construction for the project to the owner/developer. The
owner/developer will provide payment for the applicable percentage of reimbursement based on this cost estimate.
The city will not order material or schedule construction until payment has been received. If the estimated cost
exceeds the actual cost, the difference between the actual and estimated costs will be refunded to the
owner/developer. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the difference will be billed to the owner/developer.
This true-up of cost will be calculated after the city has accepted all construction for the development and the
electric system is energized.
(d) The owner/developer of any building larger than 50,000 square feet or a platted residential subdivision with
25 lots or more shall be required to enter into a developer agreement with the city. For multi-phased residential
subdivisions, the application of this requirement will be based on the total number of lots contained in all of the
phases of the subdivision, as shown on the approved preliminary plat. This agreement shall determine the cost to
the city and the owner/developer for any system improvements to the existing electric system, line extensions to
the development site, and any on-site electric system additions required to service the new development.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1002)
Sec. 13.04.063 Underground line extensions
(a) The city shall be responsible for furnishing labor, materials, and equipment to install the primary and
secondary cable, pad mount switchgear, pad mount transformers, pad mount junction boxes, terminations,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/435
connectors, all cable accessories, pull boxes, pads, manholes, foundations, pedestals, and conduit. The
owner/developer or builder is responsible for installing all facilities on the customer's side of the meter.
(b) The owner/developer shall reimburse the city the applicable percentage of reimbursement as specified in
section 13.04.061 of this division of the cost of construction of all of the on-site underground electric line to serve
the new development within the development boundaries, as well as off-site underground or overhead electric
lines directly attributed to the new development, excluding any facility or feeder upgrades, as well as engineering
costs. The city will provide an estimated cost of construction for the project to the owner/developer. The
owner/developer will provide payment for the applicable percentage of reimbursement based on this cost estimate.
The city will not order material or schedule construction until payment has been received. If the estimated cost
exceeds the actual cost, the difference between the actual and estimated costs will be refunded to the
owner/developer. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the difference will be billed to the owner/developer.
This true-up of cost will be calculated after the city has accepted all construction for the development and the
electric system is energized. The city shall not be responsible for any electric facilities beyond the meter location.
(c) Any building larger than 50,000 square feet or a platted residential subdivision with 25 lots or more shall be
required to enter into a developer agreement with the city. For multi-phased residential subdivisions, the
application of this requirement will be based on the total number of lots contained in all of the phases of the
subdivision, as shown on the approved preliminary plat. This agreement shall determine the cost to the city and
owner/developer for any system improvements to the existing electric system, line extensions to the development
site, and any on-site electric system additions required to service the new development.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1003)
Sec. 13.04.064 Dually certificated territory
New development within territory that is certificated by the state public utility commission to both the city and to
another electric utility (dually certificated territory) will be connected in accordance with sections 13.04.062 and
13.04.063 of this division, unless the owner/developer has entered into a separate electric services agreement or
developer agreement with the city to determine electric line extension cost. Electric connect fees will be collected
in the dually certified area. (Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1004)
Sec. 13.04.065 Easements
The owner/developer shall provide to the city at no cost all required on-site easements to install the electric
facilities within the development. Easements shall be recorded by plat or instrument at the county courthouse by
the owner/developer at the owner/developer's expense. Any off-site easements required to extend electric facilities
to the development will be acquired by the city and recorded at the county courthouse. The owner/developer shall
reimburse the city the applicable percentage of the total cost of the off-site easement(s). This reimbursement shall
include all payments to property owners, engineering fees, legal fees, and any related city expenses. (Ordinance
10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1005)
Sec. 13.04.066 Street lighting
The city shall be responsible for furnishing all required design services, labor, materials, and equipment to install
street lighting to city specifications. The city will own, operate, and maintain the street lighting system after its
installation. The owner/developer shall reimburse the city 100% of the cost of installing the street lighting system.
The city will provide an estimated cost of installation for the street lighting system to the owner/developer. The
owner/developer will provide payment for the 100% reimbursement based on this cost estimate. The city will not
order materials or schedule installation until payment has been received. If the estimated cost exceeds the actual
cost, the difference between the actual and estimated costs will be refunded to the owner/developer. If the actual
cost exceeds the estimated cost, the difference will be billed to the owner/developer. This true-up of cost will be
calculated after the city has accepted the street lighting system installation and placed it in service. (Ordinance 10-
23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1006)
Sec. 13.04.067 Electric line relocation or service upgrade
(a) The owner/developer shall reimburse the city 100% of the cost for any electric line relocation or electric
service upgrade. This cost shall include labor, materials, equipment, and engineering fees. The city will provide an
estimated cost of construction for the project to the owner/developer. The owner/developer shall provide payment
for the reimbursement based on this cost estimate. The city will not order material or schedule construction until
payment has been received. If the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, the difference between the actual and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/435
estimated costs will be refunded to the owner/developer. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the
difference will be billed to the owner/developer.
(b) The owner/developer shall be required to provide to the city at no cost all on-site and off-site easements
required for the electric line relocation or electric service upgrade.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1007)
Sec. 13.04.068 Change in design cost
After the city has issued the “approved for construction” design for the electric layout and the owner/developer
requests or causes a redesign of the electric layout, the owner/developer shall reimburse the city all costs
associated with the redesign. This is to include, but is not limited to, engineering fees, restocking of materials,
delay construction charges, and shipping and storage fees for materials. (Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001
Code, sec. 13.1008)
Sec. 13.04.069 Location of meters; access to meter
Meters and service switches in conjunction with the meter shall be installed in accordance with the latest revision
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Incorporated, Standard C-12 (American National Code for
Electricity Metering) or other standards as may be prescribed by the city, and will be readily accessible for reading,
testing, and inspection and where such activities will cause minimum interference and inconvenience to the
customer. If pole-mounted, the city shall provide and install the meter can and/or C.T. cabinet. If mounted on a
building or structure, the customer shall install the meter can and/or C.T. cabinet. Customers shall provide, without
cost to the city: sufficient and proper space for installation of meters and other apparatus of the city, meter board,
meter loop, safety service switches when required, and an adequate anchor for service drops. These things shall
be provided at a location which is easily accessible to duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification. Such employees are authorized to enter any public or private property at any
reasonable time for reading, testing, and inspecting all meter installations. If locked gates, vicious animals or other
impediments prevent the employees from gaining access to the meter installation, the city shall estimate the
electric usage for a maximum of two (2) months. After two (2) months, electric service shall be disconnected at the
service pole until the problem is resolved. (Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1009)
Sec. 13.04.070 Electric switchover policy
The electric switchover process involves the city disconnecting its electric facilities and the connecting utility
installing and/or purchasing or leasing electric facilities to serve a customer's consuming facility that is located in
dually certificated territory. If a city electric utility customer whose consuming facility is located in dually certificated
territory requests in writing that its electric service be switched from the city electric facilities to the electric facilities
of the other dually certificated utility and those selling electric service through those facilities, this policy shall apply:
(1) Prior to disconnection, the requesting customer shall have signed and delivered to the city an
agreement, in a form and on terms and conditions that the city, in its judgment and discretion,
determines reasonably effectuates the city's electric switchover policy, and shall have fulfilled all terms
of such agreement, including payment of the nonrefundable switchover fee provided for herein,
payment of outstanding electric service charges, and provision of a new or increased security deposit
for electric service charges that the customer may continue to incur for electric service from the city
until the switchover is completed. The city will use reasonable diligence, subject to circumstances or
events beyond its reasonable control, to perform the switchover as soon as reasonably possible, and to
coordinate with the dually certificated utility to try to minimize any outages related to making the
switchover.
(2) The switchover fee consists of a charge per meter and, as applicable, an idle facilities charge, as
set forth below. The charges shall be the amounts either set forth below or as calculated by the city, in
its judgment and discretion, in accordance with the following:
(A) The charge per meter is designed to include the cost of the disconnection, removal, and
testing/recalibration of each meter through which the customer's consuming facility is served, the
cost of disconnection and removal of the service drop line used to serve the consuming facility,
and the general and administrative expenses reasonably attributable or related to switching the
customer and closing its account. Such costs are designed to include the labor charges for
removing facilities, including a reasonable estimate of the direct labor cost (salary, insurance,
pension, payroll taxes, etc.) for the time of persons needed to remove the facilities, an allocation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/435
of overhead for any necessary supervisory or engineering labor specific to the removal of the
facilities, and any costs incurred for outside services necessitated by the switchover request. The
charge per meter shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(B) The idle facilities charge, if applicable as determined by the infrastructure services director,
will include the higher of the net book value or the replacement cost new of the city's facilities that
are used to serve the consuming facility being switched, as well as the easements for these
facilities, including the costs, or a portion of the costs, pertaining to common facilities that are
used, installed, or designed to serve more than one consuming facility, which are made idle as a
result of the switchover request. Net book value is the original cost of facilities, less any
contributions in aid of construction that apply to those facilities, less accumulated depreciation
calculated using the depreciation rates that are currently used to book depreciation, and less any
salvage value net of any salvage costs. Replacement cost new shall be based upon the new cost
of like facilities for which information is available, plus the cost of acquiring easements for the
facilities as if the easements were obtained at the time of the switchover requests. The removed
meter and removed drop line will not normally be considered idled facilities, on the presumption
that those can be used elsewhere on the city's electric system within a reasonable period of time,
but they may be included in those circumstances in which the city determines, in the city's
judgment and discretion, they cannot reasonably be used elsewhere on the city's electric system
within a reasonable period of time.
(3) To reasonably and conservatively protect the city from the financial loss that would arise from
nonpayment of electric service charges that the customer may continue to incur for electric service from
the city until the switchover is completed, the customer must pay to the city in advance of the
switchover a security deposit in the amount equal to the average monthly invoices rendered to the
customer by the city for electric service during the preceding twelve months, as calculated by the city, in
its judgment and discretion. If an account's existing security deposit exceeds the average monthly
invoice amount, no additional security deposit shall be made. If the account's existing security deposit
does not equal the average monthly invoice amount, the difference must be paid to the city in advance
of the switchover.
(4) The calculation of switchover fees and security deposit may involve the making of estimates. To
the extent that there is a range of estimates for a particular calculation or calculation component, the
estimate shall be that which the city, in its judgment and discretion, determines is a reasonable estimate
that fairly compensates and protects the city and fairly limits the fee paid by the customer to the costs to
the city which the switchover creates on a cost-causation basis.
(5) If, in connection with any requested switchover subject to this policy, the purchase or lease of any
idle and/or common facilities, either by the dually certificated utility or by the requesting customer, is
necessitated, such as if a group of consumers request switchovers, then: (A) in the case of a purchase,
the price shall be the amount that the city, in its judgment and discretion, determines is the replacement
cost new for the idle facilities and the common facilities in question; and (B) in the case of a lease the
rental shall be the amount that the city, in its judgment and discretion, determines is a fair market rental
for the idle facilities and the common facilities in question. In determining replacement cost new, the city
shall consider the new cost of like facilities for which information is available, plus the cost of acquiring
easements for the facilities as if the easements were obtained at the time of the switchover requests. In
the event of such a purchase or lease, the idle facilities charge component of switchover fee calculation
shall not include the purchased or leased idle and/or common facilities. The purchase or lease of any
such idle and/or common facilities shall be effected through agreements and other documentation that
the city, in its judgment and discretion, determines is reasonably necessary to effect such purchase or
lease transactions and to reasonably effectuate the city's electric switchover policy, including
indemnifying the city from liability for the facilities after the purchase or lease of the facilities. Before a
customer can purchase or lease the facilities, it must prove to the city, in its judgment and discretion,
that the customer has the financial resources to protect the city from liability risks resulting from the sale
or lease.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1010; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.071 Connect fees
(a) The connect fee shall be paid when the application for electric service is submitted to the city. The connect
fee is in addition to the overhead and underground line extensions cost in sections 13.04.062 and 13.04.063.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/435
(b) The residential connect fee is as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and includes service
conductor and metering equipment costs.
(c) The commercial connect fee is as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and includes
service conductor and metering equipment costs.
(d) The industrial connect fee is as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and includes service
conductor and metering equipment costs.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1011; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.072 Effective date
The effective date of this policy shall be January 1, 2011. (Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec.
13.1012)
Secs. 13.04.073–13.04.100 Reserved
Division 4. Electric System Pro Rata
Sec. 13.04.101 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them. Words and terms
used in this division, but not defined in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the subdivision
ordinance. Words and terms defined in both ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there exists an
irreconcilable conflict, in which case the definition contained in this division shall control.
Developer. The owner of land proposed to be developed, or the person or entity filing an application for
development of land, or their representatives.
Development. Any activity that requires the submission of a subdivision plat (excluding a one-lot replat),
development plan, or the securing of a building permit.
Escrow. Money placed in the possession of the city to accomplish the purposes set out in this division, including,
but not limited to, the following: purchase of right-of-way and the design and construction of public utilities and
streets.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1201)
Sec. 13.04.102 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to provide for the orderly, safe, and healthy development of the area both within the
city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community. It is also the purpose of this division to establish responsibilities for the extension of electric distribution
lines and other electric utility improvements into the various service areas located within the city limits and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, to provide a procedure for acquiring necessary easements and rights-of-way, and to
establish responsibilities for paying for the cost of constructing the electric improvements, preparing the
engineering and survey work necessary to design and install the electric improvements and the cost of inspecting
any and all construction undertaken pursuant to this division. This division is designed to be used in conjunction
with the subdivision ordinance to ensure an orderly development plan for the growth of the community, and to
ensure the creation and effective operation of a utility infrastructure appropriate in size and character to support
reasonable levels of development within the community. (Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec.
13.1202)
Sec. 13.04.103 Basic policy
(a) Subdivisions within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction within the city's certificated service area shall be
provided with an approved electric utility service system.
(b) The developer shall pay all costs attributable to the installation of electric facilities as are needed to fulfill the
basic criteria requirements of the city for service within the subdivision, as determined by the city's electric
distribution line extension policy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/435
(c) The construction of all electric utility system infrastructure for a subdivision shall be covered by a written
agreement prepared or approved by the city attorney which clearly defines the scope and details of the proposed
improvements and particularly contains the developer's agreement to abide by all regulations of the city and to
deliver to the city clear and unencumbered title to all the proposed improvements at the time of acceptance by the
city, which must be prior to commencing service.
(d) Electric utility system extensions will be made in conformance with the city's adopted capital improvement
program and are projected to occur over many years based upon the fiscal capability of the city and the growth
characteristics of each area of the city.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1203)
Sec. 13.04.104 Platting required
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide electric service to any lot or tract of land or any part thereof unless
and until a plat of such lot or tract of land, meeting the platting requirements of the city, has been approved by the
planning and zoning commission and city council and has been filed for record with the county. Before
consideration of a final plat by the planning and zoning commission and city council, the developer of the tract or
subdivision shall submit to the director of utility services or the city engineer for his approval a map or plat showing
the location of electric distribution lines which will be required to ensure adequate service for the lots specified in
the proposed tract or subdivision. (Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1204)
Sec. 13.04.105 Extension of electric service by developer
(a) In the event that a development proposal is submitted which will require the use of the city's electric utility
system, and no such public system has yet been extended into the area where the proposed development is
located, it will be the responsibility of the developer to comply with the terms and conditions of this division and the
city's electric distribution line extension policy in order to ensure the immediate availability of electric service.
(b) It is, and shall remain, the responsibility of each individual developer to coordinate with the city those
construction activities necessary to tie his or her development project into the electric distribution line serving that
specific service area. In order to promote economic development, the city may participate in construction of electric
distribution lines, provided that the city may share in pro rata reimbursement described in section 13.04.109.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1205)
Sec. 13.04.106 Determination of system availability
(a) When a developer plans to undertake a specific development project within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction and the development will require service through the city's electric utility system, it will be the
responsibility of the developer to contact the city engineer to determine system availability. The developer will
advise the city engineer in writing of the specific location of his development, the total size of the development in
acreage, living units and/or square feet of commercial or industrial space, the type of development and land use to
occur within the subdivision, and the approximate time when electric utilities will be required. The information may
be incorporated into a preliminary plat or development plan application submitted to the city engineer.
(b) The city engineer shall review the city's current electric utility system and determine whether service is
currently available to the development. If service is available through an existing distribution line, the city engineer
shall identify the point on that line where the development will be permitted to connect to the system and will
advise the developer in writing of the location where a connection will be permitted. The city engineer shall support
such written notice with such map exhibits as are necessary to clearly delineate the point of connection.
(c) In the event that a connection to an existing distribution line is possible, the city manager will determine if the
line has been installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program or whether it was installed by a
prior developer under the distribution line extension policy of the city. In the event that the distribution line was
installed by the city as a portion of its capital improvement program, the developer will be advised that there will be
no pro rata reimbursement charge to connect to the distribution line. The developer will be responsible for the
entire cost of the service line connecting his development to the distribution line.
(d) If the distribution line or a portion of the electric system serving the development was installed by a prior
developer under the distribution line extension policy of the city, the city engineer will advise the developer of his
pro rata share of costs for connection to this line. The developer shall pay the pro rata charge into the pro rata
escrow account of the city prior to making a connection to the system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/435
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1206; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.107 Construction of electric distribution lines
If the city engineer should determine that electric utility service to a proposed development is not available at the
present time, the developer will be so advised in writing. In this situation, the developer must select among the
following alternatives:
(1) Discontinue his proposed development until such time as an electric distribution line has been
installed within the service area;
(2) Petition the city council to expedite the construction of an electric distribution line capable of
serving the proposed development under its regular capital improvement program; or
(3) Install the necessary electric distribution line(s) to the point necessary to serve the development.
The developer will be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of necessary electric
distribution line(s), including but not limited to engineering, attorney fees, surveying, testing, easement
preparation, easement acquisition, construction and inspection, in accordance with the city's electric
distribution line extension policy. The electric utilities will be designed and constructed to city standards
and specifications as the city engineer determines to be applicable. The developer shall contract with
the city for the construction of the electric utilities by the city. All financial arrangements shall be
completed prior to the execution of a developer agreement. In the event that a developer elects to
pursue this alternative, he will be eligible to receive a pro rata reimbursement, for a period of ten (10)
years, from future developers who tie into these specific electric utilities.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1207)
Sec. 13.04.108 Ownership and maintenance of system
All electric utility systems constructed within dedicated public right-of-way in connection with the development shall
be and shall remain the property of the city and shall be maintained by the city. (Ordinance 2011-04 adopted
3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1208)
Sec. 13.04.109 Pro rata cost allocation where electric utilities are financed by initial developer
(a) If an electric utility system or distribution line is installed within a service area by a developer, each
subsequent development within the service area which ties into such electric utility system shall pay a pro rata
share of the cost of the electric utility system installed by the initial developer. The pro rata fee shall be paid prior to
connection to the electric utility system. The pro rata fee for each subsequent development seeking service shall
be determined on a cost per acre basis by calculating the proportional area of the new development to the total
area within the service area served by such electric utility system, multiplied by the total cost of such electric utility
system installed by the initial developer. Total cost of the utilities shall include construction, engineering, attorney
fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement acquisition, and inspection costs.
(b) Provided the city collects the funds, each initial developer shall be entitled to a rebate of the pro rata charge
against subsequent developers for a period of ten (10) years following completion and acceptance of the electric
utilities, or until the initial developer has been paid all allowable reimbursable charges, whichever occurs first. At
the expiration of the tenth year, the developer will no longer be entitled to receive any reimbursement.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1209)
Sec. 13.04.110 Management of escrow account
(a) The city shall establish an escrow account in the electric fund for the deposit of all pro rata payments made
by subsequent developers. A separate escrow account shall be established for each electric utility system
constructed by an initial developer. All pro rata fees received from subsequent developments or subdivisions in
that service area shall be deposited into that specific escrow account.
(b) A minimum of twice each year, on January 30 and on July 31, the director of financial services, or the person
designated by the city manager, shall inventory each escrow account to determine what percentage of those
monies is allocable to reimbursable oversizing costs for future carrying capacity owed by the city as determined
under section 13.04.111 below. This allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that the cost of the
oversized distribution line or system improvement bears to the cost of the line size that is necessary to serve the
development. For other electric utility system improvements, the allocation shall be determined in the same
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/435
proportion that the cost of the oversized improvements bears to the cost of the minimum improvements required by
city ordinances to serve the development, as determined by the city engineer. Upon completion of such inventory,
the director of financial services, or designated person, shall transmit all escrow funds due and owing to the initial
developer. Upon payment of these funds, the city will receive a credit for the amount of money allocable toward its
reimbursable oversizing requirements as set forth in section 13.04.111 below.
(c) The developer shall be responsible for providing to the city, and maintaining with the city, an accurate current
address. When escrowed funds are available for disbursement, the city shall notify the developer at the address on
file with the city. If the developer fails to withdraw the funds within six (6) months, the funds shall be forfeited to the
city's electric fund.
(d) At no time shall the developer be entitled to receive reimbursement for a sum greater than the initial cost of
the electric utilities less the pro rata share of capacity of that utility system that would have been attributable to the
initial development for its proportionate share of capacity in the system.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1210; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.04.111 Future carrying capacity
In order to provide appropriate capacity for reasonably anticipated development in a service area, the city
engineer, with the approval of the city council, may require a developer to install an electric distribution line or
system improvement larger than necessary to support the developer's specific development. In the event that the
city engineer, with the approval of the city council, requires the installation of an electric distribution line or system
improvement larger than required to serve the development, the developer installing the line or improvement will
be reimbursed by the city for the difference in cost between the size of the line required by the city engineer and
the line size or system improvement required to serve the development. The size of the facilities required to serve
the development shall be determined by the city engineer. The city may compensate the developer for the
difference in cost mandated by oversizing through the process of allowing the developer credits of up to fifty (50)
percent of all development fees charged against any portion or phase of the development. Upon written request of
the developer, credit for development fees may be transferred from the current development project to subsequent
development projects, subdivisions or phases undertaken by the developer. (Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 3/1/11;
2001 Code, sec. 13.1211)
ARTICLE 13.05 SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 13.05.001 Applicability
(a) Use of system required. From and after the effective date of this article, each and every occupied residence
located within the city limits is hereby required to subscribe to and use the city garbage disposal system as
established herein. Each and every commercial unit located within the city limits is hereby required to subscribe to
and use the city garbage disposal system unless specifically exempted by the city council.
(b) Compliance with regulations. Each subscriber to the city garbage disposal system shall comply with all rules,
regulations and requirements set forth by the city council pertaining to the city garbage disposal system.
(c) Contract or franchise for collection service. No person or entity shall engage in the business of collecting,
hauling, removal and/or disposal of garbage or solid waste from premises within the corporate limits of the city for
the public for hire unless such person has been granted a contract or franchise therefor by the city council. The city
council shall grant any such franchise upon the terms and conditions it finds to be in the best interest of the city, its
citizens and inhabitants. Any franchise so granted may be made exclusive or limited to such numbers as the city
council shall determine to be warranted by the public convenience and necessity, and best calculated to effect
regular and efficient garbage and waste removal service and promote the general health, sanitation and welfare.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-1; Ordinance 01-44 adopted 12/4/01; 2001 Code, sec. 6.101; Ordinance adopting 2017
Code)
Sec. 13.05.002 Purpose
(a) To provide a safe and healthful environment for all citizens within the city limits and the surrounding areas of
the city.
(b) To protect the health of all citizens by eliminating possible infectious and noxious odors affecting the wellbeing
of citizens of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/435
(c) To provide a means for the orderly and safe handling, storage, collection, transporting and disposal of solid
waste and garbage in the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-2; 2001 Code, sec. 6.102)
Sec. 13.05.003 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
City garbage disposal system. The collection of garbage by personnel employed by either the city or by a privately
owned and operated garbage collection firm, company or corporation which is authorized to provide such disposal
collection service within the corporate limits of the city either by contract or franchise with the city.
Commercial garbage container. The type container used for industrial, commercial, institutional, apartments, etc.,
as specified by the private collection agency authorized to collect waste and garbage within the city limits.
Commercial unit. Any type of business or industry, whether sales, services, or storage, or any institution, church,
school, or hospital.
Family unit. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not
related to one another by birth, adoption or marriage.
Garbage. Any rejected waste of whatever kind, including but not limited to discarded food, cans, bottles,
glassware, paper goods, leaves, brush, grass clippings, and all other disposable goods of whatever kind.
Premises. Any house, home, dwelling, residence, apartment, duplex, mobile home, house trailer, motor home,
hotel, motel, school, church, hospital, nursing home, store, office, restaurant, warehouse, or any other type of
building or structure, yard, place or lot, whether occupied or not, within the city limits.
Residence. Any building or structure commonly known as a house, mobile home, duplex, or apartment, or any
other structure which is commonly used for housekeeping by a family unit.
Residential garbage container. Any disposable plastic or paper bag or cardboard or wooden box capable of being
sealed with sufficient durability to allow manual pickup without loss or spilling and of a capacity of not more than
thirty (30) gallons.
Residential unit. Any person or persons occupying a residence.
Solid waste. All putrescible and nonputrescible discarded or unwanted solid materials, including garbage, refuse,
trash, junk, and other discarded solid materials.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-3; 2001 Code, sec. 6.103)
Sec. 13.05.004 Penalty
Any person that is found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each
offense. Each and every day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code,
sec. 10-11; 2001 Code, sec. 6.110)
Sec. 13.05.005 Accumulation of solid waste prohibited
(a) An accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person
owning, operating, managing, controlling or occupying any premises within the city limits to fail or refuse to remove
and dispose of an accumulation of solid waste from such property within ten (10) days after having been notified in
writing to do so by the city fire marshal or other person duly authorized to give notice, or by a city police officer, or
any other authorized person.
(b) No person shall permit any garbage to accumulate on their premises except in covered garbage containers
as defined in this article.
(c) Every person in possession of any premises in the city shall be required to have accumulation of solid waste
removed and disposed of properly before such waste becomes a health hazard.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/435
(1976 Code, sec. 10-5; 2001 Code, sec. 6.104)
Sec. 13.05.006 Collection schedule
Collection of garbage shall be made twice each week for residential customers. Collection of garbage for a
commercial unit shall be on a negotiated basis with any private collection firm. Any such contract shall be subject
to approval by the city. (1976 Code, sec. 10-6; 2001 Code, sec. 6.105)
Sec. 13.05.007 Weekly disposal of garbage mandatory
Garbage must be disposed of at least once each week from all premises, or more often as may be necessary to
maintain premises in a healthful and sanitary condition, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for anyone to
permit garbage to accumulate on their premises for more than seven (7) days. (1976 Code, sec. 10-7; 2001 Code,
sec. 6.106)
Sec. 13.05.008 Prohibited acts
(a) Tampering with containers or contents. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of a
residential or commercial garbage container or his employee or agent, or the employees or agents of the city's
refuse collection and disposal contractor, to tamper with, rummage in, disturb, meddle with, scavenge in, move,
remove or add any residential or commercial garbage container or any garbage, solid waste or recyclable material
from such container, or any in way pilfer or scatter any garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or solid waste.
(b) Construction material and similar waste not to be placed in containers. No dirt, concrete, rocks, bricks or
other waste building material or other trash resulting from construction, major remodeling, general cleanup of
property or resulting from sizeable amount of trash and debris being cleared in preparation for construction shall
be placed in garbage containers for regular pickup. The owner shall have such debris and trash removed at his
expense by either his own crew or by extra pickup from the city's contractor at a rate to be negotiated and subject
to review by the city.
(c) Depositing waste on public property or property of another. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep,
throw, or deposit any garbage, trash, solid waste, stagnant water or dead animal onto, upon or along any public
property or private property of another, except as may be specifically provided by this article.
(d) Burning material not to be placed in containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning
match, charcoal, ember, or other burning material in any container used for the disposal of garbage or trash.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-8; Ordinance 2013-07 adopted 6/18/13; 2001 Code, sec. 6.107)
Sec. 13.05.009 Placement of waste and recycling for collection
(a) Each owner or person subject to this article shall place the garbage and/or recycling containers for collection
at the curb of such dwelling or business, and no pickup shall be allowed in the alleys and alleyways of the city
except by commercial units and commercial businesses in the city. The rates established herein shall be
applicable only to the picking up of disposable containers occupying no more than sixty-four cubic feet (64) and the
customer must negotiate for the pickup of large items with the city's contractor. The rate so negotiated shall be
subject to review by the city.
(b) Where garbage or recycling is collected from the street curbline adjacent to the property, the garbage and/or
recycling containers must be placed there no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the afternoon preceding the collection day
and must be removed to a point behind the building line of the property not later than 8:00 a.m., of the day
following collection.
(Ordinance 2018-14 adopted 8/27/18)
Sec. 13.05.010 Rates for collection
Rates for garbage collection shall be as provided for in the most current contract for such services between the city
and the contracted service provider. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, sec. 6.109)
Sec. 13.05.011 Brush and tree limb collection
(a) Definitions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/435
Brush. Broken or cut tree limbs.
Professional tree cutting service. A person, firm or corporation contracting for cutting and removal of trees.
(b) Collection generally; placement for collection.
(1) The city's solid waste service provider will pick up brush in accordance with the terms of the
exclusive franchise agreement.
(2) Brush stacked or piled in alleys or streets, obstructing public rights-of-way, shall be a violation of
this section, and subject to citation and fines. Same shall not be picked up until appropriately placed.
(c) Waste generated by contractor. The city will not pick up brush or trees that have been cut by a contractor
working for the homeowner specifically for the removal of trees. The contractor shall be responsible for removal
and disposal of any and all work performed.
(d) Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a penalty or fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and every day such offense is
continued shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(Ordinance 00-19 adopted 8/22/00; Ordinance 2012-20 adopted 11/20/12; 2001 Code, secs. 6.501–6.504;
Ordinance 2016-07, sec. 1, adopted 3/14/16)
Sec. 13.05.012 Bulky waste collection
(a) Definitions.
Bulky waste. Large household items including furniture pieces such as couches, chairs, tables, dressers, bed
frames, headboards, and mattresses, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, water heaters, stoves, microwave
ovens, space heaters, lawn mowers, bicycles, strollers, etc.
Construction or remodel materials. Lumber, plywood, sheetrock, vanities, cabinets, toilets, bathtubs, sinks,
windows, doors, etc.
Hazardous waste. Freon, air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers, paint, oil or petroleum based products, tires,
batteries, pesticides, televisions, computer monitors and any substance or item that is hazardous to the
environment.
Non-household items. Fencing materials, old lumber, storage buildings, boats, motorcycles, etc.
(b) Collection generally; placement for collection.
(1) The city's solid waste service provider will pick up bulky waste in accordance with the terms of the
exclusive franchise agreement. This service is provided to customers paying garbage collection fees
only, no exceptions.
(2) The city's solid waste service provider cannot accept any item that is considered hazardous
waste. These items must be disposed of properly through an appropriate receiver site. The service
provider will also not pick up construction or remodel materials or non-household items. It is the
responsibility of the contractor, builder or property owner to dispose of these materials properly.
(3) Bulky waste placed in alleys or streets, obstructing public rights-of-way, shall be a violation of this
section, and subject to citation and fines. Same shall not be picked up until appropriately placed.
(Ordinance 2-21 adopted 9/17/02; Ordinance 2013-05 adopted 6/4/13; 2001 Code, secs. 6.701–6.703; Ordinance
2016-07, sec. 2, adopted 3/14/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.05.013 Dumping waste in private container
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump trash or waste material in privately owned dumping
containers except by the person owning such container, or other persons authorized by said owner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/435
(b) Penalty. Any person who shall willfully violate the terms of this section, upon conviction, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1976 Code, secs. 10-21, 10-22; 2001 Code, secs. 6.201, 6.202)
ARTICLE 13.06 WATER WELLS*
Sec. 13.06.001 Permit required; approval; fee
(a) Anyone desiring to cause a water well to be drilled upon their property must appear and request approval of
the city council. The city council may consider circumstances surrounding the request and may impose specific
requirements to be met.
(b) Upon receiving satisfactory approval of the city council, specific requirements shall be documented upon
permitting and a permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be required.
(Ordinance 00-6 adopted 3/7/00; Ordinance 06-17 adopted 4/4/06; 2001 Code, art. 13.700(a), (b))
Sec. 13.06.002 Authorized uses
A water well may be used for purposes other than domestic or household usage (i.e., irrigation, livestock, or other
agricultural, etc.). A water well shall not be used for typical domestic or household usage where connection to the
city water system is available or can be accessed through reasonable main extensions as allowed in the general
regulations for public utilities. The city council may expressly permit domestic usage due to extenuating
circumstances presented. (Ordinance 00-6 adopted 3/7/00; 2001 Code, art. 13.700(c))
Sec. 13.06.003 Backflow prevention device
A backflow prevention device shall be required between the city's water meter and the customer's service line to
mitigate a cross-connection in the event the well or private water system is tied to the household domestic system.
(Ordinance 00-6 adopted 3/7/00; 2001 Code, art. 13.700(d))
Sec. 13.06.004 Annual inspection
An inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be collected annually for
purposes of defraying cost to inspect the private water system and verify no cross-connection exists with the public
system. The inspection will also verify the backflow prevention device is capable of operating properly. (Ordinance
00-6 adopted 3/7/00; 2001 Code, art. 13.700(e))
ARTICLE 13.07 GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS
Sec. 13.07.001 Applicability and prohibitions
(a) This article shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in
section 13.07.002 of this article.
(b) Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users whose premises are not
utilized for commercial activities.
(c) Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food
service shall register, install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in sections
13.07.003 and 13.07.004 of this article. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, food
manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility
preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption.
(d) No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW
system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause
pollutants to pass through the treatment system into the environment.
(e) No person shall introduce, or cause, permit, or suffer the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier
into a grease trap/interceptor. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/435
from the grease interceptor into the collection system, and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel,
kerosene, terpene, and other solvents.
(f) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (e) that the use of surfactants or soaps is
incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations.
(g) Water from toilets (black water) shall not be connected to the grease trap/interceptor.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1501)
Sec. 13.07.002 Definitions
Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq.
BOD. The value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
COD. The value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain
multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to
herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Generator. Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces
a grease trap waste.
Grease trap or interceptor. A device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light
density liquids and waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection
system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids generated by and from food preparation activities
prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors
are also referred to herein as “grease traps/interceptors.”
Grease trap waste. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a
commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from
the dewatering processes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source.
Interference. A discharge which alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits
or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a
cause of a violation of the city's Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit.
pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water, and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of
the hydrogen ion concentration.
POTW or publicly owned treatment works. A treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined
by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all
sewers, pipes, and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means
the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and
the discharges from such a treatment works. For the purposes of this article, the terms “sanitary sewer system”
and “POTW” may be used interchangeably.
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water
treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with
30 Texas Administrative Code, section 312.142.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/435
TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes, or
permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such
wastewater from mobile sources.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1502)
Sec. 13.07.003 Registration required
Every generator who installs a new grease trap/interceptor shall register such with the city. Existing grease
traps/interceptors shall be registered with the city within sixty days of the adoption of this article. There shall be no
fee associated with the registration of a grease trap/interceptor. (Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code,
sec. 13.1503)
Sec. 13.07.004 Installation and maintenance
(a) Installation requirements.
(1) New facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed,
or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such
facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate, and maintain a grease
trap/interceptor with sampling ports in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other
applicable ordinances. Grease traps/interceptors with sampling ports shall be installed and inspected
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Existing facilities with grease traps/interceptors. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be
operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance
with this article, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW.
(3) Existing facilities without grease traps/interceptors. Existing facilities that should have a grease
trap/interceptor and do not shall install an under-counter grease trap within 180 days of notification from
the POTW following the adoption of this article.
(4) Disposal of waste. All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in
accordance with federal, state, or local regulations.
(b) Cleaning and maintenance generally.
(1) Grease traps/interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times.
(2) Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank
capacity on the vacuum truck, in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation
capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas
Administrative Code, section 312.143.
(c) Self-cleaning.
(1) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to
removing grease from their own grease trap(s) located inside a building, provided:
(A) The grease trap is no more than fifty gallons in liquid/operating capacity;
(B) Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g., absorb liquids into solid
form and dispose into trash);
(C) The local solid waste authority allows such practice;
(D) Grease trap waste is placed in a leak-proof, sealable container located on the premises and
in an area for the transporter to pump out; and
(E) Detailed records on these activities are maintained.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/435
(2) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the POTW
for approval annually. The written request shall include the following information:
(A) Business name and street address;
(B) Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone number;
(C) Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in
gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and
(D) Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce
them for compliance inspections.
(3) Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements, procedures, and detailed recordkeeping
outlined in their approved application to ensure compliance with this article. A maintenance log shall be
kept by self-cleaning operators and submitted annually with the self-cleaning request. The maintenance
log shall indicate, at a minimum, the following information:
(A) Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced;
(B) Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor;
(C) Waste disposal method used;
(D) Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;
(E) Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and
(F) Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed and
disposed of properly, the grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were
replaced and in operable condition.
(4) Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including
fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program.
(d) Cleaning schedules.
(1) Grease traps/interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and
floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor, to ensure the
discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits, and to ensure no visible grease in observed in
the discharge.
(2) Grease traps/interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of
every ninety days, or more frequently when:
(A) Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as
measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials,
sediment, oils, or greases;
(B) The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by
the POTW; or
(C) If there is a history of noncompliance.
(3) Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request in
writing for an exception to the ninety-day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The
POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
(A) The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor
will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with the
established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by
the POTW; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/435
(B) Less than twenty-five percent of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as
measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials,
sediment, oils, or greases.
(4) In any event, a grease trap/interceptor shall be fully evacuated and cleaned at least once every
180 days.
(e) Manifest requirements.
(1) Each pump-out of a grease trap/interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for
recordkeeping purposes.
(2) Persons who generate, collect, and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each
individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall
include:
(A) Name, address, phone number, and commission registration number of the transporter;
(B) Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste, and
the date collected;
(C) Type and amount of waste collected or transported;
(D) Name and signature of the responsible person collecting, transporting, and depositing the
waste;
(E) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
(F) Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where
the waste was deposited;
(G) Name and signature of the facility's on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the
waste and the amount of waste received; and
(H) A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and
regulating authorities in tracking the volume of greases transported.
(3) Manifests shall be divided into five parts, and records shall be maintained as follows:
(A) One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed
and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup.
(B) The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled
out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest.
(C) One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility.
(D) One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the
collection and deposit of the waste.
(E) One part of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated
the waste within fifteen days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility.
(F) One part of the manifest shall go to the city.
(4) Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be readily
available for review by the POTW.
(f) Alternative treatment.
(1) Bioremediation media may be used with prior approval of the POTW. The user shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the POTW through laboratory testing, appropriate for the type of grease trap to be
used, that:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/435
(A) The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or
commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of
160°F (71°C).
(B) The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap
and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer
system.
(C) The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer system.
(D) The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not
exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being used
and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11.
(2) All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (1) shall be scientifically sound
and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant
levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the EPA and the TCEQ and which are
defined in title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 136, or title 30 Texas Administrative Code, section
319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1504)
Sec. 13.07.005 Testing and inspection
(a) Effective January 1, 2013, all grease traps/interceptors shall be tested annually for allowable levels of FOG,
BOD, COD, TSS, pH, and other pollutant levels. Testing shall be conducted by the user at its own expense.
(1) Test results shall be provided to the POTW within 15 days of collecting the test sample.
(2) Where testing indicates that greater than allowable levels of FOG, BOD, COD, TSS, pH, or other
pollutants are being discharged into the POTW, the user shall take corrective action to reduce the
pollutant levels. Corrective action may include, but is not limited to, more frequent pumping schedule,
maintenance, or other actions as required to limit pollutants to allowable levels. Additional testing to
confirm effectiveness of corrective measures shall be performed by the user and provided to the city.
(b) All grease traps/interceptors shall be visually inspected by the POTW while traps are fully drained. Such
inspections shall occur once every three years for each grease trap/interceptor.
(c) The POTW shall have the right to enter the premises of any registered grease trap/interceptor to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder.
(1) Users shall allow the POTW ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, and the performance of any additional duties.
(2) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the POTW will be permitted to enter without delay for
the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(3) The POTW shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
(4) Where more than three violations of this article occur within a two-year period, the POTW may
require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary such as FOG sensing and alarm devices.
The facility's monitoring equipment shall be installed and maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampling location shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
POTW and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the POTW access to the user's premises shall constitute a
violation of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/435
(7) Refusal of the user to allow access by the POTW to a site with a registered grease
trap/interceptor shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1505)
Sec. 13.07.006 Civil penalties
(a) If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line, the
generator shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and
$2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations, three or more within any two-year
period, may result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 per occurrence and may also result in termination of
services.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a written warning for the first
violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a
$2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations, three or more within
any two-year period, may result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 per occurrence and may also result in
termination of services.
(Ordinance 2011-11 adopted 4/5/11; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1506)
ARTICLE 13.08 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.08.001 Declaration of policy, purpose and intent
(a) Intent. In order to conserve the available water supply and/or to protect the integrity of water supply facilities,
with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to serve and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city adopts the following drought contingency plan.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this drought contingency and emergency water management plan (subsequently
referred to as “the plan”) is as follows:
(1) To conserve the available water supply in times of drought and emergency.
(2) To maintain supplies for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection.
(3) To protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety.
(4) To minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortages.
(5) To minimize the adverse impacts of emergency water supply conditions.
(c) State commission on environmental quality rules.
(1) The TCEQ rules governing development of drought contingency plans for wholesale water
suppliers are contained in title 30, part 1, chapter 288, subchapter B, rule 288.22 of the Texas
Administrative Code, which is included in appendix B to Ordinance 2014-10. For the purpose of these
rules, a drought contingency plan is defined as “a strategy or combination of strategies for temporary
supply and demand management responses to temporary and potentially recurring water supply
shortages and other water supply emergencies.”
(2) TCEQ's minimum requirements for drought contingency plans are addressed in the following
subsections of this article:
(A) 288.22(a)(1): Provisions to inform the public and provide opportunity for public input -
section 13.08.002.
(B) 288.22(a)(2): Coordination with regional water planning group - section 13.08.004.
(C) 288.22(a)(3): Criteria for initiation and termination of drought stages - section 13.08.008.
(D) 288.22(a)(4): Drought and emergency response stages - section 13.08.008.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/435
(E) 288.22(a)(5): Procedures for initiation and termination of drought stages - section
13.08.008.
(F) 288.22(a)(6): Water use reduction goals during periods of water shortage and drought -
section 13.08.008.
(G) 288.22(a)(7) Water supply and water demand management measures for each stage -
section 13.08.008.
(H) 288.22(a)(8): Provisions for new and renewed contracts - section 13.08.011.
(I) 288.22(a)(9): Procedures for granting variances - section 13.08.010.
(J) 288.22(a)(10): Procedures for enforcement of mandatory restrictions - section 13.08.009.
(K) 288.22(b): Notification of plan implementation to executive director - section 13.08.007.
(L) 288.22(c): Provisions for review of the approved drought contingency plan - section
13.08.012.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.501)
Sec. 13.08.002 Public input and adoption of plan
(a) The city council meets on a regular basis as provided for in section 2.08 of the home rule charter. A meeting
agenda is posted in accordance with state law and it presents a listing of items for discussion and of items to be
acted upon by city officials. Meetings are open to the public and the public is given an opportunity to speak and
voice their views and opinions. The city council will be active in supporting the plan and civic organizations will also
be encouraged to assist in implementing this plan. City council meetings are attended by representatives of local
newspapers and the news media provide distribution of events and subjects.
(b) The city informed and educated the public about the drought contingency plan by the following means:
(1) The proposed plan was provided to anyone requesting a copy.
(2) The plan was presented to the city council at a public meeting at city hall on February 2, 2010.
(3) The plan and the February 2, 2010 public hearing were advertised in the local newspaper on
January 28, 2010.
(4) The plan was presented for adoption to the city council at a public hearing in city hall on February
16, 2010.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.502; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.08.003 Wholesale water customer education
The city will periodically provide wholesale water customers with information about the plan, including information
about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response
measures to be implemented at each stage. This information will be provided by means of providing copies of the
plan available upon request, posting the plan on the city website, and periodically including information about the
plan with invoices for water sales. (Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.503)
Sec. 13.08.004 Coordination with regional planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the Region “C” water planning group and the Tarrant Regional Water
District. The city has provided copies of this plan to these entities. A copy of the letters is included in appendix C to
Ordinance 2014-10. (Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.504)
Sec. 13.08.005 Authorization to implement plan
The mayor, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this
plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/435
The mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply
emergency measures as described in this plan. (Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.505)
Sec. 13.08.006 Applicability
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all customers utilizing water provided by the city. The terms “person” and
“customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal
entities. (Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.506)
Sec. 13.08.007 Initiation and termination procedures
(a) Applicability. The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing potable
water provided by the city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. The plan does not apply to locations using treated
wastewater effluent, private wells or their own water rights in the Trinity River. The plan may be applied to the
entire city or geographic portions of the city as necessary. If the plan is applied only to a limited sector, the
boundaries will be defined in terms of roadways, creeks and other easily distinguishable features.
(b) Initiation of drought and emergency response stage. The mayor, or his/her official designee, may order the
implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency when one or more of the trigger conditions for
that stage is met. The following actions will be taken when a drought stage is initiated:
(1) The public and wholesale customers will be notified through the authorized emergency public
notification system. This may include local media, notices posted in public buildings and the city
website and other media.
(2) The city will notify the executive director of the TCEQ within 5 business days when mandatory
provisions of the plan are activated.
(3) Drought contingency plan drought stages imposed by TRWD action must be initiated by the city.
For other trigger conditions, the mayor, or his/her official designee, may decide not to order the
implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency even though one or more of the
trigger criteria for the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision include, but are not
limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, the anticipation of replenished water supplies, or the
anticipation that additional facilities will become available to meet needs. The reason for this decision
should be documented.
(c) Termination of drought stage. The mayor or, his/her official designee, may order the termination of a drought
response stage or water emergency when the conditions for termination are met or at their discretion. The
following actions will be taken when a drought stage is terminated:
(1) The public and wholesale customers will be notified through the authorized emergency public
notification system. This may include local media, notices posted in public buildings and the city
website and other media.
(2) If any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency plan that have been activated are
terminated, the city will notify the executive director of the TCEQ within 5 business days.
(3) The mayor, or his/her official designee, may decide not to order the termination of a drought
response stage or water emergency even though the conditions for termination of the stage are met.
Factors which could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year,
weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed conditions that warrant the continuation of
the drought stage. The reason for this decision should be documented.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.507)
Sec. 13.08.008 Drought emergency response stages
(a) Stage 1 (water watch).
(1) Drought indicators and trigger conditions.
(A) The city's water demand exceeds 90% of reliable delivery capacity for three consecutive
days. The delivery capacity could be city-wide or in a specified portion of the system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/435
(B) The city's water treatment or distribution system becomes contaminated.
(C) The city's water demand for all or part of the delivery system approaches delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(D) The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components, or due to other criteria, such as energy shortages or outages.
(E) TRWD initiated stage 1, water watch, for one or more of the following reasons:
(i) Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs drops below
75% (25% depleted) of conservation storage.
(ii) Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery system exceeds delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(iii) Water demand is projected to approach the limit of TRWD's permitted supply.
(iv) TRWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(v) TRWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(vi) The TRWD general manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD board of directors,
finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a stage 1 drought.
(2) Water use reduction goal. The goal for water use reduction under stage 1, water watch, is to
decrease use by five percent (5%). If circumstances warrant, or if required by TRWD, the mayor, or
his/her official designee, can set a goal for greater water use reduction.
(3) Water supply management measures.
(A) All water users.
(i) Initiate mandatory restrictions to prohibit nonessential water use as follows:
a. Prohibit hosing of paved areas, such as sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, tennis
courts, patios, or other impervious surfaces, except to alleviate an immediate health or
safety hazard.
b. Prohibit hosing of buildings or other structures for purposes other than fire
protection or surface preparation prior to painting.
c. Prohibit using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or other waste, including:
1. Failure to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a
leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a leaking faucet;
2. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with:
A. A broken head;
B. A head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head is over
a street or parking lot; or
C. A head that is misting because of high water pressure; or
3. During irrigation, allowing water:
A. To run off a property and form a stream of water in a street for a
distance of 50 feet or greater; or
B. To pond in a street or parking lot to a depth greater than one-quarter of
an inch.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/435
(ii) Prohibit outdoor watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems between 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
(iii) Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address
to a twice per week schedule as outlined below. This includes landscape watering of parks,
golf courses, and sports fields.
a. Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) may water on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.
b. Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may water on
Thursdays and Sundays.
c. All nonresidential locations (apartment complexes, businesses, industries, parks,
medians, etc.) may water on Tuesdays and Fridays.
d. Exceptions:
1. Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by hand-held
hose, or using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches of
the foundation that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
2. Newly installed shrubs (first year) and trees (two years) may be watered up
to two hours on any day by hand-held hose, drip irrigation, a soaker hose or a
tree bubbler. Tree watering is limited to an area not to exceed the drip line of a
tree.
3. Outdoor watering at service addresses with large multi-station irrigation
systems may take place in accordance with a variance granted by the mayor, if
the mayor determines that a property cannot be completely irrigated with an
average of three-quarters of an inch of water in a single day, and that the
property should be divided into sections to be irrigated on different days.
4. Twice per week landscape watering restrictions do not apply to locations
using well water or treated wastewater effluent for irrigation.
5. Establishing new turf is discouraged. If new hydromulch, grass sod, or grass
seed is installed for the purpose of establishing a new lawn, there are no
watering restrictions for the first 30 days while it is being established. After that,
the watering restrictions set forth in this stage apply. (This exception does not
include over-seeding with rye since turf already exists.)
(iv) Washing of any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle
shall be limited to the use of a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive-pressure shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any
time on the premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station.
Companies with an automated on-site vehicle washing facility may wash their vehicles
at any time. Further, such washing may be exempt from these requirements if the
health, safety, and welfare of the public are contingent upon frequent vehicle
cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and
perishables.
(v) All users are encouraged to reduce frequency of draining and refilling swimming
pools.
(vi) All users are encouraged to use state native and drought tolerant plants in
landscaping.
(vii) The mayor, or his/her designee, will notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and require them to implement the same stage and measures. Per the contract,
wholesale customers are required to institute and apply the same rationing,
conservation measures or restrictions to the use of water by their customers for so
long as any part of their total water supply is being furnished by the city. Any
mandatory reduction of deliveries from the city to its customers shall also be distributed
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/435
as pro rata curtailment of water deliveries to or diversions by wholesale water
customers, as provided in Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(B) City and local governments. In addition to actions listed above:
(i) Review conditions and problems that caused stage 1. Take corrective action.
(ii) Increase public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
(iii) Increase enforcement efforts.
(iv) Intensify leak detection and repair efforts.
(v) Audit all city and local government irrigation systems to ensure proper condition,
settings, and operation.
(vi) Identify and encourage voluntary reduction measures by high-volume water users
through water use audits.
(vii) Landscape watering of municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is restricted to
twice per week watering schedule, or twice per week per irrigation station if a variance is
granted by the mayor. (See exceptions to outdoor watering restrictions in “all water users”
category above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation systems.)
Exceptions:
a. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions; however,
watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
b. Skinned areas of sports fields may be watered as needed for dust control.
(viii) Reduce nonessential water use. As used herein, nonessential water uses are those
that do not have any health or safety impact and are not needed to meet the core function of
the city.
(ix) Institute a mandated reduction in deliveries to all wholesale customers. Such a
reduction will be distributed as required by Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(x) If TRWD has imposed a reduction in water available to customers, impose the same
percent reduction on wholesale customers.
(C) Commercial or industrial users.
(i) All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and industrial users.
Exception: Water uses that utilize treated wastewater effluent exclusively are not
subject to water use restrictions.
(ii) Landscape watering of parks, golf courses, and sports fields is restricted to a twice per
week watering schedule, or twice per week per irrigation station if a variance is granted by
the mayor. (See exceptions to outdoor watering restrictions in “all water users” category
above for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation systems.)
Exceptions:
a. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions; however,
watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. Fairways are restricted to
twice per week watering as outlined above. Golf course rough is restricted to once per
week watering.
b. Skinned areas of sports fields may be watered as needed for dust control.
(iii) Stock at commercial plant nurseries is exempt from stage 1 watering restrictions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/435
(iv) Hotels, restaurants, and bars are encouraged to serve drinking water to patrons on an
“on demand” basis.
(v) Hotels are encouraged to implement laundry conservation measures by encouraging
patrons to reuse linens and towels.
(4) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 1
no longer prevail. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of stage
1 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 1 of the plan.
(b) Stage 2 (water warning).
(1) Drought indicators and trigger conditions.
(A) The city's water demand exceeds 95% of reliable delivery capacity for two consecutive
days. The delivery capacity could be city-wide or in a specified portion of the system.
(B) The city demand for all or part of the delivery system equals or exceeds delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(C) The city water treatment or distribution system becomes contaminated.
(D) The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components, or due to other criteria, such as energy shortages or outages.
(E) TRWD initiated stage 2, water warning, for one or more of the following reasons:
(i) Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs drops below
60% (40% depleted) of conservation storage.
(ii) Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery system exceeds delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(iii) Water demand is projected to approach the limit of TRWD's permitted supply.
(iv) TRWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(v) TRWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(vi) The TRWD general manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD board of directors,
finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a stage 2 drought.
(2) Water use reduction goal. The goal for water use reduction under stage 2, water warning, is to
decrease use by ten percent (10%). If circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD, the mayor, or
his/her official designee, can set a goal for greater water use reduction.
(3) Water management measures.
(A) All water users.
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stage 1.
(ii) Landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address is
limited to once every seven days. Outdoor watering schedule to be determined by the
mayor.
Exceptions:
a. Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by hand-held hose, or
using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches of the foundation
that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/435
b. Newly installed shrubs (first year) and trees may be watered up to two hours on
any day by hand-held hose, drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree watering is limited to
an area not to exceed the drip line of a tree.
c. Outdoor watering at service addresses with large multi-station irrigation systems
may take place in accordance with a variance granted by the mayor, if the mayor
determines that a property cannot be completely irrigated with an average of threequarters
of an inch of water in a single day, and that the property should be divided into
sections to be irrigated on different days.
d. Once per week outdoor watering restrictions do not apply to locations using well
water or treated wastewater effluent for irrigation.
(iii) All users are encouraged to wait until the current drought or emergency situation has
passed before establishing new landscaping. If new hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed is
installed for the purpose of establishing a new lawn, there are no watering restrictions for the
first 30 days while it is being established. After that, the watering restrictions set forth in the
current drought stage apply. (This exception does not include over-seeding with rye since
turf already exists.)
(iv) Prohibit use of water for dust control, except as required to protect public health.
(v) Prohibit the operation of ornamental fountains or ponds that use potable water except
where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with
a recirculation system.
(vi) Prohibit filling of swimming pools with automatic valves.
(vii) The mayor, or his/her designee, will notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and require them to implement the same stage and measures. Per the contract,
wholesale customers are required to institute and apply the same rationing, conservation
measures or restrictions to the use of water by their customers for so long as any part of
their total water supply is being furnished by the city. Any mandatory reduction of deliveries
from the city to its customers shall also be distributed as pro rata curtailment of water
deliveries to or diversions by wholesale water customers, as provided in Texas Water Code,
section 11.039.
(B) City and local governments. In addition to actions listed above:
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stage 1.
(ii) Review conditions or problems that caused stage 2. Take corrective action.
(iii) Increase frequency of media releases on water supply conditions.
(iv) Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
(v) Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is limited to
once every seven days, or once every seven days per irrigation station if a variance is
granted by mayor. (See stage 1 exceptions to outdoor watering restrictions in “all water
users” category for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation systems.)
Exceptions:
a. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes as needed to keep them alive;
however, watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. Fairways are
restricted to once per week watering as outlined above. Golf course rough cannot be
watered.
b. Watering for dust control on skinned areas of sport fields is not allowed.
(vi) Eliminate nonessential water use. As used herein, nonessential water uses are those
that do not have any health or safety impact and are not needed to meet the core function of
the agency.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/435
(vii) Prohibit wet street sweeping.
(viii) Institute a mandated reduction in deliveries to all wholesale customers. Such a
reduction will be distributed as required by Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(ix) If TRWD has imposed a reduction in water available to customers, impose the same
percent reduction on wholesale customers.
(C) Commercial or industrial users.
(i) All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and industrial users.
Exception: Water uses that utilize treated wastewater effluent exclusively are not
subject to water use restrictions.
(ii) Landscape watering at parks, golf courses, and sports fields is limited to once every
seven days, or once every seven days per irrigation station if a variance is granted by the
mayor. (See stage 1 exceptions to outdoor watering restrictions in “all water users” category
for rules that apply to facilities with large multi-station irrigation systems.)
Exceptions:
a. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes as needed to keep them alive;
however, watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
b. Watering for dust control on skinned areas of sport fields is not allowed.
(iii) Use of water from hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting related activities, or
other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare, requires a variance
issued by the mayor. Non-emergency fire hydrant use may be limited to only designated
hydrants. Upon declaration of this drought stage, all holders or applicants of a water fire
hydrant meter agreement are required to apply for a variance as set forth in this plan. If
conditions allow, as determined by the mayor, the use of water from hydrants may continue
until the mayor, or his/her official designee, issues a determination on the petition for
variance. If conditions do not allow, the mayor may require all fire hydrant meters to be
immediately returned from the field, pending determination of each petition for variance.
(4) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 2
no longer prevail. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of stage
2 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 2 of the plan. Notification of termination of
stage 2 will include instructions to set stage 1 or terminate all drought response stages as determined
by the mayor, or his/her designee.
(c) Stage 3 (water emergency).
(1) Drought indicators and trigger conditions.
(A) The city's water demand exceeds 100% of reliable delivery capacity for one day. The
delivery capacity could be city-wide or in a specified portion of the system.
(B) The city's demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity because
delivery capacity is inadequate.
(C) Natural or man-made contamination of the water supplier's treatment or distribution system.
(D) The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components, or due to other criteria, such as energy shortages or outages.
(E) The TRWD has initiated stage 3, water emergency, which may be initiated by one or more
of the following:
(i) Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs drops below
45% (55% depleted) of conservation storage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/435
(ii) Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery system exceeds delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(iii) Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit of TRWD's permitted
supply.
(iv) TRWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(v) TRWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(vi) The TRWD general manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD board of directors,
finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a stage 3 drought.
(2) Water use reduction goal. The goal for water use reduction under stage 3, emergency water use,
is to decrease use by 20 percent. If circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD, the mayor, or
his/her official designee, can set a goal for a greater water use reduction.
(3) Water management measures.
(A) All water users.
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stages 1 and 2.
(ii) Prohibit landscape watering, including at parks, golf courses, and sports fields.
Exceptions:
a. Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by hand-held hose, or
using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches of the foundation
that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
b. Trees may be watered up to two hours on any day by hand-held hose, drip
irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree watering is limited to an area not to exceed the drip
line of a tree.
(iii) Prohibit establishment of new landscaping.
(iv) Vehicle washing restricted to commercial carwashes and commercial service stations
can only be done as necessary for health, sanitation, or safety reasons, including, but not
limited to, the washing of garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and other
perishables. All other vehicle washing is prohibited.
(v) Prohibit the operation of ornamental fountains or ponds that use potable water except
where necessary to support aquatic life.
(vi) Prohibit the draining, filling, or refilling of swimming pools, wading pools and Jacuzzitype
pools. Existing private and public pools may add water to maintain pool levels;
however, they may not be refilled using automatic fill valves.
(vii) The mayor, or his/her designee, will notify wholesale customers of actions being
taken and require them to implement the same stage and measures. Per the contract,
wholesale customers are required to institute and apply the same rationing, conservation
measures or restrictions to the use of water by their customers for so long as any part of
their total water supply is being furnished by the city. Any mandatory reduction of deliveries
from the city to its customers shall also be distributed as pro rata curtailment of water
deliveries to or diversions by wholesale water customers, as provided in Texas Water Code,
section 11.039.
(B) City and local governments. In addition to actions listed above:
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stages 1 and 2.
(ii) Review conditions or problems that caused stage 3. Take corrective action.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/435
(iii) Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
(iv) Increase frequency of media releases explaining the emergency situation.
(v) Reduce city and local government water use to the maximum extent possible.
(vi) Prohibit the permitting of new swimming pools, Jacuzzi-type pools, spas, ornamental
ponds and fountain construction. Pools already permitted and under construction may be
completely filled with water.
(vii) Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is prohibited.
Exception: Golf course greens may be watered by hand as needed to keep them
alive; however, watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
(viii) Institute a mandated reduction in deliveries to all wholesale customers. Such a
reduction will be distributed as required by Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(ix) If TRWD has imposed a reduction in water available to customers, impose the same
percent reduction on wholesale customers.
(C) Commercial or industrial users.
(i) All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and industrial users.
Exception: Water uses that utilize treated wastewater effluent exclusively are not
subject to water use restrictions.
(ii) Landscape watering at parks, golf courses, and sports fields is prohibited.
Exception: Golf course greens may be watered by hand as needed to keep them
alive; however, watering must be done before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
(iii) Hotels, restaurants, and bars required to serve drinking water to patrons on an “on
demand” basis.
(iv) Require hotels to implement laundry conservation measures by encouraging patrons
to reuse linens and towels.
(v) Stock at a commercial plant nursery may be watered only with a hand-held hose,
hand-held watering can, or drip irrigation system.
(vi) Commercial and industrial water users required to reduce water use by a set
percentage determined by the mayor.
(vii) Use of water from hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting related activities, or
other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare, requires a variance
issued by the mayor. Non-emergency fire hydrant use may be limited to only designated
hydrants. Upon declaration of this drought stage, all holders or applicants of a water fire
hydrant meter agreement are required to apply for a variance as set forth in this plan. If
conditions allow, as determined by the mayor, the use of water from hydrants may continue
until the mayor, or his/her official designee, issues a determination on the petition for
variance. If conditions do not allow, the mayor may require all fire hydrant meters to be
immediately returned from the field, pending determination of each petition for variance.
(4) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 3
no longer prevail. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of stage
3 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 3 of the plan. Notification of termination of
stage 3 will include instructions to set stage 2, set stage 1, or terminate all drought response stages as
determined by the mayor, or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.508)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/435
Sec. 13.08.009 Enforcement procedures
Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in stages 1, 2, and 3 drought stages. These mandatory water
use restrictions will be enforced by warnings and penalties as follows:
(1) On the first violation, customers will be given a written warning that they have violated the
mandatory water use restriction.
(2) On the second and subsequent violations, citations may be issued to customers, with minimum
and maximum fines established by ordinance.
(3) After two violations have occurred, the utility may install a flow restrictor in the line to limit the
amount of water that may pass through the meter in a 24-hour period.
(4) After three violations have occurred, the city may cut off water service to the customer.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.509)
Sec. 13.08.010 Variance procedures
(a) The mayor, or his/her official designee, may grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise
prohibited under this drought contingency plan if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health,
sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the applicant.
(2) Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations.
(3) Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented.
(b) Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the mayor, or his/her official designee. All petitions
for variances should be in writing, and should include the following information:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s);
(2) Purpose of water use;
(3) Specific provisions from which relief is requested;
(4) Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested;
(5) Description of the relief requested;
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought;
(7) Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use;
(8) Other pertinent information.
(Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.510)
Sec. 13.08.011 Provisions for new and renewed contracts
Each wholesale raw water supply contract entered into or renewed by the city after March 1, 2010, shall contain a
requirement that the customer adopt and comply with a drought contingency plan compliant with the city's drought
contingency plan. To the extent not prevented by enforcement of provisions in the city's wholesale contracts in
effect prior to March 1, 2010, the city will implement pro rata curtailment of water deliveries or diversions pursuant
to Texas Water Code, section 11.039. (Ordinance 2014-10 adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.512)
Sec. 13.08.012 Periodic plan review
As required by TCEQ rules, the city will review this drought contingency plan in 2015 and at least every five years
thereafter. The plan will be updated as appropriate based on new or updated information. (Ordinance 2014-10
adopted 6/3/14; 2001 Code, sec. 13.513)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/435
Editor's note–The drought contingency plan was reviewed by the city council at public hearings on May 6, 2014, and June 3,
2014, with respect to the continuation of this plan.
ARTICLE 13.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.09.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to
minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the
citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way;
(3) Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(4) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city;
(5) Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways;
(6) Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians;
(7) Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them;
(8) Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and
(9) Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1101)
Sec. 13.09.002 Authority and scope
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, or maintenance of facilities within the
public rights-of-way except as provided by the ordinances of the city and the directives of the city. All construction
activity in the public rights-of-way will be in accordance with this article. Public rights-of-way shall be as defined in
Texas Local Government Code section 283.002(6), as amended, to include the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. It
includes state department of transportation rights-of-way. For the purposes of this article, a person who constructs,
installs, operates, or maintains facilities within the public rights-of-way, as provided by this article, is a user of the
public rights-of-way. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1102)
Sec. 13.09.003 Unauthorized use of public right-of-way
(a) The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public
rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this article.
(b) A person commits a class C misdemeanor offense who commences or continues with the construction or
installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way, except as permitted by this article or by state law. Each day
the person continues with the construction or installation of facilities, or engages in maintenance that requires
excavation or blocks the public rights-of-way in violation of this article, constitutes a separate offense.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1103)
Sec. 13.09.004 Conflicts with provisions of franchise
To the extent the provisions of this article conflict with the specific provisions of a franchise granted by the city and
accepted by the franchisee, the provisions of the franchise shall prevail during the term of the franchise. To the
extent that the provisions can be reconciled, both the franchise and this article shall be given effect. (Ordinance
10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1104)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/435
Sec. 13.09.005 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number.
Affiliate. An entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with a
permittee.
Certificated telecommunications provider. The same as in Local Government Code section 283.002(2), as
amended. Any entity that has been granted a certificate from the state public utility commission under chapter 54
of the Texas Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service.
City. The City of Bridgeport, Texas, or an agent of the city.
Facilities. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, pipes, underground and
overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated physical
equipment placed in, on or under the public right-of-way.
Franchise. The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, ordinance, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or
agreement.
Franchising authority. The City of Bridgeport, Texas, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
Permittee. A person with a permit from the city authorizing the person to construct or install facilities within the
public rights-of-way or engage in maintenance that requires excavation or blocks the public rights-of-way.
Person. An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.
Public right-of-way. The same as this term is defined in section 283.002(6) of the Texas Local Government Code,
as amended. The term includes any state department of transportation right-of-way.
User. A person who owns, constructs, installs, or maintains facilities within the public rights-of-way. A user may be
an employee of a franchise holder or a certificated telecommunications provider, or may be a contractor or
subcontractor under contract with a franchise holder or certificated telecommunications provider.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1105)
Secs. 13.09.006–13.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Registration and Permits
Sec. 13.09.031 Registration of users
(a) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, all users of the public rights-of-way shall register
with the city. Registration and permits shall be issued in the name of the person who will own, construct, install, or
maintain the facilities within the public rights-of-way. Registration must be renewed every two (2) years. For entities
with a current franchise or license, the franchise or license shall be evidence of renewal registration. If a
registration is not renewed, and after a sixty-day written notification to the owner, the facilities of the user shall not
be issued permits until renewal of registration. When any information provided for the registration changes, the
user shall inform the city of the change no more than thirty (30) days after the date of the change. Registration
shall include the following information:
(1) The name of the user of the public rights-of-way;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the contact person or persons for the user;
(3) The type of facilities the user will construct, install, or maintain within the public rights-of-way, if
known. The name, address, and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who
will be working in the public rights-of-way on behalf of the user. Users may provide a master list of the
required information for contractors performing work on their behalf within the public rights-of-way;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/435
(4) The name and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four
(24) hours a day;
(5) Certificate of insurance or evidence of self-insurance consistent with the provisions of sections
13.09.111 and 13.09.112.
(b) The fee for registration and renewal of registration shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code. Entities with a current franchise agreement with the city and/or certificated telecommunications providers
are considered registered and will have no registration fee. However, all contractors and subcontractors must
register. Contractors and subcontractors that register in conjunction with activities to be performed on behalf of a
current franchise holder or certificated telecommunications provider will have no registration fee.
(c) The city may deny or revoke the registration of a user for violating the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1116; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.032 Construction permit required; exceptions; application
(a) No person shall perform any construction, installation or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way
without first obtaining a construction permit from the city. A construction permit shall not be required for the
installation of individual customer service connections, repairs or maintenance that does not require boring or
excavation within public rights-of-way. Emergency responses related to existing facilities, in order to prevent
service interruptions or the imminent threat of harm to persons and property, may be undertaken without first
obtaining a permit; however, the city shall be notified immediately after cessation of the emergency regarding work
performed, or being performed, in the public rights-of-way and be provided an updated map of any relocated
facilities. Permits shall be issued only to persons who have a correct registration or franchise with the city. Permits
shall be issued only to persons who will be doing the work within the public rights-of-way.
(1) Construction projects are classified into two categories. Projects are classified at the discretion of
the city manager, or his/her designee, into major and minor construction projects. Permits are required
for all major construction projects of new, replacement or upgrades of the facilities in the public rightsof-
way, whether aerial or underground.
(A) Major construction projects.
(i) Projects greater than 2,000 linear feet above grade or 500 linear feet below grade;
(ii) Projects involving street closures;
(iii) Projects requiring the cutting or breaking of pavement or curb;
(iv) Projects within a roadway that is scheduled to be widened; or
(v) Projects that will take more than five (5) consecutive days to complete.
(B) Minor construction projects.
(i) Projects less than 2,000 linear feet above grade or 500 linear feet below grade;
(ii) Projects that contain 2 or less street or creek crossings;
(iii) Projects that will take 5 consecutive days or less to complete;
(iv) Projects that include only local repairs;
(v) Projects not involving street closures; and
(vi) Projects not requiring the cutting or breaking of pavement or curb.
(2) A permit is not required under this section if the activity in the public rights-of-way consists
exclusively of:
(A) Minor construction projects as defined in subsection (a)(1)(B) above;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/435
(B) A service connection of real property on either side of the public rights-of-way;
(C) Routine maintenance or repair of facilities that does not include the cutting or breaking of
pavement or curb, or boring; or
(D) The replacement of a single damaged pole, the installation of aerial lines on existing poles
or the installation of aerial lines on 5 new poles or less.
(3) The submittal of an approved permit from the state department of transportation shall serve as
the construction permit for work within state department of transportation rights-of-way.
(4) Notwithstanding anything else in this section, a permittee shall submit a written letter, e-mail, or
fax notice of work to the city manager, or his/her designee, prior to the commencement of any work
activity in all instances where the owner or its contractor will be engaging in any activity in a city rightof-
way that involves the cutting or breaking of pavement or curb, or boring.
(b) The construction permit application shall include the following:
(1) The name of the user to be working within the public rights-of-way;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the contact person or persons for the user;
(3) The name of the owner of the facilities;
(4) The signature of an authorized representative of the user;
(5) The date of commencement and the estimated completion time for the work;
(6) Two sets of construction plans that include the following:
(A) The proposed location and route of all facilities within public rights-of-way to be constructed,
installed, expanded, replaced, removed, or maintained.
(B) The location of all public rights-of-way boundaries at the proposed facilities.
(C) A description of all existing city utilities that could potentially conflict with the applicant's
proposed route, including city profiles, if available, when crossing any city utility.
(D) A description of the type and size of facilities the applicant proposes to install.
(E) A description of any bores or trenches the applicant proposes to dig, and any handholes,
manholes, switchgear, transformers, pedestals, etc., the applicant proposes to install, showing the
approximate depth of such construction and installations along with any variance from standard
city trenching details.
(F) A description of plans to remove and replace pavement if such plans differ from the city
construction requirements.
(7) Certificate of insurance showing compliance with section 13.09.111 of this article unless a current
certificate is on file with the city.
(c) A request for a permit must be submitted at least five (5) working days prior to the commencement of
construction if the construction will disturb less than 500 linear feet of public rights-of-way, or ten (10) working days
prior to the commencement of the construction if the construction will disturb greater than 500 linear feet of public
rights-of-way, unless waived by the city manager, or his/her designee. The time frame may be reduced if
necessary to alleviate a condition threatening public safety.
(d) The city manager, or his/her designee, or the permittee may request a pre-construction meeting.
(e) All details of the construction plans are subject to the approval of the city manager, or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1117; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.033 Denial or revocation of construction permit
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/435
If any of the provisions of this article are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the city manager, or his/her
designee. If a person has violated the terms and conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit,
new permits may be denied or additional terms required until correction of the deficiencies associated with the
prior permit. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1118; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.034 Appeals
(a) Any appeal from the denial or revocation of a permit or registration or from the decision of the designee of
the city manager shall be to the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed with the city manager's office within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the decision being appealed. The city manager shall render a decision within ten (10)
business days from the date the appeal was filed. He may make inquiries of individuals with knowledge of facts
and/or may schedule a hearing with relevant personnel to discuss the appeal. All such appeal hearings are
informal in nature and the rules of evidence do not apply to such hearings. The city manager may sustain, reverse,
modify, or amend the decision of his/her designee.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the appeal determination by the city manager may appeal that decision. In order to
hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations by the city manager, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals consisting of members who shall hear and make determinations on matters pertaining
to the denial or revocation of a permit or registration or from the decision of the city manager, or his/her designee.
The members of the zoning board of adjustment are hereby appointed as the board of appeals and shall have and
exercise the authority to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is an error or abuse of discretion
regarding the denial or revocation of a permit or registration or from the decision of the city manager, or his/her
designee, as provided by this article. Any such appeal shall be filed pursuant to chapter 14, exhibit A, section 15,
of this code. The board of appeals is not empowered to waive any requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1119; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.035 Penalty for working without permit
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider or city
franchise holder, to construct or install facilities or excavate within the public rights-of-way without a permit issued
pursuant to this article. Contractors and subcontractors of either certificated telecommunications providers or city
franchise holders are not exempt from the permit requirements contained in this division. Only a single permit is
required for any one project. Such permit may be obtained by either the city franchise holder, the certificated
telecommunications provider, or their contractor or subcontractor.
(b) Any violation of this section shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code per violation per day. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1120; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 13.09.036–13.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Construction Requirements
Sec. 13.09.061 Compliance with permit
(a) All construction and installation in the public rights-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the
facilities. The city shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as may be reasonably
required to ensure compliance with the permit.
(b) A copy of the construction permit and engineering plans that have been reviewed and released for
construction by the city shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city at
all times when construction or installation work is occurring.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1131)
Sec. 13.09.062 Time for completion
All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the
construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an
extension from the city. The city will review a request for permit extension as soon as possible. Until the city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/435
completes the review for permit extension, the permittee may continue with the work specified in the construction
permit. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1132)
Sec. 13.09.063 Federal or state permits
A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state rights-of-way
located in the city shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city at all
times when construction or installation work is occurring. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec.
3.1133)
Sec. 13.09.064 Notification of construction start
The city shall be notified at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed. With this
notification, the permittee shall provide the one-call ticket number assigned when complying with the Underground
Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act. The permittee shall also provide notification to property owners
adjacent to the construction site by letter or door hangers at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the start of
the construction. The notification shall include contact information. In the event the construction is an emergency
response as described in section 13.09.032(a), notification of construction shall be made as soon as possible via a
facsimile transmission to the city. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1134)
Sec. 13.09.065 Compliance with codes and laws
All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1135)
Sec. 13.09.066 Erosion control
The permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with city, state, and
federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be
left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around
open holes, and high erosion areas that will require backed silt fencing. Upon request, the permittee may be
required to furnish documentation submitted to or received from the federal or state government. Erosion control
facilities shall be in place prior to commencement of construction. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code,
sec. 13.1136)
Sec. 13.09.067 Notification of damage
The permittee shall notify the city immediately of any damage to other utilities, whether owned by the city, another
public entity, or a private utility. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1137)
Sec. 13.09.068 Performance standards
(a) It is the city's policy to avoid cutting streets or sidewalks unless it is demonstrated to be necessary due to
underground obstacles or other circumstances that make boring impractical. However, when a street or sidewalk
cut is necessary, the street or sidewalk cut, and the proposed repair, must be fully described in the construction
plans submitted with the permit application. Repair of all streets and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to
avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and in accordance with city standards.
(b) Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity-dependent facilities.
(c) New facilities in established rights-of-way where aerial facilities do not exist shall be installed underground.
Furthermore, electric transmission lines (those lines operated at voltages of 60,000 volts or higher that bring power
from a generating plant to an electrical substation) and feeder lines (those lines that emanate from an electrical
substation or hub to distribute power throughout an area) shall be constructed overhead. Open trenching shall be
allowed in new developments prior to the completion of the subgrade preparation for the development's roadway
infrastructure. Owners of new developments shall provide notice of the development to all utilities registered with
the city prior to the city approving plats or site plans. When performing directional boring, the contractor shall have
a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress, and shall place a mark at each stem with a
paint dot and indicate the depth of the bore at no less than every other stem. Nothing in this section shall prevent a
utility from recovering its cost for such facilities in accordance with its own cost recovery policies.
(d) A permittee is responsible for obtaining line locates in accordance with the Underground Facility Damage
Prevention and Safety Act, the one-call statute. When required by the city, the permittee shall verify locations of
city utilities by pot holing, hand digging, or other method approved by the city prior to any excavation or boring.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/435
(e) Handholes or manholes shall not be located in sidewalks, unless demonstrated that there is no reasonable
alternative.
(f) Utility location flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are under construction. Flags must be
removed by the permittee upon completion of the project unless another permittee is also working in the area and
has not completed their work.
(g) If the construction requires the pumping of water or mud, the permittee shall contain all pumped water or
mud in accordance with city ordinances, federal or state law, and the directives of the city.
(h) All work shall be protected after hours or other times when the contractor is not present as reasonably
necessary to assure the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1138)
Sec. 13.09.069 Working hours
All construction activity in the public rights-of-way shall take place between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday, unless the city manager, or his/her designee, approves an
exception twenty-four (24) hours in advance. No unauthorized work will be done, except for emergencies, on city
holidays or Sundays. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1139; Ordinance adopting 2017
Code)
Sec. 13.09.070 Lane closures
Lane closures on arterials and collectors as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan will be limited to after 9:00 a.m.
and before 4:00 p.m., except as approved by the city manager, or his/her designee. All traffic-control devices shall
be in place prior to the start of construction. All lane closures shall comply with the Texas Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1140;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.071 Permittee responsibility
The permittee is responsible for the workmanship of its contractor or subcontractors. A responsible representative
of the permittee shall be available to the city at all times during construction. If the project will disturb more than
500 linear feet of the public rights-of-way, a representative of the permittee must designate a representative with
pager or cell phone communications capability to be available and on the construction site within two (2) hours of
request by the city. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1141)
Sec. 13.09.072 Information signs
For permitted projects greater than 2,000 linear feet above grade or 500 feet below grade, a minimum three-bythree
(3 x 3) foot information sign with 4" letters stating the identity and the telephone number of the permittee
shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur prior to the beginning of the work in the public rightsof-
way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time of construction. (Ordinance 10-41
adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1142)
Sec. 13.09.073 Restoration of right-of-way
(a) When a permittee completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation, or other work, the
permittee shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way to a condition at least as good as existed immediately
prior to work commencing. The permittee shall replace and properly re-lay and repair the surface, base, irrigation
system, and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the
erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the permittee's facilities within thirty (30) calendar days after
completion of the work. Upon failure of a permittee to perform any such repair or replacement work, in five (5)
working days of a receipt of a written notice given by the city to the permittee, and the permittee has not
commenced the restoration, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been
disturbed by the permittee, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the permittee shall
reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within sixty (60) calendar days from the receipt of the city's invoice by
the permittee.
(b) Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of completion of the repair work by
the permittee, that the surface, base, irrigation system, or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/435
to bring the work to a condition at least as good as existed immediately prior to the construction commencing, the
permittee shall perform such additional restoration work.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the failure of the permittee to properly repair or
restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs
and restoration efforts subject to the indemnification requirements of section 13.09.113. The permittee shall
promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within sixty (60) calendar days from the receipt of the
city's invoice.
(d) If a person performs emergency construction or excavation in the public rights-of-way pursuant to section
13.09.032 of this article, that person shall comply with the requirements of this section for restoration of the public
rights-of-way.
(e) Although no work will be permitted on private property adjacent to public rights-of-way, these restoration
provisions shall apply to any damages to the adjacent private property as a result of construction within the public
rights-of-way.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1143)
Sec. 13.09.074 Record drawings
Permittees shall provide the city with record drawings within ninety (90) days of completion of construction. The
record drawings shall be in a format used by the permittees in their ordinary course of business, but shall exclude
customer-specific, proprietary or confidential information. If the release of the location of any utility, including water
and sewer, or of the record drawings submitted under this section would jeopardize public safety, the information
shall be considered confidential. In addition, if record drawings submitted under this section include information
expressly designated by the user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by
state law, the city may not disclose the information to the public without the consent of the user, unless otherwise
compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a
court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code,
sec. 13.1144)
Sec. 13.09.075 Emergency removal or abatement of facilities
If the mayor declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written
notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a permittee shall remove or abate the permittee's facilities by the
deadline provided in the mayor's request. The permittee and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to
assure continuity of service. If the permittee, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the
facility, at the sole cost and expense of the permittee, without paying compensation to the permittee and without
the city incurring liability for damages. The permittee shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within
sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the city's invoice. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec.
13.1145)
Sec. 13.09.076 Improperly installed facilities
(a) Any person doing work in the public rights-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade, and maintain the
facilities.
(b) New facilities or modifications to existing facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired,
upgraded, or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repairs, upgrade, or maintenance endangers people;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable city codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard industry practices;
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the
directions provided by the city.
(c) Upon notification by the city, the permittee shall submit a construction permit application for correction of
facilities within ninety (90) days after the date of notification. Correction of the facilities shall be completed within
ninety (90) days after the date of approval, or within an alternate schedule approved by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/435
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1146)
Sec. 13.09.077 Conditions for occupancy of right-of-way
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, as lawfully authorized by state and federal law, the city has first
priority over all other users of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to construct sewer, water,
drainage, electric, and other pipelines or cables and conduits; to do underground and overhead work and/or
change aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley, or public rights-of-way occupied by a
user; and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of the streets in accordance with state and federal law. Other
projects, such as beautification facilities, will not have higher priority over other users.
(b) The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among known users of the public rightsof-
way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each type of user, and, to the
extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as
allowed under state or federal law. A user shall co-locate on existing poles or aerial facilities where feasible;
however, this provision shall not be construed to permit the attachment on or placement in another user's facilities
without the permission, agreement or license from the owner of such facilities.
(c) If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or
public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the authorized user of the
public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons public rights-of-way that contain a portion of a user's facilities,
the city shall close or abandon such public rights-of-way subject to the rights of the user.
(d) Subject to applicable state law, whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change, or
alteration of a user's facilities in the public rights-of-way is reasonably necessary for the widening or straightening
of a street, upon written notice by the city, the user shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of the user's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within one hundred
twenty (120) days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based
upon information provided by the user. Prior to relocation, the city shall provide a suitable location within a public
right-of-way, property or place for relocated facilities sufficient to maintain service. For projects expected to take
longer than one hundred twenty (120) days to remove, change, or relocate, or are deemed by the user to impose a
significant financial hardship, the user shall have the right to present alternative proposals to the city and the city
shall give due consideration to any such alternative proposals. This section shall not be construed to prevent the
permittee's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for
relocation or removal. If the permittee fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the
permittee may be subject to legal action by the city or to a liability to the city for such delay, as may be set forth in
this code, as now or hereafter enacted. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection, the city and the permittee may
agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a
change. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, weather conditions, emergency conditions,
accuracy and completeness of engineering plans or changes in design, relocation, coordination and other criteria
which may delay projects.
(e) A permittee may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and
maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the
city, including the prohibition of tree topping. A permittee trimming trees within public rights-of-way shall prescribe,
to industry standards, its vegetation management program and such other standards including Tree Line USA, a
program sponsored by the National Arbor Day Foundation. Should the permittee, its contractor or agent fail to
remove such trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours under routine circumstances, or up to 10 business days, or
until all service restoration activities have been completed because of emergency conditions, the city may remove
the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city the permittee shall promptly reimburse
the city for all costs incurred within sixty (60) working days.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1147)
Secs. 13.09.078–13.09.110 Reserved
Division 4. Insurance
Sec. 13.09.111 Certificates of insurance
(a) A user shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an
insurance company eligible to do business in the state and acceptable to the city throughout the term of
occupancy of public rights-of-way. At the time of registration, a permittee shall furnish the city with proof of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/435
insurance. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance
and limits when the city determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the
industry or the permittee require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept
certificates of self-insurance issued by the state or letters written by the permittee in those instances where the
state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to
accept such letters the permittee must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources
to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and
furnished by the city.
(b) The permittee shall furnish to the city copies of certificates of insurance or proof of self-insurance evidencing
the coverage required by section 13.09.112.
(c) An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions:
(1) Name the city and its officers, employees, board members, and elected representatives as
additional insureds for all applicable coverage with the exception of worker's compensation and
employer's liability.
(2) Provide for thirty (30) days' notice to the city for cancellation or nonrenewal.
(d) The permittee shall, as soon as practicable, advise the city manager of actual or potential litigation that may
develop and affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify.
(e) This section creates no right of recovery of an insurer against the city. The required insurance policies shall
protect the permittee and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(f) The policy “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy.
(g) The permittee shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no
recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by the permittee
must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in
connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1156; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.09.112 Insurance requirements
(a) Commercial general liability.
(1) Property damage: $1,000,000.00.
(2) Personal injury: $1,000,000.00.
(3) Products-comp/op agg: $2,000,000.00.
(4) Aggregate: $2,000,000.00.
(b) Comprehensive automobile liability.
(1) Personal injury, each person: $500,000.00.
(2) Property damage, each occurrence: $500,000.00.
(c) Worker's compensation and employer's liability.
(1) Each accident: $1,000,000.00.
(2) Disease, policy limit: $1,000,000.00.
(3) Disease, each employee: $1,000,000.00.
(d) Umbrella liability insurance. Combined single limit: $5,000,000.00.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1157)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/435
Sec. 13.09.113 Indemnity
(a) Except as to certificated telecommunications providers, each permittee placing facilities in the public rightsof-
way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against any and all claims,
demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for:
(1) Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including but not limited to the user, a permittee,
its agents, officers, employees, and subcontractors, the city's agents, officers, and employees, and third
parties); and/or
(2) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income, or wages to any person
(including but not limited to the agents, officers, contractors, subcontractors, and employees of the user,
a permittee, or the city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the
negligent or willful act or omissions of the permittee, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in
the performance of activities pursuant to this article.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability attributable to the negligence of the city, its officers,
employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
(c) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create or grant
any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other permittee or entity.
(Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1158)
Secs. 13.09.114–13.09.150 Reserved
Division 5. Network Nodes in Public Right-of-Way
Sec. 13.09.151 Generally
This division shall be construed in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code to the extent
not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the state. To extent of any conflict between
this division and the remainder of this article, this division controls.
Sec. 13.09.152 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the definitions found in the city's design manual for the installation of network
nodes and node support poles are hereby incorporated into this division and shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. In addition, the definitions from section 284.002 of the Texas Local
Government Code are specifically incorporated into this section by reference. In addition, in this section:
City. The City of Bridgeport, Texas.
City council. The governing body of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
Chapter 284. Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Design manual. The city's design manual for the installation of network nodes and node support poles.
Easement. Includes any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the
city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private easement used
for the provision of utilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized
to oversee cable television and other multichannel regulation on a national level.
Street. Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of
the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for
vehicular travel where there is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the
entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A “street” does not include
the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/435
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as those terms are defined in
[Texas Local Government Code] chapter 284.
Sec. 13.09.153 Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way
Pursuant to this division and subject to the design manual and chapter 284, a wireless network provider has the
nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. The terms of this division shall
apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services
throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides
the company written notice, whichever date occurs later.
Sec. 13.09.154 Compliance with this division, the design manual, applicable codes, and chapter 284
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this division and the remainder of this article, and are
hereby included in the definition of a “public service provider” for the purposes of this article. All wireless network
providers shall also comply with applicable codes, the terms and conditions of the city's design manual, and
chapter 284.
Sec. 13.09.155 Permit applications
(a) Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city
to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a public right-of-way.
(b) As required by chapter 284, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for
which the permit is sought.
(c) A network provider that wants to install or co-locate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the
city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes, and upon
payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or co-location of those network
nodes.
(d) The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications:
(1) Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant
will comply with this article, the city's design manual, chapter 284, and applicable codes;
(2) Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-ofway
to ensure compliance with the design manual and this division;
(3) A certificate that the network nodes comply with applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network nodes will be placed into
active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of
construction and final testing of each network node is completed.
(e) Exception.
(1) As provided in section 284.157 of chapter 284, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain
a permit, or pay a rate to the city for:
(A) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular
lanes in a public right-of-way;
(B) Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is
substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks
or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
(C) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network
nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.
(2) The network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of work
described in this subsection (e).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/435
Sec. 13.09.156 Installation in historic districts or design districts
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before co-locating new network
nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to
comply with the requirements described in the city's design manual. The city has the authority to designate new
historic districts and design districts in the future.
Sec. 13.09.157 Installation in municipal parks and residential areas
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council or their
designee's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of way:
(1) Is in a municipal park; or
(2) Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(A) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(B) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land
that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(3) In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a
public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area
that apply to those facilities.
(4) The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's
design manual.
Sec. 13.09.158 Municipal review process by the city
(a) Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is
complete and notify the applicant of that determination:
(1) For network nodes and node support poles, no later than 30 days after the date the city receives
the permit application; and
(2) For a transport facility, no later than 10 days after the date the city receives the permit application.
(b) Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is
submitted to the city:
(1) For network nodes, no later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete application;
(2) For network support poles, no later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete
application; and
(3) For transport facilities, no later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application.
(c) Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the
denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which
the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before
the date that the city denies the application.
(d) Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial
application.
(1) The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the
deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other
than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city.
(2) The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the
90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to
the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/435
Sec. 13.09.159 Time of installation
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final
approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city, in its sole discretion, may
grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider.
Sec. 13.09.160 Applicable fees and rental rates to the city
(a) As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way, the network
provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in
lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee, or other
right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city,
except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law
and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city.
(b) Network nodes.
(1) The application fee shall be $500.00 per application covering up to 5 network nodes, and $250.00
for each additional network node per application.
(2) The annual public right-of-way rate shall be $250.00 per network node installed in the city public
rights-of-way.
(3) As provided in section 284.054 of chapter 284, the city may adjust the amount of the annual
public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if
any, in the consumer price index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of
the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day
following the written notice.
(c) Node support poles. The application fee for each network support pole shall be $1,000.00.
(d) Transfer facilities.
(1) The application fee for each transfer facility shall be $500.00 per application covering up to 5
nodes, and $250.00 for each additional node per application.
(2) The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be $28.00 monthly for each network node site located
in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an
amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under
chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code or cable franchise fees under chapter 66 of the
Texas Utilities Code.
(e) Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on
lines between poles or node support poles.
(f) Co-location of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's license agreement, the co-location of
network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of $20.00 per year per service pole.
(g) City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the colocation
of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment
rate consistent with section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis.
Sec. 13.09.161 Indemnity
As provided in section 284.302 of chapter 284, a network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city
harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising
from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The
city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions (“claims”) covered by this
indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to
defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity
obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case
of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases,
the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/435
attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental
immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law.
Sec. 13.09.162 Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers
Nothing in this division shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated
by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 10/23/17)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The zoning ordinance of the city, adopted by the city on October 21, 1965, as amended, previously published as
chapter 14, exhibit A, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances, is hereby continued in force and effect, is incorporated
herein by reference, and is included as exhibit A to this chapter. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance and the
technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only
nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a
history note following the amended section. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any
other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. At the request of the city, all references
to “city administrator” have been changed to “city manager” without notation. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code;
2001 Code, art. 14.200; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 14.03 AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE**
Sec. 14.03.001 Adopted
The airport zoning ordinance of the city, passed by the city council on March 16, 1984, as amended, previously
published as chapter 14, exhibit B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances, is hereby continued in force and effect, is
incorporated herein by reference, and is included as exhibit B to this chapter. Such ordinance is printed herein as
enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of
articles, sections and subsections have been retained. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper
place and denoted by a history note following the amended section. Obviously misspelled words have been
corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets.
(Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, art. 14.300; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE AND RESTRICT THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES
AND LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE, OR OTHER PURPOSES; THE HEIGHT, NUMBER OF
STORIES, AND SIZE OF BUILDING AND OTHER STRUCTURES, THE SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN
SPACE, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION, AND FOR SAID PURPOSES TO DIVIDE THE MUNICIPALITY
INTO DISTRICTS OF SUCH NUMBER, SHAPE AND AREA AS MAY BE DEEMED BEST SUITED TO CARRY
OUT THESE REGULATIONS: To: PRESCRIBE PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS AND
TO PROVIDE FOR ITS ENFORCEMENT.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/435
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Bridgeport deems it necessary in order to lessen congestion on streets,
to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate
the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, school[s], parks, and other public requirements; to
conserve the value of property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city, all in
accordance with a comprehensive plan;
Now, therefore, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS.
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, and the words
in the plural number include the singular; the word “building” includes the word “structure”[;] the word “Shall” is
mandatory, and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A structure that is subordinate in size or purpose to the principal structure on the same
lot or parcel, and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal structure or use of land. An
accessory structure may be attached or detached. Examples of detached accessory structures include, but are not
limited to, garages, home workshops and tool houses, farm structures, barns, playhouses, greenhouses, gazebos,
storage buildings, and swimming pool pumphouse/changing rooms. Accessory structures do not include carports.
ALLEY: A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See Dwelling Multiple.
AUTOMOTIVE IMPOUNDMENT YARD: An area which may be operated in conjunction with a wrecker service
where the purpose of the facility is long- or short-term motor vehicle storage, although prohibiting the exhibition,
repair and/or maintenance of stored motor vehicles and the dismantling and/or sale of dismantled parts.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING AND SALVAGE YARD: An area where automobiles or parts of automobiles or
machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offered for sale in the open as whole units, as salvaged parts, or as
processed metal.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the
adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story if subdivided and used for dwelling or business
purposes.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging and meals for five (5) or more persons are
served for compensation.
BODY PIERCING. Means the creation of an opening in an individual's body, other than in an individual's earlobe,
to insert jewelry or another decoration.
BODY PIERCING STUDIO. Means a facility in which body piercing is performed.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and when separated by a division wall without
openings each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building except as provided in Section 18 [13].
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the roof
surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a
gable, hip or gambrel roof, provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of
the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building.
BUSINESS: Includes the Commercial and Industrial Uses and Districts as herein defined.
CARPORT: A roofed structure with two or more open sides used or designed to be used for vehicle shelter and
parking. Temporary or portable carport structures with cloth, fabric or tarp roofs are not permitted.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/435
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building; and which is bounded on
two (2) or more sides by the building.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front.
Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose
of this ordinance.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof, used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more
families as separate housekeeping units, including apartments and apartment hotels.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOMES): A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1)
or more sides by a party (i.e., shared) wall, which is designed for occupancy by one (1) family, and which is located
on a separate lot delineated by front, side and/or rear lot lines. The term specifically includes townhomes.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed and constructed as a freestanding structure for occupancy by one
(1) family and located on a lot or separate building tract having no physical connection to a building located on any
other lot or tract.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families, living
independently of each other.
FAMILY: One (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as single housekeeping unit, as distinguished
from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity, or sorority house.
FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: The total of the horizontal area of each floor, measured from the outside
face of the building walls and excluding garages, carports, cellars, and accessory buildings.
FREESTANDING VENDING MACHINE: A self-service device designed to be freestanding that, upon insertion of
payment, dispenses unit servings of product, and which device is affixed to a foundation, is at least 80 square feet
in size, and has all the characteristics of and can function as a primary use. The term Freestanding Vending
Machine excludes cigarette vending machines, prepackaged snack or gum vending machines, bottled or canned
drink vending machines, automated carwashes, and automated fueling stations which do not meet the
aforementioned description.
FRONTAGE: All the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, measured
along the street line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building with capacity for not more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles for
storage only. Provided, however, a private garage may exceed a four (4) vehicle capacity if the lot whereon such a
garage is located contains not less than fifteen hundred (1500) square feet for each vehicle stored.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private or storage garage used for the care, repair, or equipment of
self-propelled vehicles or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage used exclusively for parking or
temporary storage of self-propelled vehicles.
GROUP HOUSES: A group of detached or semi-detached dwelling facing upon a place as herein defined.
HOTEL: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are ledged with or
without meals, and in which there are more than fifteen (15) sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and no
provision made for cooking in any individual room or apartment.
HOUSE TRAILER: A non-self-propelled vehicle containing living or sleeping accommodations which is designed or
used for highway travel.
HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME:
(a) means a structure:
(i) constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(ii) built on a permanent chassis;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/435
(iii) designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is
connected to the required utilities;
(iv) transportable in one or more sections; and
(v) in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or,
when erected on-site, at least 320 square feet;
(b) includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(c) does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g).
LODGING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging for five (5) or more persons as [is] provided for
compensation.
LOT: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, together with such open spaces as
are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place.
CORNER LOT: A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets, and having a width not
greater than seventy-five (75) feet.
INTERIOR LOT: A lot other than a corner lot.
THROUGH LOT: A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the Office of the
County Clerk of Wise County.
MANUFACTURED HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A HUD-code manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A site meeting the requirements of Section 11.E [11.D] which is designed,
arranged or used for the purpose of locating two (2) or more manufactured homes used as permanent
sleeping/living quarters.
MOBILE HOME:
(a) means a structure:
(i) constructed before June 15, 1976;
(ii) built on a permanent chassis;
(iii) designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is
connected to the required utilities;
(iv) transportable in one or more sections; and
(v) in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or,
when erected on-site, at least 320 square feet; and
(b) includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building or land occupied by a use that does not conform with the regulations of the
use district in which it is situated.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area other than a street, alley or place, used for the temporary parking of
more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles and available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING AREA SEMI-PUBLIC: An open area other than a street, alley or place, used for temporary parking of
more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles as an accessory use to semi-public institutions, schools, churches,
hospitals, and noncommercial clubs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/435
PLACE: An open unoccupied space other than street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of
access to abutting property.
PORTABLE STORAGE BUILDING: A transportable freestanding container, storage unit, shed-like building or
container or other portable structure, that can be or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind and
which is located for such purposes outside of an enclosed building. For purposes of this definition, the term
Portable Storage Building specifically excludes self-contained metal shipping containers of any size originally
designed or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight and/or designed for or capable of
being mounted or moved on a truck.
SERVANTS' QUARTERS: An accessory building located on the same lot or grounds with the main building, and
used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate
domicile.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling above it.
STORY, HALF: A Story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite
exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or that it be
attached to something having a location on the ground.
TATTOO. Means the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting
pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other related equipment. The term specifically excludes the
application of permanent cosmetics.
TATTOO STUDIO. Means an establishment or facility in which tattooing is performed.
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS OR TOWERS: Any structure, antenna, tower or related appurtenant
equipment or facilities designed and constructed primarily for the commercial reception and transmission of radio,
television, satellite, cellular telephone, microwave, or other telecommunication and communication signals or
broadcasts, including but not limited to transmission, reception or relay facilities. The term specifically excludes
residential antennas that pertain to the reception and/or transmission of private or commercial radio services,
wireless telephone services, WiFi services, wireless data or video services, or satellite communication services
solely for the private use of a resident. The term also excludes antennas mounted on City towers, provided a
license or lease authorizing such antenna has been approved by the City Council.
TOURIST CAMP: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units for
overnight tourists, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each such unit.
USED CAR JUNK AREA: An open area other than a street, alley or place, used for the dismantling or wrecking of
used automobiles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked cars or their parts.
USED CAR SALES AREA: An open area other than a street, alley, or place, used for the display and sale of used
automobiles and where no repair work is done except the necessary reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and
sold on the premises.
WIND TURBINE GENERATOR: A system that is designed and built with a primary purpose to convert wind energy
into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, a tower or attached apparatus, and associated control
or conversion electronics, and is intended on for [sic] on-site production and consumption of electricity to serve the
needs of the consumer on-site. Systems capable of reversing the electric meter, as ancillary function to on-site
consumption, shall be included in this definition.
YARD: An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
FRONT YARD: A yard extending across the front of the lot between the inner side yard lines and
measured between:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/435
(a) the front line of the lot and front line of the building, and
(b) the front line of the lot and the nearest line of any open porch or paved terrace.
REAR YARD: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line
of the lot and the rear line of the main building.
SIDE YARD: A yard between the building and the other side of the lot and extending from the
street line to the rear yard.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 02-05 adopted 2/19/02; Ordinance 08-01, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/08;
Ordinance 09-18, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09; Ordinance 09-28, sec. 1, adopted 7/7/09; Ordinance 09-29 adopted
7/7/09; Ordinance 09-70, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/09; Ordinance 2012-11, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/12; Ordinance 2014-
03, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/14; Ordinance 2017-27, sec. 1, adopted 8/28/17; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 1, adopted
2/12/18; Ordinance 2019-02, sec. 1, adopted 1/14/19)
SECTION 2. DISTRICTS
In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings erected or altered
for specified uses, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of the buildings hereafter erected or altered, to
regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces; and to regulate and limit the density of
population, the City of Bridgeport is hereby divided into districts of which there shall be eight (8) known as:
“R-1” One-Family District
“R-2” Two-Family District
“R-3” Apartment District
“C” Business District
“I” Industrial District
“PD” Planned Development District
“MH” Manufactured Housing District
“MHP” Manufactured Home Parks District
The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a
part of this ordinance, being designated as the “District Map” and said map and all the notations, references and
other information shown thereon shall be as much as a part of this ordinance as if the matters and information set
forth by said map were all fully described herein.
Except as hereinafter provided:
FIRST: No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or
land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building or land
is located.
SECOND: No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height
or bulk limit herein established for the district in which such building is located.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/435
THIRD: No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall
be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in
any manner except in conformity with the area regulations herein established.
FOURTH: No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for
any other building, provided further that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected.
FIFTH: Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case
shall there be more than one (1) building on one (1) lot, except as follows:
More than one (1) building may be permitted in the “C” Business District and the “I” Industrial
District provided that the buildings are under common ownership.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2014-03, sec. 2, adopted 2/4/14; Ordinance 2015-05 adopted 3/17/15)
SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS: “R-1” ONE-FAMILY DISTRICT
In the “R-1” One-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided its this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses[:]
1. One-Family Dwellings.
2. Churches.
3. Schools, elementary and high.
4. Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the City of
Bridgeport or Wise County.
5. Buildings for hospitalization and care of minor children on land now owned and operated for such
purposes by philanthropic institutions.
6. Accessory buildings.
7. Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling, including
home occupation such as the office of physician, surgeon or dentist.
8. Carports.
9. A transitional use for dwellings only, may be permitted where the side of a lot in the “R-1” One-
Family District abuts upon a lot zoned for business purposes.
10. Pump Stations, Fire Station, or other city installations.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2017-12, sec. 1, adopted 4/10/17; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 2, adopted
2/12/18)
SECTION 4. USE REGULATIONS: “R-2” TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT
In the “R-2” Two-family District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in the “R-1” One-Family District.
2. Two-Family Dwellings.
3. Accessory buildings.
4. Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling, including
home occupation such as the office of doctors, except veterinary, dentist or artist.
5. Carports.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/435
6. A transitional use for dwellings only, may be permitted where the side of a lot in the “R-2” Two-
Family District abuts upon a lot zoned for business purposes.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2017-12, sec. 2, adopted 4/10/17; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 3, adopted
2/12/18)
SECTION 5. HEIGHT AND AREA: REGULATIONS FOR “R-1” and “R-2” DISTRICTS
In the “R-1” One-Family and “R-2” Two-Family Districts, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards
and the minimum lot area per family shall be as follows:
HEIGHT: No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirtyfive
(35) feet.
REAR YARD: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot,
provided such rear yard need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the alley.
SIDE YARD: On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than
ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, provided that such side yard may not be less than five (5) feet in width.
On corner lots the side yard regulation shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of reversed frontage
where the corner lot faces an intersecting street. In this case, there shall be a side yard on the street side of the
corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, and
no accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line on the lots in the rear; provided
further that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width, after providing the required
interior side yard, of a corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record at the time of the passage of this
ordinance to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this
regulation cannot reasonably be complied with.
FRONT YARD: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet to the front line of the building.
LOT AREA PER FAMILY: In the “R-1” One-Family District every building hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall provide a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet per family, and a minimum lot frontage of
fifty (50) feet.
In the “R-2” Two-Family District the lot area per family requirements for single-family dwellings shall be the same
as in the “R-1” One-Family District and every two-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
provide a lot area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet per family, and a minimum lot frontage of fifty
(50) feet.
Provided, however, that where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record at the time of the
passage of this ordinance, said lot may be occupied by not more than one family.
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: In the “R-1” One-Family District and “R-2” Two-Family District,
every dwelling unit hereafter constructed, installed, or erected shall provide a minimum floor area as follows:
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT - One thousand three hundred square feet (1,300 SF) per
dwelling unit
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT - Nine hundred square feet (900 SF) per dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS: Accessory buildings shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, five
(5) feet from the rear lot line on a lot abutting an alley or ten (10) feet from the rear lot line on a lot which does not
abut an alley, and a distance equal to ten (10%) percent of the lot width from the side lot line, provided that the
side setback for an accessory structure shall never be less than five (5) feet nor be required to exceed fifteen (15)
feet.
CARPORTS:
Carports shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line, five (5) feet from the rear
lot line on a lot abutting an alley or ten (10) feet from the rear lot line on a lot which does not abut an
alley, and a distance equal to ten (10%) percent of the lot width from the side lot line, provided that the
side setback for an accessory structure shall never be less than five (5) feet nor be required to exceed
fifteen (15) feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/435
Carports shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in total floor area. Carports must meet all
setback and building line requirements in accordance with the zoning district in which the site is
located. Carports shall not be located within any easement.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 09-70, sec. 2, adopted 10/20/09; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 5, adopted
2/12/18)
SECTION 6. “R-3” APARTMENT DISTRICTS
In the “R-3” Apartment District, no buildings or land shall be used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in the “R-2” Two-Family District.
2. Multiple Dwellings.
3. One-Family Attached Dwellings (Townhomes), subject to the issuance of a Specific Use Permit as
provided by Section 11A.03(10) of this Ordinance.
4. Boarding and lodging houses.
5. Hotels in which incidental business may be conducted for the sole convenience of the occupants
of the building, provided, however, there shall be no entrance to such place of business except from the
inside of the building.
6. Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
7. Institutions of an educational or philanthropic nature, other than those of a correctional nature, or
for mental cases.
8. Accessory buildings.
9. Carports.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2017-12, sec. 3, adopted 4/10/17; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 4, adopted
2/12/18; Ordinance 2019-02, sec. 2, adopted 1/14/19)
SECTION 7. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS: “R-3” APARTMENT DISTRICTS
In the “R-3” Apartment District the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and the minimum lot area
per family shall be as follows:
HEIGHT: No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed five (5) stories or sixty (60) feet.
REAR YARD: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot,
provided such rear yard need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet for interior lots nor fifteen (15) feet for corner lots.
SIDE YARD: For buildings not exceeding two and one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, the side yard requirements
shall be the same as required in the “R-1” One-Family District. For buildings more than two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories in height, each side yard shall be increased one (1) foot in width for each additional story above the second
floor.
On corner lots the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of reversed
frontage where the corner lot faces an intersecting street. In this case, there shall be a side yard on the street side
of the corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot,
and no accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line on the lots in the rear; provided
further, that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width after providing the required
interior side yard of a corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record at the time of passage of this ordinance
to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot
reasonably be complied with.
FRONT YARD: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet to the front line of the building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/435
LOT AREA PER FAMILY: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall provide a lot area of not less
than four thousand (4,000) square feet for one family, five thousand (5,000) square feet for two families, and an
additional five hundred (500) square feet for each family in excess of two families, provided, however, these
regulations shall not apply to hotels or apartment hotels where no cooking is done in any individual room, suite or
apartment. The minimum lot frontage shall be fifty (50) feet.
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: In the “R-3” Apartment District, every dwelling unit hereafter
constructed, installed, or erected shall provide a minimum floor area as follows:
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT - One thousand three hundred square feet (1,300 SF) per
dwelling unit
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT - Nine hundred square feet (900 SF) per dwelling unit
THREE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT - Six hundred fifty square feet (650 SF) per dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS: Accessory buildings shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, five
(5) feet from the rear lot line on a lot abutting an alley or ten (10) feet from the rear lot line on a lot which does not
abut an alley, and a distance equal to ten (10%) percent of the lot width from the side lot line, provided that the
side setback for an accessory structure shall never be less than five (5) feet nor be required to exceed fifteen (15)
feet.
CARPORTS:
Carports shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line, five (5) feet from the rear
lot line on a lot abutting an alley or ten (10) feet from the rear lot line on a lot which does not abut an
alley, and a distance equal to ten (10%) percent of the lot width from the side lot line, provided that the
side setback for an accessory structure shall never be less than five (5) feet nor be required to exceed
fifteen (15) feet.
Carports shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet per residential unit in total floor area. Carports
must meet all setback and building line requirements in accordance with the zoning district in which the
site is located. Carports must be built at least five (5) feet from any dwelling. Carports shall not be
located within any easement.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 09-70, sec. 3, adopted 10/20/09; Ordinance 2018-04, sec. 6, adopted
2/12/18)
SECTION 8. “C” COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: USE REGULATIONS
In the Commercial District no land shall be used and no building shall be used, erected, or converted to any use
other than:
1. Any use permitted in the Residence Use Districts.
2. Automatic Laundry.
3. Bakery, retail only.
4. Bank and office.
5. Cafeteria.
6. Commercial billboard or advertising signs.
7. Cleaning and pressing shops.
8. Drugstore.
9. “Fix-it” shops, not exceeding 400 square feet in area.
10. Florist shops.
11. Gasoline filling stations, but not including major auto repair work.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/435
12. Grocery Store.
13. Ice Delivery Station.
14. Meat Market.
15. Moving picture theater (not drive-in).
16. Restaurants.
17. Retail store or shop for custom or the making of articles to be sold at retail on the premises only.
18. Shoe repair.
19. Tailor.
20. Washateria.
21. Auto repair garage.
22. Automobile[,] truck and bus service and repairs.
23. Baggage, transfer, storage and warehouse.
24. Cabinet maker.
25. Carpenter shop.
26. Carpet cleaning if dust-proof rooms and dust-catching washing and scouring equipment is
provided.
27. Ice Manufacture.
28. Lumber yard (building materials).
29. Motorcycle repairing.
30. Paint shop.
31. Penal or correctional institution for the care of insane, liquor or narcotic patients, feeble-minded.
32. Sheetmetal shop.
33. Stone monument works, retail only.
34. Storage warehouse.
35. Taxicab storage and repair.
36. Used car lot.
37. Hospitals and clinics except veterinary hospitals and clinics.
38. Drive-in Theaters.
39. Trailer Courts.
40. Any other retail or wholesale use, provided such use is not noxious or offense by reason of
emission of odors, soot, dust, noise or vibrations, but excluding such uses as are enumerated in the
Industrial District.
41. Freestanding vending machines, subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as provided by
Section 11A.03(4) of this Ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/435
42. Telecommunication antennas or towers, subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as
provided by Section 11A.03(6) of this Ordinance.
43. Any restaurant, food sales store (grocery or convenience store), or other permitted use that
derives less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the establishment's gross revenues from the onpremise
sale or service of alcoholic beverages. The City may require an audit of the accounts of an
establishment to determine compliance with this subsection.
44. Any establishment that derives seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the establishment's gross
revenues from the on-premise sale or service of alcoholic beverages, subject to the issuance of a
specific use permit as provided by Section 11.A.03(2) of this Ordinance.
45. Outdoor display and/or sales of portable storage buildings, subject to the issuance of a specific
use permit as provided by section 11A.03(9) of this Ordinance.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 09-20, sec. 2, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 09-28, sec. 2, adopted 7/7/09;
Ordinance 2016-35 adopted 12/12/16; Ordinance 2017-27, sec. 2, adopted 8/28/17)
SECTION 9. “C” HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
In the Commercial District the height and size of buildings shall be as follows; provided, however, that building[s]
erected or structurally altered and used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front, side and rear
yard, and lot area per family regulations of the R-1 and R-2 Residence Use Districts.
HEIGHT: No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height at the street line of two (2)
times the width of the street, but above the height permitted at the street line four (4) feet may be added to the
height of the building for each one (1) foot of that building or portion thereof is set back from the street line.
FRONT YARD: No front yard required.
SIDE YARD: No side yard required except on that side of a lot abutting upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling
purposes in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet.
REAR YARD: No rear yard required.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 9A. “C” COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS
In the Commercial District, the construction of exterior walls of all buildings and structures shall consist of the
following:
The front facade of the building shall consist of one hundred percent (100%) masonry
construction, exclusive of doors, windows, glass, and entryway treatments or atriums of glass and
metal construction.
All remaining facades of the building below the first floor ceiling plate line shall consist of not less
than fifty percent (50%) masonry construction, exclusive of doors, windows, glass, and entryway
treatments or atriums of glass and metal construction.
All construction shall comply with the City's building and fire prevention codes.
Masonry construction shall mean that form of construction composed of stone, brick, concrete, hollow clay tile,
concrete tile, stucco or other similar building units or materials, or combination of these materials, including brick
and stone veneers, EFIS, and cementitious board.
(Ordinance 07-29, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 09-25, sec. 1, adopted 6/16/09)
SECTION 10. “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
USE REGULATIONS: In the Industrial District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or
converted to any use other than:
1. Any use permitted in the Business District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/435
2. Any manufacturing or Industrial process not prohibited by any other law, provided, however, that
no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the
location of such use shall have been approved by the City Council.
1. Acid manufacture.
2. Cement, lime (gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture).
3. Distillation of bones.
4. Explosive, manufacture or storage.
5. Fat rendering.
6. Fertilizer manufacture.
7. Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping.
8. Gas manufacture.
9. Glue manufacture.
10. Petroleum refining.
11. Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
12. Stockyards, or slaughter of animals.
13. Tannery.
14. Storage of [or] baling of rags, paper, iron or junk.
15. Reserved.
16. Reserved.
17. Cotton Gins.
18. Feed Mills.
19. Freestanding vending machines, subject to the specific use permit as provided by Section
11A.03(4) of this Ordinance.
20. Outdoor display and/or sales of portable storage buildings.
3. Any establishment that derives seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the establishment's gross
revenues from the on-premises sale or service of alcoholic beverages, subject to the issuance of a
specific use permit as provided by Section 11A.03(2) of this Ordinance.
4. Tattoo studio and/or body piercing studio, subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as
provided by Section 11A.03(2) [11A.03(3)] of this Ordinance.
5. Sexually Oriented Businesses, as defined in Chapter 4 “Business Regulations,” Article 4.800
[Article 4.07] “Sexually Oriented Business,” of the City Code and subject to the locational, licensing and
other requirements as provided in said regulations.
6. Wind turbine generators; subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as provided by Section
11A.03(5) of this Ordinance.
7. Telecommunication antennas or towers, subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as
provided by Section 11A.03(6) of this Ordinance.
[8.] 7. Automotive Wrecking and Salvage Yards and Automotive Impoundment Yards, as defined in
Chapter 14 “Zoning,” Exhibit A “Zoning Ordinance,” Section 1 “Definitions” of the City Code, subject to
the issuance of a specific use permit as provided by Section 11A.03(7) of this Ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/435
[9.] 8. Outdoor storage and/or sales of used tires, subject to the issuance of a specific use permit as
provided by Section 11A.03(7) [11A.03(8)] of this Ordinance.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 08-01, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 08-26 adopted 4/1/08;
Ordinance 08-69, sec. 1, adopted 9/16/08; Ordinance 09-18, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09; Ordinance 09-20, sec. 3,
adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 09-28, sec. 3, adopted 7/7/09; Ordinance 09-71, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/09; Ordinance
2012-11, secs. 1, 3, adopted 9/18/12; Ordinance 2015-10, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/15; Ordinance 2017-27, sec. 3,
adopted 8/28/17)
SECTION 10A. “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS
In the Industrial District, exterior wall construction shall consist of masonry, wood, or metal construction in
compliance with the City's building and fire prevention codes, except for the facade of any building constructed on
a lot abutting or adjacent to the right-of-way of U.S. 380, SH 114, or SH 101. Any building facade, front or other,
facing said right-of-way shall be constructed of 100% masonry construction, exclusive of doors, windows, glass,
and entryway treatments or atriums of glass and metal construction.
Masonry construction shall mean that form of construction composed of stone, brick, concrete, hollow clay tile,
concrete tile, stucco or other similar building units or materials, or combination of these materials, including brick
and stone veneers, EFIS, and cementitious board.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 07-29, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 09-25, secs. 2, 3, adopted
6/16/09)
SECTION 11. “I” HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
FRONT YARD: No front yard required.
HEIGHT: No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height equal to twice the width of the
widest street on which said building is located; and in no case shall the height be greater than ten (10) stories or
one hundred twenty (120) feet (except it may be increased by special permit of the Council).
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: In the Industrial District, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and
the minimum lot area per family shall be as follows; provided, however, that buildings erected or structurally altered
and used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front, side and rear yard regulations of the
Residence Use Districts.
REAR YARD: No rear yard required.
SIDE YARD: No side yard required, but if provided it shall not be less than three (3) feet, and except on that side of
the lot abutting upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes in which case there shall be a side yard of not
less than five (5) feet.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 11A. SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
11A.01. Permits:
The City Council, by an affirmative three-fourths vote may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties
affected and after recommendation [by] the Planning and Zoning Commission, authorize the location of certain
uses in specific locations, provided the application therefor shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and
showing a general arrangement of project, together with essential requirements, such as off-street parking
facilities, size, height, construction materials, and location of buildings and the uses to be permitted, location and
construction of signs, means of ingress and egress to public streets, the type of visual screening, such as walls,
paintings and fences, and the relationship of the intended uses to all existing properties and land uses in all
directions to a minimum distance of 200 feet.
11A.02. Specific Use Permit Regulations:
1. Every specific use permit granted under these provisions shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning
ordinance as applicable to such property under consideration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/435
2. In granting a specific use permit, the City Council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the
owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued for use of the premises pursuant to such specific
use permit.
3. No specific use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the specific use permit
shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the special use
permit, as attached to the site plan drawing and approved by the Council.
4. No use authorized by a specific use permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise
significantly changed unless a separate specific use permit is granted for such enlargement, modification,
structural alteration or change.
5. The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse or modify any decision,
determination or ruling with respect to the granting, extension, revocation, modification or any other action taken
relating to such specific use permit.
6. When the City Council authorizes granting of a specific use permit, the zoning map shall be amended
according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses, said amendment to
indicate on the appropriate location the ordinance number granting the specific use permit and suffixed by an “S”
designation.
7. The City Council, in its determination that a specific use permit be granted, may set additional conditions to
those specifically enumerated herein, as it may deem in the best interest of the community.
11A.03. Specific Uses:
Uses for which specific use permits may be granted are as follows:
1. A single manufactured home; and
2. Any establishment that derives seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the establishment's gross
revenues from the on-premise sale or service of alcoholic beverages; provided, however that such
establishment meets the following conditions:
a. Such establishment must be located in a Commercial “C” or an Industrial “I” zoned district;
b. Such establishment shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or
private school, public hospital, day care center, child care facility, public park or recreational
facility;
c. Such establishment shall meet the off-street parking requirements of Section 14 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
Additionally, lights must be provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved area, and
shall be designed to reflect away from adjoining public or private property.
d. The exterior building wall construction of such establishment must be one hundred percent
(100%) masonry, exclusive of all windows, doors, roofs and glass construction material;
e. Such establishment must meet all fire protection requirements of all applicable codes,
including fire suppression/sprinkler system requirements;
f. No pole signs shall be permitted;
g. No illuminated, moving, flashing or neon signs shall be permitted in any windows or
otherwise visible from the right-of-way;
h. No signs advertising or depicting alcohol or tobacco shall be visible from the right-of-way;
i. All required state licenses or permits must be valid and in effect;
j. All sales and consumption must be within permanent walls of the establishment covered by a
roof, or within a connected enclosed patio, and alcoholic beverages shall not be taken from the
premises.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/435
k. Such establishment must be at least two thousand (2,000) square feet in size and must meet
all applicable codes;
l. A specific use permit will terminate upon change or [of] ownership of the holder of the specific
use permit, and is not transferable; and
m. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
3. Tattoo studio and/or body piercing studio; provided, however that such establishment meets the
following conditions:
a. Such establishment must be located in an Industrial “I” zoned district;
b. Such establishment shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a
church, public or private school, public hospital, day care center, child care facility, public park or
recreational facility;
c. No illuminated, moving, flashing or neon signs shall be permitted in any windows or
otherwise visible from the right-of-way;
d. All required state licenses or permits must be valid and in effect;
e. A specific use permit will terminate upon change or [of] ownership of the holder of the
specific use permit, and is not transferable; and
f. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
4. A freestanding vending machine; provided, however, that such vending machine meets the
following conditions:
a. Such vending machine must be located in a Commercial “C” or Industrial “I” zoned district;
and
b. Such vending machine must meet all the zoning requirements for the zoning district in which
it is located; and
c. A commercial site plan must be submitted; and
d. Such vending machine shall not be installed in such a manner as to impede circulation of
traffic or fire lane access; and
e. If such vending machine is located in any area other than a parking lot, such vending
machine shall provide a minimum of three (3) improved and striped parking spaces; and
f. All utility connections (water, sewer, electrical) for all such vending machines must be
installed and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and codes of the City; and
g. If such vending machine will be installed on a parking lot that belongs to a different owner
than the owner of the vending machine, a written letter from the owner of the parking lot
expressing approval of the construction of the vending machine must be submitted to the Building
Inspector before a building permit will be issued; and
h. If such vending machine will be installed on property owned by the owner of the vending
machine, the property on which the vending machine will be installed must be platted into its own
lot; and
i. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
5. Wind turbine generators; provided, however, that such turbine meets the following conditions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/435
a. Such turbine must be located in an Industrial “I” zoned district, or on property owned by the
Bridgeport Independent School District;
b. Such turbine must be located on a tract with a minimum size of five (5) acres;
c. Such turbine shall be set back from property line or right-of-way a distance at least equal to
the height of the turbine; or double the height of the turbine if the property abuts all residential
property;
d. The maximum noise level shall not exceed fifty (50) decibels, measured at the property line,
adjacent to any residentially zoned property, and sixty (60) decibels adjacent to all other zoning
districts, at any wind velocity;
e. The maximum height shall be no greater than fifty (50) feet, measured from the existing
ground level to the highest point of the blades;
f. The turbine shall only serve the purpose of generation of electrical power for use on the tract
on which the wind turbine generator is located;
g. The wind turbine generator and tower shall not be artificially lighted, unless such lighting is
required by the Federal Aviation Administration;
h. The wind turbine generator tower must either (a) have a locked anti-climb device installed; or
(b) be completely enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six (6) feet in height;
i. No signage or advertisement shall be allowed on the wind turbine generator or tower;
j. An applicant shall submit detailed construction plans showing the location of the proposed
wind turbine generator, including any necessary or ancillary equipment, buildings and wiring to the
proposed wind turbine generator, and provide the specifications of proposed wind turbine
generator;
k. A specific use permit will terminate upon change or [of] ownership of the holder of the
specific use permit, and is not transferable; and
l. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
6. Telecommunication antennas or towers; subject to the following conditions:
a. Such telecommunication antenna or tower must be located in a Commercial “C” or Industrial
“I” zoned district; and
b. Such telecommunication antenna or tower must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communication Commission
(FCC), and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas; and
c. To ensure the structural integrity of the tower, no tower, antenna, or other appurtenance shall
be installed without first obtaining a building permit issued by the City to ensure compliance with
the applicable local building codes. An antenna facility must be installed according to the
manufacturer's recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the
State of Texas; and
d. No permanent lighting is allowed on antennas or towers except as required by the FCC or
the FAA; and
e. Antennas or towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height
and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; and
f. All utility connections must be installed and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws
and codes of the City; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/435
g. Antennas or towers shall be maintained with either a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness;
and
h. All antenna or towers shall be of monopole construction, unless another tower can be shown
to cause less visual impact on surrounding property than a similar monopole structure, such as
stealth facilities (an antenna located on an existing structure, water tower, utility tower, steeple,
bell tower, electric transmission tower, light pole or similar structure); and
i. Antenna or tower heights will be kept at the most reasonable minimum necessary for reliable
reception or communications. In any case, the maximum height of the antenna, structure or tower
shall not exceed fifty (50) feet; and
j. An equipment storage building associated with an antenna facility shall be landscaped to
screen the view from adjacent property. In locations where the visual impact would be minimal,
the landscaping/screening requirement may be reduced or waived; and
k. Co-location of antenna facilities is greatly encouraged. All new structures shall be
constructed to support antenna for at least two carriers, unless the structure is an alternative or
stealth design.
l. No signage or advertisement shall be allowed on the antenna or tower facilities; and
m. No part of an antenna facility, antenna, tower, or other attachment may extend beyond the
property lines of the lot on which the antenna or tower facility is located; and
n. Antennas and towers shall be set back from the property line or right-of-way a distance at
least equal to the height of the antenna or tower, or double the height of the antenna or tower if
the property abuts a residential property. Stealth antennas are exempt from the minimum setback
distances; and
o. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove it within ninety (90)
days of receipt of notice of abandonment from the City. If the antenna or tower is not removed
within the ninety days, the City may remove the antenna or tower at the owner's expense; and
p. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
7. Automotive wrecking and salvage yards and automotive impoundment yards; provided, however,
that such yard meets the following conditions:
a. Such yard must be located in an Industrial “I” zoned district; and
b. Such yard must be screened with a 10-foot-high solid barrier fence. The fence must be
painted a natural earth-tone color and may not have any sign appear on its surface other than a
sign indicating the business name;
c. Materials may not accumulate or be stacked more than 8 feet above ground level; and
d. Such yard may not be located within 50 feet of the right-of-way of a public street, state
highway or residence; and
e. An impoundment yard must be a minimum of 500 feet from any adjacent residentially zoned
property; and
f. A wrecking and salvage yard must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from any adjacent residentially
zoned property; and
g. If such yard will be located on a tract of land that belongs to a different owner than the owner
of the yard, a written letter from the owner of the property expressing approval of the operation of
the yard must be submitted; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/435
h. The property must be maintained at all times in compliance with the City's Code of
Ordinances, specifically including Article 6.300 [Article 6.03] “Property Maintenance”; and
i. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
[8.] 7. Outdoor storage and/or sales of used tires; provided however that the following conditions are
met:
a. All outdoor storage and/or display of used tires shall be located on hard-surfaced areas, at a
minimum consisting of gravel or crushed rock;
b. All outdoor storage and/or display of used tires shall be screened from the view of any
adjacent public street or property by a screening wall or fence no less than six feet (6') nor more
than eight feet (8') in height, provided that no storage shall exceed the maximum height of such
screening. Any portion of the storage yard adjacent to or fronting a street shall be screened with a
brick, stone or masonry wall or solid wood stockade fencing; other portions of the storage yard not
adjacent to or fronting a street may be screened with a solid opaque fence.
c. A specific use permit will terminate upon change of ownership of the holder of the specific
use permit, and is not transferable; and
d. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties from the
impact of the specific use.
9. Outdoor display and/or sales of portable storage buildings; provided however, that the following
conditions are met:
a All outdoor storage and/or display of portable storage buildings shall be located on hardsurfaced
areas, consisting of asphalt or concrete;
b. All outdoor storage and/or display of portable storage buildings shall be screened from the
view of any adjacent public street or property by a screening wall or fence no less than six feet (6')
nor more than eight feet (8') in height. Any portion of the storage yard adjacent to or fronting a
street shall be screened with a brick, stone or masonry wall or solid wood stockade fencing.[;]
c. A specific use permit will terminate upon change of ownership of the holder of the specific
use permit, and is not transferable; and
d. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties form the
impact of the specific use.
10. One-family attached (townhomes):
a. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
b. There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
c. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
d. On corner lots, there shall be a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
e. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet to the front line of the
building.
f. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: Three thousand (3,000) square feet.
g. Minimum Lot Width per Dwelling Unit: Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.
i. Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit: One thousand square feet (1,000 SF) per dwelling
unit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/435
j. Off-Street Parking: Shall meet the off-street parking requirements of Section 14, (14.01,
Number 3) of the Zoning Ordinance.
k. The City Council may impose additional restrictions to protect adjacent properties form the
impact of the specific use.
(Ordinance 83-10 adopted 10/4/83; Ordinance 07-25, sec. 2, adopted 5/15/07; Ordinance 08-01, sec. 3, adopted
1/15/08; Ordinance 09-18, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09; Ordinance 09-20, sec. 4, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 09-28,
sec. 4, adopted 7/7/09; Ordinance 09-71, sec. 2, adopted 10/20/09; Ordinance 2012-11, sec. 4, adopted 9/18/12;
Ordinance 2015-10, sec. 2, adopted 7/21/15; Ordinance 2016-35 adopted 12/12/16; Ordinance 2017-27, sec. 4,
adopted 8/28/17; Ordinance 2019-02, sec. 3, adopted 1/14/19)
SECTION 11B. PD - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1. General Purpose and Description. The Planned Development District “PD” prefix, is intended to provide for
combining and mixing of uses allowed in various districts with appropriate regulations and to permit flexibility in the
use and design of land and buildings in situations where modification of specific provisions of this ordinance is not
contrary to its intent and purpose or significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is based and will not be
harmful to the community. A PD District may be used to permit new and innovative concepts in land utilization.
While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which allow development not otherwise permitted,
procedures are established herein to insure against misuse of the increased flexibility.
2. Permitted Uses. Any use specified in the conceptual and development plan shall be permitted in the PD
District. The site, location, appearance, and method of operation may be specified to the extent necessary to
insure compliance with the purpose of this ordinance.
3. Development Standards
3.1 Development standards for each separate PD District shall be set forth in the ordinance granting
the PD District and may include but shall not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth,
yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access,
screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other
requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate.
3.2 In the PD District, the particular districts to which uses specified in the PD are most similar shall
be stated in the granting ordinance. All PD applications shall list all requested variances from the
standard requirements set forth throughout this ordinance (applications without this list will be
considered incomplete).
3.3 The ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to the Purpose and intent of the
PD granted therein. A specific list is required of variance in each district or districts and a general
statement citing the reason for the PD request.
3.4 The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections of the Ordinance unless
specifically exempted in the granting ordinance.
4. Conceptual and Development Plan. In establishing a Planned Development District, the City Council shall
approve and file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans, standard[s] and restrictions for each
Planned Development District. During the review and public hearing process, the City Council shall require a
conceptual plan, a development plan and/or detail site plan.
4.1 Conceptual Plan. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the
applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed Planned Development District in a graphic
manner and shall be supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development
and restrictions.
4.1.1 A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and
preliminary lot arrangements. For residential development the conceptual plan shall set forth the
size, type, and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes,
screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and other pertinent development data.
4.1.2 A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use
proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development.
Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the City Council, may include but is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/435
not limited to the types of use(s), topography, and boundary of the PD area, physical features of
the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements, location of future public facilities, building heights
and locations, parking ratios, and other information to adequately describe the proposed
development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the final development
plan.
4.1.3 Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development
to adjacent property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building
height, or coverage of the site and which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, reduce the
yards provided at the boundary of the site, or significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated
on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized by the building official or his designated
representative. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding whether or not a detail site plan
conforms to the original concept plan, the City Council shall determine the conformity.
4.2 Development Plan or Detail Site Plan. This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of
the Planned Development District and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the
conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit.
The development plan may be submitted for the total area of the PD or for any section by the City
Council. A public hearing on approval of the development plan shall be required at the Council level,
unless such a hearing is waived pursuant to Section 4.3.1 at the time of conceptual plan approval in the
original amending ordinance. The development plan shall include:
4.2.1 A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing existing vegetation, natural
watercourses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural
features as a result of the development. This should include a delineation of any floodprone
areas.
4.2.2 A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites
or lots; and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites,
street widening and street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing streets; general
location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and
sewer mains; the location and width of all curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the
zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract with the topographical contour,
interval of not more than five (5) feet.
4.2.3 A site plan for proposed complexes showing the location of separate buildings, and
between buildings and property lines, street lines, and alley lines. Also to be included on the site
plan is a plan showing the arrangement and provision of off-street parking.
4.2.4 A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental planting, wooded areas, and trees
to be planted.
4.2.5 An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the
development in all districts except single-family and two-family may be required by the City
Council if deemed appropriate. Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a
single drawing if such drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the building official or his
designated representative.
4.3 Procedure for Establishment. The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District
shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in Ordinance 65-12. This procedure is
expanded as follows for approval of conceptual development plans.
4.3.1 Separate public hearings shall be held by City Council for the approval of the conceptual
plan and the development plan or any section of the development plan, unless such requirements
are waived by the City Council upon a determination that a single public hearing is adequate. A
single public hearing is adequate when:
(a) The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the Planned Development
District to fulfill the requirements for both plans; or
(b) Information on the concept plan is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the
land and the detail site plan will not deviate substantially from it; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/435
(c) The requirement is waived at the time the amending ordinance is approved. If the
requirement is waived, the conditions, shall be specifically stated in the amending ordinance.
4.3.2 The ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall not be approved until
the conceptual plan is approved.
4.3.3 The development plan may be approved in sections. When the plan is approved in
sections, the separate approvals by the City Council for the initial and subsequent sections will be
required.
4.3.4 An initial development plan shall be submitted for approval within in six (6) months from
the approval of the conceptual plan or some portion of the conceptual plan. If the development
plan is not submitted within six (6) months, the conceptual plan is subject to reapproval by the City
Council. If the entire project is not completed within two (2) years, the City Council may review the
original conceptual plan to ensure its continued validity.
4.3.5 Regardless of whether the public hearing is waived for the development plan, approval by
the City Council is still required.
5. Written Report May be Required. When a PD is being considered, a written report may be requested of the
applicant discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection,
tax, police, fire, and traffic. Written comments from the applicable public school district and from private utilities
may be submitted to the City Council.
6. Planned Development to be Recorded. All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance in its original form, or by subsequent amendment thereto, shall be referenced on the
Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts, together with the category of uses permitted
and restrictions therein, shall be maintained in an appendix of the PD Ordinance.
(Ordinance 01-01 adopted 1/23/01)
SECTION 11C. MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE HOMES
1. Location Requirements. A person commits an offense if the person places, keeps, maintains or occupies a
mobile home or a manufactured home upon any lot or parcel of ground within the city for a period exceeding
twenty-four (24) hours, except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Mobile Homes Prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person locates or occupies a mobile home within the city for
use or occupancy as a residential dwelling. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a mobile
home installed before the effective date of this ordinance. In the absence of water connection records,
or a building permit, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home to establish proof of
the date that such mobile home was legally permitted.
(b) A previously existing mobile home which is removed from the city may be replaced with a
manufactured home, subject to the restrictions in the Zoning Ordinance and other city ordinances
regarding abandonment or termination of nonconforming uses.
3. Unlawful Occupancy. A person commits an offense if a person occupies a manufactured home, or permits the
occupancy of any such manufactured home except as specifically permitted in this ordinance.
4. Electrical Connections. Except as provided in Section 11D, no person shall make any electrical connection to
any manufactured home from any source of electricity within the city without the approval of the electrical inspector
of the city as to such connection, and the payment of the required inspection fee therefor. All electrical connections
must comply with the requirements of the adopted Electric Code of the City of Bridgeport, including any
requirement to obtain a permit prior to making such connection.
5. Plumbing Connections. Except as provided in Section 11D, no person shall make any plumbing connection to
any manufactured home from any source of water supply or sewage disposal within the city without the approval of
the plumbing inspector of the city as to such connection, and the payment of the required inspection fee therefor.
All plumbing connections must comply with the requirements of the adopted Plumbing Code of the City of
Bridgeport, including any requirement to obtain a permit prior to making such connection.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/435
6. Nonconforming Uses.
(a) Any mobile home or manufactured home which is located on residentially zoned property that is
sold shall be removed from the property at the time of sale, and thereafter the property shall be used
only in conformance with the regulations applicable in the zoning district in which the property is
located.
(b) Notwithstanding anything in the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, the owner of a manufactured
home that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster, may replace the manufactured home,
provided that the installation complies with all applicable state or local regulations and the owner
applies for a permit and commences installation within twelve (12) months of the date of destruction.
The failure of the owner to start such installation within twelve (12) months shall forfeit the owner's right
to replace the manufactured home. In this subsection, the terms “fire” and “natural disaster” shall have
the same meanings as the identical terms in Section 1201.008(f) of the Texas Occupations Code.
(c) Notwithstanding anything in the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, the owner of a nonconforming
manufactured home that occupies a lot within the city may remove the manufactured home from its
location and place another manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is
a newer manufactured home and is at least as large in living space as the prior manufactured home,
and provided that the installation complies with all applicable state or local regulations and the owner
applies for a permit and commences installation within twelve (12) months of the date of removal. The
failure of the owner to start such installation within twelve (12) months shall forfeit the owner's right to
replace the manufactured home. Replacement of a manufactured home in accordance with this
subsection is limited to a single replacement.
(d) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Section and Section 12 of the Zoning
Ordinance, the provisions of this Section shall be controlling.
(Ordinance 02-05 adopted 2/19/02; Ordinance 08-24 adopted 4/1/08)
SECTION 11D. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
1. Creation and Purpose. The Manufactured Home Parks (“MHP”) District is created to provide adequate space
and restrictions for the placement of manufactured homes in the City. This does not include mobile homes as
defined in this ordinance. The “MHP” District is also established to provide housing densities compatible with
existing and proposed neighborhoods by providing alternative housing types both in construction and economy,
while providing for quality manufactured home park subdivision development containing many of the
characteristics and atmosphere of a conventional single-family residential district.
2. Location of MHP Districts. The previous “Mobile Home Parks” Districts in the City of Bridgeport known as
“MHP” Districts, shall hereafter be known as “Manufactured Home Parks” Districts, and shall continue with the
“MHP” District designation.
3. Manufactured Home Subdivision. Land within the “MHP” District shall be developed as a manufactured home
subdivision. Lots or spaces within the “MHP” District will be sold or rented to private individuals in strict
conformance with the terms and in conformance with conditions under which the manufactured home subdivision
was approved by the City Council and the requirements of this Section. All roadways within a manufactured home
subdivision shall be dedicated to the public. Private interior drives must be approved by the City Council. Land
zoned “MHP” which is not developed as a manufactured home subdivision may be developed as “R-1” One-Family
District, so long as it is developed in accordance with the regulations of said district. In such case manufactured
homes will not be permitted.
4. Permitted Uses. In the “MHP” District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be installed,
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained, enlarged, converted to any use except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
(a) Manufactured housing dwelling;
(b) Single-family dwellings;
(c) Churches;
(d) Public schools, elementary and high;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/435
(e) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the City;
(f) Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling,
when not involving the conduct of a business or industry.
5. Site Plan Requirements. All properties within this district shall be contiguous and shall be totally developed
under a unified site plan. No application for a house moving permit for the installation of a building shall be
approved unless a site plan has been approved meeting the conditions provided in this ordinance.
6. Area Requirements. The requirements regulating the maximum permissible residential density, minimum lot
size, minimum yard sizes, maximum building height and minimum dwelling size for the “MHP” District, shall be as
follows:
“MHP” Zoning District Area Requirements
Maximum Density 4.0 (d.u./acre)
Minimum Lot Area 10,890 sq. ft. per unit
Minimum Lot Width 50 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Side Yard (Interior Lot) 10% of lot width, not less than 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard (Adjacent to Street) 15 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 20% of lot depth, not to exceed 25 ft. from
centerline of alley
Maximum Building Height 20 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size 1,200 sq. ft.
Minimum Space Separation between
Homes 20 ft.
The minimum site area which may be developed or used for manufactured home park purposes shall be four (4)
acres. No manufactured home shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of a boundary of an “MHP” District.
7. Yard Requirements for Secondary Structures. In the “MHP” District, no carport, garage, storage building,
laundry house, or other permitted structure may be located closer than 10% of the width of the lot or 5 ft.
whichever is greater, from any side property line and 5 ft. from any rear property line. Such structures are also
subject to the front and side yard requirements set forth above. No more than 30% of the required rear yard may
be occupied by accessory structure(s).
8. Development and Installation Standards. Any property developed in the “MHP” District as a manufactured
home or a manufactured housing subdivision shall have and meet the following minimum requirements:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/435
(a) Within thirty (30) days of the manufactured home placement on the lot, connection with the
municipal water system, furnishing an ample and adequate supply of water for both health and
firefighting purposes, including the adequate provisions of fire hydrants. A one-time extension of fifteen
(15) days may be granted by the City Manager or his designee;
(b) Within thirty (30) days of the manufactured home placement on the lot, connection with the
municipal sanitary sewer system. A one-time extension of fifteen (15) days may be granted by the City
Manager or his designee;
(c) Adequate provisions for the collection and removal of waste and garbage;
(d) A single master meter shall be provided for the electrical connection to the manufactured home
park. If the owner of the park desires to submeter each unit, the cost of the additional meters and any
and all maintenance shall be borne by the owner of the park;
(e) A single master meter shall be provided for the water and sewer connection to the manufactured
home park. If the owner of the park desires to submeter each unit, the cost of the additional meters and
any and all maintenance shall be borne by the owner of the park;
(f) The park shall have adequate and sufficient electrical lighting of the streets and areas thereof. The
cost of this lighting will be borne by the owner of the park;
(g) The park shall have an adequate and ample area set aside for a play area if children are
permitted in the park, which play area shall be enclosed with a fence so that vehicles may not enter
therein;
(h) Each lot or space shall be identified by lot number painted or displayed on a signboard at the
front of the lot. Numerals shall be dark in color against a light background so as to assure easy
identification by emergency personnel. Minimum numeral size will be six (6) inches in height. The sign
board must be at least ten (10) inches by ten (10) inches in size;
(i) Manufactured homes shall have the axles, wheels, and tow bar or tongue removed and shall be
secured to a permanent foundation or footing and piers, all in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications;
(j) Manufactured homes must have a minimum of an eighteen-inch (18") crawl space left under all
homes;
(k) Manufactured homes shall have permanent steps installed at all exits;
(l) Skirting shall be securely attached between the manufactured home and the ground on all sides
within thirty (30) days of home installation. Skirting materials shall consist of materials which are
compatible with design of the home and enhance its appearance. Unpainted or untreated corrugated
metal, screen or wire, or lattice type skirting is prohibited;
(m) Construction, siding, and installation of the homes shall be in conformance with applicable
federal, state, and local codes and standards, and each manufactured home shall have affixed a seal of
the appropriate federal or state department;
(n) Ingress and egress to the property shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
City ordinance standards and regulations;
(o) Drainage and garbage collection right-of-way, fire lanes and utility easements shall be provided
as required by the City. Such can be accomplished by designating all private interior drives within the
site as easements for vehicular access and service;
(p) Soil conditions, groundwater level, drainage, flooding, and topography shall not create hazards to
the developed portion of the property or the health and safety of the residents;
(q) Any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured home after it is placed on the site must
be approved by the Building Official of the City. All structural additions shall comply with the City's
building codes and ordinances;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/435
(r) Manufactured home parks shall be developed at densities comparable to adjacent residential
uses or have adequate landscape buffering or open space to provide transition of uses. Adequate
landscape buffering or open space for transition purposes shall be determined on an individual site
basis and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission;
(s) Detached roofs (similar to a carport roof, but constructed over a manufactured home) are not
permitted;
(t) Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied as living quarters;
(u) A manufactured home park may only be located in a zoning district approved for such use.
9. Interior Streets. Internal streets, no-parking signs, and streets name signs shall be privately owned, built, and
maintained, unless dedicated to and accepted by the City. Streets shall be designed for safety and convenient
access to all manufactured home spaces and in accordance with the general design standards of the City's
development regulations.
10. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances of the City.
11. Screening. A solid, opaque screening wall or fence of not less than six (6) feet in height, shall be provided
along all perimeter property lines of a manufactured home subdivision which do not abut a dedicated street. Said
screening wall or fence shall be of a decorative masonry construction. This requirement can be waived or modified
if natural or man-made physical features create an adequate separation or buffer from adjacent uses, as
determined by the City Council. However any request to waive this requirement shall be presented as an element
of the site plan and shall be subject to approval at that time only.
12. Open Space Area. Open space designated for the use and enjoyment of all residents shall be provided
within a manufactured home subdivision at the ratio of five hundred (500) square feet for each of the first twenty
(20) units, and two hundred (200) square feet for each additional unit in excess of twenty (20). Designated open
space shall be developed and maintained for recreational and leisure activities and shall be located within the
subdivision being developed.
13. Water and Sewer. Each manufactured home space or lot shall be served by water and sanitary sewer.
Engineering plans for water and sanitary sewer shall be submitted for review by the City, at the time of site plan
approval. Water and Sewer must be in compliance with the City's building regulations.
14. Drainage. Engineering plans for drainage shall be submitted for review by the City at the time of site plan
approval. All applicable requirements of the City shall be complied with.
15. Manufactured Home Sales. Manufactured home subdivisions shall be for residential purposes only. Sales of
these homes shall be limited to those which become available on the market on an individual basis. Commercial
sales and promotion are not permitted.
16. Inspections and Permit Required.
(a) A permit shall be secured from the building official by any person desiring to install a
manufactured housing unit within the city. Such permit shall be secured before any preparation of the
lot is begun and started prior to moving in a manufactured housing unit upon such lot.
(b) Appropriate permits are also required for electrical, plumbing, and mechanical installation/hookup.
Any additions to the manufactured housing unit shall require appropriate permits in accordance with
the adopted building, residential, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes of the City of Bridgeport.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or have made any connection with any water,
wastewater, electrical, or natural gas service to a manufactured home without having first obtained a
permit as specified in this section.
(d) An electrical inspection shall be required to restore electric service to any mobile home or
manufactured housing unit from which service has been discontinued.
(Ordinance 2014-03, sec. 3, adopted 2/4/14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/435
SECTION 11E. MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
1. Creation and Purpose. The Manufactured Housing (“MH”) District is created to provide adequate space and
restrictions for the placement of manufactured homes in the City. This does not include mobile homes as defined in
this ordinance. The “MH” District is also established to provide housing densities compatible with existing and
proposed neighborhoods by providing alternative housing types both in construction and economy, while providing
for quality manufactured homes containing many of the characteristics and atmosphere of a conventional type
single-family residential district.
2. Location of MH Districts. Each tract of land in the City of Bridgeport previously designated as “Single-Family
Mobile Home” shall hereafter be known as “Manufactured Housing” District.
3. Permitted Uses. In the “MH” District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be installed,
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained, enlarged, converted to any use except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
(a) Manufactured housing dwelling;
(b) Single-family dwellings;
(c) Churches;
(d) Public schools, elementary and high;
(e) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by the City;
(f) Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling,
when not involving the conduct of a business or industry.
4. Area Requirements. The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes, maximum
building height and minimum dwelling size for the “MH” District, shall be as follows:
“MH” Zoning District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 7,200 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 50 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Side Yard 10% of lot width, but not less than 5 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 20% of lot depth, not to exceed 25 ft. from
centerline of alley
Maximum Building Height 20 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size 1,200 sq. ft.
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Per Lot 1
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/435
5. Yard Requirements for Secondary Structures. In the “MH” District, no carport, garage, storage building,
laundry house, or other permitted structure may be located closer than 10% of the width of the lot or 5 ft.,
whichever is greater, from any side property line and 5 ft. from any rear property line. Such structures are also
subject to the front and side yard requirements set forth above. No more than 30% of the required rear yard may
be occupied by accessory structure(s).
6. Installation of Manufactured Housing Allowed.
(a) Upon application to the building official of the city and upon the issuance of the required permit
and payment of the applicable fee, the installation of a manufactured homes shall be permitted as a
residential dwelling if such use is a permitted use within the zoning districts in which the property is
located.
(b) An application to install a new manufactured home for use and occupancy as a residential
dwelling is deemed approved and granted unless the building official denies the application in writing
within 45 days from receipt of the application setting forth the reason.
(c) This section shall not affect the validity of any deed restriction that is otherwise valid.
7. Standards for Manufactured Housing.
(a) All manufactured housing placed within the city limits shall conform with the Federal “Mobile
Home Construction and Safety Standards,” dated June 16, 1976, established for manufactured housing
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development relating to manufactured housing,
as amended, and shall bear a label or seal of compliance indicating such compliance.
(b) All other structures, on-site, shall comply with all city codes and ordinance. In addition,
compliance shall be made with the appropriate sections of this code concerning foundations, supports,
and utility connections.
(c) All manufactured homes shall be sited on the lot so that the front door faces a street.
8. Minimum Manufactured Housing Installation Standards. The following requirements shall be applicable to
manufactured homes installed within the city, and shall be in addition to any other requirements found in the
adopted Building Code of the City of Bridgeport:
(a) Minimum Anchoring Standards. The “Mobile Homes Tie-Down Standards” contained in the
Building Code, as amended, shall apply in all respects to the anchoring and tie-down of manufactured
homes within the city and shall apply to subsequent installation of previously occupied mobile homes
within the city.
(b) Minimum Underpinning Standards.
(1) All manufactured homes installed within the city shall have constructed a continuous skirt or
underpinning constructed around the perimeter of said home within thirty (30) days of said
installation. Skirting materials shall consist of materials which are compatible with design of the
home and enhance its appearance. Unpainted or untreated corrugated metal, screen or wire, or
lattice type skirting is prohibited.
(2) The intervening space between floor sills and the ground shall be protected by a nonbearing
wall below the floor level of the structure extending from the bottom of the frame to the
ground level and fully enclosing the perimeter of the structure and fastened securely to the
exterior wall of the structure.
(c) Within thirty (30) days of the manufactured home placement on the lot, connection with the
municipal water system. A one-time extension of fifteen (15) days may be granted by the City Manager
or his designee.
(d) Within thirty (30) days of the manufactured home placement on the lot, connection with the
municipal sanitary sewer system. A one-time extension of fifteen (15) days may be granted by the City
Manager or his designee.
(e) Adequate provisions for the collection and removal of waste and garbage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/435
(f) Manufactured homes shall have the axles, wheels, and tow bar or tongue removed and shall be
secured to a permanent foundation or footing and piers, all in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications.
(g) Manufactured homes must have a minimum of an eighteen-inch (18") crawl space left under all
homes.
(h) Manufactured homes shall have permanent steps installed at all exits.
(i) Construction, siding, and installation of the homes shall be in conformance with applicable federal,
state, and local codes and standards, and each manufactured home shall have affixed a seal of the
appropriate federal or state department.
(j) Ingress and egress to the property shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
City ordinance standards and regulations.
(k) Drainage and utility easements shall be provided as required by the City.
(l) Any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured home after it is placed on the site must
be approved by the Building Official of the City. All structural additions shall comply with the City's
building codes and ordinances.
(m) Detached roofs (similar to a carport roof, but constructed over a manufactured home) are not
permitted.
(n) Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied as living quarters.
(o) A manufactured home may only be located in a zoning district approved for such use.
9. Inspections and Permit Required.
(a) A permit shall be secured from the building official by any person desiring to install a
manufactured housing unit within the city. Such permit shall be secured before any preparation of the
lot is begun and started prior to moving in a manufactured housing unit upon such lot.
(b) Appropriate permits are also required for electrical, plumbing, and mechanical installation/hookup.
Any additions to the manufactured housing unit shall require appropriate permits in accordance with
the adopted building, residential, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes of the City of Bridgeport.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or have made any connection with any water,
wastewater, electrical, or natural gas service to a manufactured home without having first obtained a
permit as specified in this section.
(d) An electrical inspection shall be required to restore electric service to any mobile home or
manufactured housing unit from which service has been discontinued.
10. Access to Premises. The building official of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all premises
upon which manufactured housing units are placed for the purpose of insuring compliance with the terms of this
Section applicable to said manufactured homes, and any refusal shall result in refusal of the issuance of any
permit required under this Section or revocation of any issued permit until such permission is granted.
11. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances of the City.
(Ordinance 2014-03, sec. 4, adopted 2/4/14)
SECTION 11F. OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the comprehensive rules and
regulations contained in Article 4.400 [Article 4.05] “Oil and Gas Drilling and Production,” as amended, of the City
Code. (Ordinance 08-69, sec. 2, adopted 9/16/08)
SECTION 11G. TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL USES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/435
1. General Purpose. Certain temporary and seasonal uses of land are essential to the full development and
utilization of the land and are deemed necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the City. The
temporary and seasonal uses and special events hereinafter enumerated shall not be deemed violations of the
zoning ordinance when conducted under the conditions herein provided.
Permits issued for any of the seasonal and temporary uses hereinafter enumerated shall not constitute a waiver of
payment for any utility service pursuant to the regulations found in Section 13.102(e) [Section 13.02.002(e)] of the
City's Code of Ordinances.
Charitable, religious, and nonprofit organizations may conduct retail sales for fundraising purposes in any zoning
district with the issuance of a temporary or seasonal use permit; however, the permit fee associated with the permit
shall be waived[.]
2. Permitted Temporary Uses. The permitted temporary uses, the conditions of use, the zoning districts wherein
the same shall be permitted, and approvals required are as follows:
(a) Temporary Office. Temporary field or construction offices and temporary building material storage
areas to be used solely for on-premises business and/or construction purposes in connection with the
property on which they are erected, or within the same platted subdivision, may be permitted in all
zoning districts when approved by the Building Inspector, provided they meet the following
requirements:
(1) The application for a temporary use permit shall include a scale drawing showing the
location and size of the building(s), all outside storage areas, and proposed construction fencing.
(2) The temporary building shall be constructed in accordance with the City's building code and
all other applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations of the City.
(3) No permit shall be issued for a temporary building on a site for a period greater than twelve
(12) months. An extension may be granted by approval of the City Council.
(4) Any temporary building erected under this section as a temporary construction office must
be removed within thirty (30) days after substantial completion or abandonment of the new
construction for which it is accessory.
(5) Written permission from the property owner must be submitted if the owner is different than
the temporary office operator.
(b) Model homes may be permitted in residential zoning districts, when approved by the Building
Inspector, provided they comply with the following requirements:
(1) Up to four (4) houses may be used as model homes by each individual builder in a
subdivision.
(2) The garage of a model home may be used as a sales office, and driveways required for a
single-family residence may be omitted during the term that the model home is being used for this
purpose.
(3) Off-street parking must be provided on or adjacent to the site of a model home. Off-street
parking may be located on adjacent platted lots as a principal, but temporary, use for the term that
the model home is being used for this purpose.
(4) All off-street parking shall be on a surface that is approved by the City Engineer.
(5) Use of a structure as a model home shall cease at the time eighty (80) percent of the lots
owned by the individual builder/developer have been issued a building permit for a residential
dwelling.
(6) At the time use as a model home ceases, all driveway, sidewalks, curbs, garages, and offstreet
parking shall be constructed and provided for the model home.
(7) At the time the model home is converted to a residential use, all adjacent lots used for
parking lots shall be returned to the natural condition as existed prior to use of the adjacent lot for
a model home.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/435
(8) The City may require a bond or escrow for the removal of parking lots and/or the
reconstruction required for any reclamation efforts caused by the temporary parking lot.
(c) Snow cone or other seasonal refreshment stands may be permitted on properties zoned
commercial (C) and industrial (I), when approved by the Building Inspector. Snow cone stands shall be
exempt from the area and masonry requirements of the underlying zoning district; however, they are
subject to setback requirements as may be required by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector
may issue a permit for such sales when it is found that there is available adequate off-street parking
area, either improved or unimproved; and that location and layout of drives, parking areas, lighting, and
sale signs will not constitute a hazard to public travel on the abutting public streets. Written permission
from the property owner must also be submitted if the owner is different than the sales operator. No
permit for a snow cone stand shall be issued for a period greater than six (6) months. Snow cone
stands must be removed from the property where they are located at the end of the permitted period.
(d) Firewood sales may be permitted on properties zoned commercial (C) and industrial (I), when
approved by the Building Inspector. Firewood sales shall be exempt from the area and masonry
requirements of the underlying zoning district; however, they are subject to setback requirements as
may be required by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may issue a permit for such sales
when it is found that there is available adequate off-street parking area, either improved or unimproved;
and that location and layout of drives, parking areas, lighting, and sale signs will not constitute a hazard
to public travel on the abutting public streets. Written permission from the property owner must also be
submitted if the owner is different than the sales operator. No permit for firewood sales shall be issued
for a period greater than six (6) months. Firewood must be removed from the property where it is
located at the end of the permitted period.
(e) Carnivals and circuses may be permitted on properties zoned commercial (C), industrial (I), or
public/semi-public (non-exempt), with written property owner permission, when approved by the
Building Inspector, provided they meet the following requirements:
(1) No permit for a carnival or circus shall be issued for a period greater than fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
(2) Adequate parking and sanitary facilities shall be made available to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector.
(3) No carnival or circus shall begin operation before 8:00 a.m. and operation shall cease
before 11:00 p.m. on all nights, except on Saturday when the event shall cease operation at
midnight.
(4) The Building Inspector shall establish the terms and conditions for the temporary use at the
time of approval. In the event that a sponsor is dissatisfied with the Building Inspector's decision,
the sponsor may appeal the requested use to the City Council.
(5) A special event permit shall be issued and provided to the Building Inspector before
temporary use permit shall be issued for a carnival or circus.
(6) Written permission from the property owner must be submitted if the owner is different than
the carnival or circus operator.
3. Permitted Seasonal and Other Temporary Uses. The sale of seasonal items and the temporary sale of other
items are permitted in commercial (C) and industrial (I) districts, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The following seasonal sales are permitted:
(1) Produce;
(2) Christmas Trees (The temporary outdoor sale of Christmas trees may be permitted for a
period of forty (40) days prior to Christmas Day. Trees, stands, equipment, trash, signs, lighting
and shelters shall be removed by the permit holder no later than January 4, following the
Christmas holiday.);
(3) Firewood (see additional requirements in subsection 2(d) of this Section);
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/435
(4) Snow Cones, and other seasonal refreshment stands as determined by the Building
Inspector (see additional requirements in subsection 2(c) of this Section);
(5) Other items typically sold as seasonal sales items.
(b) A permit shall be required for any seasonal or temporary sales, and no permit shall be issued for
a period greater than thirty (30) consecutive days (except as otherwise provided herein), and no more
than one permit shall be issued for any one property in the course of any calendar year.
(c) All sales shall meet the special conditions, if any, imposed by the Code Enforcement Officer,
Building Inspector, and/or Fire Inspector for the protection of public interest and the welfare of the
community.
(d) No tent or similar structure shall be erected in any required setback or designated easement.
Tents shall conform to the International Fire Code and no tent shall be erected without first obtaining a
permit.
(e) Prior to a permit being issued for a seasonal or temporary sales location, the following
requirements must be met:
(1) Written permission from the property owner must be submitted if the owner is different than
the sales operator.
(2) On-site parking is required as determined by the Building Inspector, with a minimum of two
spots required for any sales. The surface of such parking areas need not be paved or surfaced as
otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinance for permanent parking areas, but it must be suitable
for the type and amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic reasonably anticipated for the seasonal
sales.
(3) Access to restroom facilities must be provided.
(4) A sign permit must be issued in accordance with the City's sign ordinance, if the sales
operator intends to erect signage.
(5) The sales location must comply with building, plumbing, electrical, and health codes when
applicable.
(f) Existing businesses that sell seasonal or other merchandise temporarily are exempt from the
permitting requirements for seasonal uses. Such businesses, however, shall comply with all other
criteria provided for seasonal uses.
(g) An application for approval of a seasonal or temporary use must be submitted not less than
twenty (20) days prior to the commencement date of the use and shall include the following information:
(1) A completed application on a form provided by the City;
(2) A scale drawing showing the location and size of any buildings or other improvements, all
outside storage areas, parking, and proposed construction fencing;
(3) The applicant shall submit a fee in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the
City.
(h) Approval of a permit for a temporary use or seasonal use must be approved by the City Manager
or his designee. The City Manager or his designee may elect, at his/her discretion, to forward any
request to the City Council.
4. Permitted Special Events. Special events, parades, and other similar activities or events requiring any street
closure or use of City-owned property or personnel are subject to the regulations in Article 12.900 [Article 12.08] of
the City code. Other special events may be permitted, provided they meet the following requirements:
(a) No special event permit shall be issued for a period of time exceeding three (3) consecutive days;
(b) A special event must be organized and conducted in a way that ensures that it meets minimum
standards of health, sanitation, and safety required by the City or State law, codes, ordinances, rules or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/435
regulations;
(c) No retail sales are conducted except those incidental to the primary activity, such as refreshment
and souvenir sales;
(d) All parking for a special event shall be provided on an area and surface reasonably anticipated to
be dry and safe for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The surface of such parking areas need not be
paved or surfaced as otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinance for permanent parking areas, but it
must be suitable for the type and amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic reasonably anticipated for
the special event;
(e) A completed application on a form provided by the City must be submitted;
(f) The applicant shall submit a fee in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City;
(g) Approval of a permit for a special event must be approved by the City Manager or his designee.
The City Manager or his designee may elect, at his/her discretion, to forward any request to the City
Council.
(Ordinance 10-25 adopted 7/20/10; Ordinance 2012-09 adopted 7/17/12)
SECTION 12. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
Within the districts established by this ordinance, or amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist lots
and uses of land, and/or buildings and structures, which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future
amendments.
Such nonconforming uses, structures or lots are deemed to be incompatible with permitted uses and structures in
the applicable zoning district and are contrary to the stated purposes of this ordinance. With due regard for the
property rights of the persons affected when considered in light of the public welfare and in view of protecting the
use and enjoyment of adjacent conforming properties, it is the declared purpose of this section that
nonconformities be eliminated and be required to conform to the regulations in this ordinance. Notwithstanding the
above, such nonconforming use, structure or lot may be continued subject to the conditions and limitations set
forth in this section.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS: Occupancy permitted. A non-conforming building or structure may be occupied
except as herein otherwise provided.
REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS: Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure,
provided that no structural alteration shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, and further
provided these regulations shall never be construed to allow an addition to a non-conforming building.
ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS, MOVING: A non-conforming building or structure shall not be added to or
enlarged in any manner unless such addition and enlargements are made to conform to all the requirements of the
district in which such building or structure is located.
No non-conforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or on
any other lot, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations of the district.
RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS: A non-conforming building or structure which is damaged or partially
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, explosion, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God, shall not be a again [sic]
restored or used for such purpose if the expense of such restoration exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. Any non-conforming building or
structure partially destroyed may be restored within six (6) months of the date of partial destruction and is diligently
prosecuted to completion. Whenever a nonconforming building or structure is damaged in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost at that time, the repair or reconstruction of such building or structure shall conform to
all the regulations of the districts in which it is located, and it shall be treated as a new building.
NON-CONFORMING USES Of BUILDINGS: Continuation. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance the
non-conforming use of the building or structure lawfully existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance
may be continued.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/435
The use of a non-conforming building or structure may be changed to use of the same, or more restricted
classification, but where the use of a non-conforming building or structure is hereafter changed to a use of a more
restricted classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of less-restricted classification.
A vacant, non-conforming building or structure lawfully constructed may be occupied by use for which the building
or structure was designated or intended, if so occupied within a period of six (6) months after the effective date of
this ordinance, and the use of a non-conforming building or structure lawfully constructed which becomes vacant
after the effective date of this ordinance, may also be occupied by the use for which the building or structure was
designated or intended, if so occupied within a period of six (6) months after the building becomes vacant.
Expansion prohibited. A non-conforming use of a conforming building or structure, (i.e., commercial use in a
dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure,
nor changed except to a conforming use. If such non-conforming use or portion thereof is discontinued or changed
to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure, or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located.
Extension. A non-conforming use shall not be extended, but the extension of a lawful use to any portion of a
lawfully existing non-conforming building or structure which existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall
not be deemed the extension of such non-conforming use.
NON-CONFORMING USE OF LAND: Continuation of use. The non-conforming use of land (where no main
building is involved), existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance, may be continued provided; that no
such non-conforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining
property.
That if such non-conforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such
land or portion thereof, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
That any sign, billboard, poster, storage yard, or trailer camp, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time
of the effective date of this ordinance, may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provision
hereof, provided however, that no structural alterations are made thereto.
DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT: A nonconforming use of any building or structure which has been
discontinued shall not thereafter be returned to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered
discontinued when:
A. It has been replaced with a conforming use;
B. Such building or structure is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied or out of use
for a continuous period of six months, or the equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use have
been removed from the premises and have not been replaced within such six-month period;
C. The use changes, is temporarily prohibited, or is moved from the premises;
D. Utility service to the premises is terminated;
E. The ownership or occupancy changes;
F. The owner or occupant expresses an intent, through actions or statements, to discontinue or
change the use; or
G. The premises are dilapidated, substandard or not maintained in a suitable condition for
occupancy.
DISPLACEMENT: No non-conforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
VISION CLEARANCE: On any lot on which a front yard is required by this ordinance, no wall, fence or other
structure shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth or structure of any kind shall be maintained in
such location within such required front yard so as to obstruct the view. Any fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery, etc.,
higher than a base line extending from a point 2 1/2 feet above walk grade at the walk to a point 4 1/2 feet above
walk grade at the depth of front yard required is hereby declared to be an obstruction to view, except single trees
having a single trunk which are pruned to a height of seven feet above walk grade.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/435
DISTRICT CHANGES: Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer an area
from one district to another district of a different classification or when boundaries or districts are changed as a
result of annexation of new territory or changes in the regulations or restrictions of this ordinance the provisions of
this section shall also apply to any non-conforming uses existing therein which may so become nonconforming.
AMORTIZATION
A. The City Council may request that the Zoning Board of Adjustment establish a compliance date for
discontinuance of a nonconforming use, structure or lot in accordance with this section.
B. In determining whether to initiate an amortization proceeding, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may consider the character of the surrounding area, the degree of incompatibility of the nonconforming
use, structure or lot to the zoning district in which it is located, the effect of the nonconforming use,
structure or lot on the surrounding area, the effect of cessation of the nonconforming use, structure or
lot on the area, any other danger or nuisance to the public caused by the nonconforming use, structure
or lot, and any other factors the board considers relevant. If the board determines that there is no public
necessity for establishing a compliance date, the board shall request that the City Council initiate
rezoning of the property to bring the nonconforming use, structure or lot into compliance with applicable
zoning regulations.
C. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the owner of the use and the owner of the property
at least 30 days before the hearing.
D. The compliance date for discontinuance of a nonconforming use, structure or lot shall be
prescribed by the board at a public hearing, after hearing testimony from the owner, the operator,
neighboring property owners, community organizations and other interested parties. In prescribing a
reasonable amortization period for the nonconforming use, structure or lot to give the property owner an
opportunity to recover his investment from the time the nonconforming use, structure or lot
commenced, as allowed by law, the board shall consider the following factors:
1. The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment and other assets (excluding
the land and any inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) on
the property before the time the nonconformity commenced. Any such investment made after the
nonconformity commenced shall not be included;
2. Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a compliance date, including
demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages;
3. Any return on investment since inception of the nonconforming use, structure or yard,
including net income and depreciation;
4. The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation; and
5. Any other factors allowed by law.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2016-36 adopted 12/12/16)
SECTION 13. HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS
The foregoing requirements in the height and area districts shall be subject to the following exceptions and
regulations:
HEIGHT: (a) in the thirty-five (35) and sixty (60) feet height districts, public or semi-public buildings, hospitals,
sanitariums, or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when the front, side and
rear yards are increased an additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed thirty-five (35) and sixty (60) feet,
respectively, in height.
(b) One-Family dwellings in the thirty-five (35) feet height districts may be increased in height by not more than
ten (10) feet when two (2) side yards of not less than fifteen (15) feet each are provided. Such dwelling, however,
shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
(c) Chimneys, water towers, penthouses, scenery lofts, sugar refineries, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires,
standpipes, false mansards, parapet walls, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected as to their height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City of Bridgeport.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/435
(d) On through lots one hundred and fifty (150) feet or less in depth the height of a building may be measured
from the curb level on either street. On through lots more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet in depth the height
regulations and basis of height measurements for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of
not more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from that street.
[(e) Reserved]
AREA: For the purpose of side yard regulations the following dwellings with common party walls shall be
considered as one (1) building, occupying one (1) lot: semi-detached two-family and four-family dwellings and row
houses not more than two (2) rooms deep.
(f) In the case of a court apartment, side yards may be used as rear yards provided that:
(1) The required side yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each entrance or exit opening into or
served by such[.]
(2) The width of the place or court shall not be less than three (3) times the width of the side yard, as
required in this provision, provided that open, unenclosed porches may project unto [into] the required
place or court not more than twenty (20) percent of the width of such place or court.
(3) Where a roadway is provided in the place or court the width allowed for such roadway shall be in
addition to that required above.
(4) All other requirements including front, side and rear yards shall be complied with in accordance
with the district in which such court apartments are located.
(g) The front and side yard requirements for dwellings shall be waived where dwellings are erected above
stores.
(h) In computing the depth of a rear yard for any building where such yard opens onto any alley, one-half (1/2) of
such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard.
(i) An accessory building may occupy not more than thirty (30) percent of a required rear yard, provided,
however, in the case of reversed frontage no accessory building shall be erected closer than five (5) feet to the line
of abutting lot to the rear.
(j) Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for
the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided,
however, that none of the above projections shall extend into a court more than six (6) inches nor into a minimum
side yard more than twenty-four (24) inches.
(k) No cornices shall project over the street line more than five (5) percent of the width of such street, and shall
in no case project more than four (4) feet.
(l) Open or enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies projecting into a yard or court, not
more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted by
the Building Inspector where same are so placed as not to obstruct the light and ventilation.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 14. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
14.01, OFF-STREET PARKING - RESIDENTIAL USES
1. On lots zoned or used for residential uses, off-street parking shall not be allowed within the front or side
yards, except as provided below:
(a) Within a defined driveway perpendicular to the abutting roadway. Such driveway may be defined
by gravel, paved or unpaved tire runners, unpaved tire running paths, concrete or asphalt pavement,
pavestone, brick, or other accepted pavement approved by the City Engineer.
(b) If not within a defined driveway perpendicular to the abutting roadway, on a surface paved with
concrete, asphalt, brick, pavestone, or other accepted pavement approved by the City Engineer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/435
2. Single-family residential dwelling units, including manufactured homes, constructed after January 1, 2008,
shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per unit. Such spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9)
feet wide and sixteen (16) feet long and may be located end-to-end or side-by-side on a driveway or in an
enclosed garage. No portion of the required off-street parking spaces may be located in the right-of-way of a public
street or a public alley.
3. All multifamily uses (including apartments, duplexes, and manufactured home parks), constructed after
January 1, 2008, shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per unit. Such spaces shall be a
minimum of nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long and shall open directly onto an aisle of driveway that is
not a public street or a public alley.
4. All off-street residential parking spaces and driveways for new residential uses constructed after January 1,
2008, shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, brick, pavestone, or other accepted pavement approved by the City
Engineer.
5. For single-family residential driveways constructed after January 1, 2008, there shall be a minimum
separation of four (4) feet between driveways located on adjacent residential lots, and in no case shall said
driveways abut one another. The combined width of driveway cuts or entrances along any street or alley for any
single-family residential lot shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the frontage or width of the lot.
6. There shall be no more than one (1) driveway cut or entrance within the front yard of a single-family
residential lot, except for approved circular driveways complying with all the provisions of this section, two (2)
driveway cuts or entrances are allowed. Circular driveways constructed prior to January 1, 2008, may be
constructed of rock, gravel, or crushed stone. No more than forty percent (40%) of the required front yard of a
single-family residential lot shall be paved. For a single-family residential lot that is a corner lot, one (1) additional
driveway cut or entrance is allowed along the street adjacent to the side or rear yard of the lot.
14.02. OFF-STREET PARKING - NONRESIDENTIAL USES
1. Unless otherwise noted, the provisions of this Section apply to all new development or construction occurring
after January 1, 2008, including the construction of new buildings, building additions or expansions, changes in the
use of structures, and the remodeling or structural alteration of an existing building.
2. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(a) Commercial Uses (Other than Restaurant): 1 space per 300 SF
(b) Restaurant (Drive-In, Fast Food, General): 1 space per 100 SF
(c) Lodging uses (Hotel, Motel, Bed and Breakfast, Boarding House): 1 space per guest room, plus
specified requirement for restaurant
(d) Church, Theater, Recreation Center, Community Center[:] 1 space per 5 persons accommodated
in largest assembly area
(e) Medical or Psychiatric Hospital, Nursing, or Congregate Facility: 0.5 spaces per bed
(f) College, University, Public or Private School[:] 1 space per classroom, plus 1 space per 4 persons
accommodated in largest assembly area
(g) Industrial[:] None
(h) Other Uses[:] As approved by City Engineer
3. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to uses or buildings fronting on that portion of Halsell Street
between 16th Street and SH 114; that portion of Cates Street between 16th Street and SH 114; that portion of
Stevens Street between 16th Street and 9th Street; those portions of streets intersecting the aforementioned
streets between Cates Street and Stevens Street; nor to industrial zoned land uses or structures; provided
however, if off-street parking spaces are constructed for uses or buildings fronting on the aforementioned portions
of Halsell Street, Cates Street or Stevens Street, they must be paved with concrete, asphalt, brick, pavestone, or
other accepted pavement approved by the City Engineer.
4. For mixed uses, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements
for each use included in the building or development.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/435
5. The number of parking spaces may be reduced when the land use or floor area of a building is changed or
reduced to a use or floor area requiring fewer parking spaces. The number of parking spaces shall be increased
when the land use or floor area of a building is changed or increased to a use or floor area requiring additional
parking spaces.
6. When calculations determining the number of required parking spaces result in fractions, fractions less the
[than] 0.5 shall be disregarded and fractions equal to or greater than 0.5 shall be rounded upward to the next
highest whole number.
7. Parking ratios based upon the number of persons accommodated or seats shall be calculated in accordance
with the provisions of most recent edition of the International Building Code adopted by the City.
8. For uses where the off-street parking requirement is to be approved by the City Engineer, the City may
require the submission of a parking study, which shall at a minimum include estimates of parking requirements
based on recommendations from the Urban Land Institute, the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or the Traffic Institute
and on data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed use.
The City Engineer will review this study in determining and approving the off-street parking requirement.
9. Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on either the same lot as the principal use or on a lot that
is immediately adjacent and contiguous to the lot containing the principal use. If the adjacent and contiguous lot is
under different ownership than the lot containing the principal use, appropriate legal documentation shall be
provided to ensure the required number of spaces shall remain available throughout the existence of the principal
use.
10. Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the Texas Accessibility
Standards (TAS) adopted by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation pursuant to the Architectural
Barriers Act (Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes). Such parking spaces shall be counted toward fulfilling the total offstreet
parking requirement.
11. The minimum required dimensions for off-street parking spaces shall be 9.0 feet for the stall width and 18.0
feet for the stall depth.
12. Each off-street parking space shall open directly onto an aisle or driveway that is not a public street or a
public alley, provided that the provisions shall not apply to parking spaces provided by the City for City parks.
13. No off-street parking spaces shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street, public alley, or
required joint or cross access easement.
14. Curbs or curb stops shall be provided to prevent any vehicle using a parking area from encroaching on any
public right-of-way, landscaped area, or adjacent property.
15. All off-street parking spaces, aisles, and driveways constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, brick, pavestone, or other accepted pavement approved by the City
Engineer.
16. In addition to meeting the applicable off-street parking requirements, drive-through facilities shall provide a
minimum of three queue spaces, each with a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum length of twenty feet.
14.03. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special exceptions to the terms and provisions of this Section may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 07-61 adopted 12/18/07)
SECTION 15. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
The Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of five regular members and two
alternate members, each to be appointed for a term of two years by the City Council. Alternate members shall
serve in the absence of regular member(s). Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be removed from
office by the City Council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment of the City Council for the unexpired term of the member affected. All cases to be heard by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment must be heard by a minimum number of four members.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/435
The terms of three of the members shall expire on the first Monday in May of each odd-numbered year, and the
terms of two of the members shall expire on the first Monday in May of each even-numbered year. The regular
members of the Board shall be identified by place numbers one through five, with the two alternate members
identified by place numbers six and seven. The odd-numbered places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the
even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years.
The Board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings, provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with
this ordinance.
The Board of Adjustment shall meet regularly monthly, at a date and time established by the Board, as needed to
address public business. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board
may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions
and every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing and shall contain a full record of the findings of
the Board in each case, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Secretary and shall be a
public record.
The Secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall forthwith notify in writing the City Council, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Building Inspector of each decision, interpretation, special exception and variance
granted under the provision[s] of this ordinance.
The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administered [administer] oaths or compel the
attendance of witnesses.
POWERS: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
ordinance and may also decide any question involving the interpretation of any of the provisions of this ordinance
including determination of the location of any district boundary, if there is uncertainty in respect thereto.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguard[s],
make special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance in harmony with its general purpose and intent and in
accordance with the general and specific rules herein contained.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variance from the terms of
this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to such condition, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be
observed and substantial justice done.
PROCEDURE COVERING SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, APPEALS AND GRANTING OF VARIANCES
APPEALS AND VARIANCES: Appeals and requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Bridgeport affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal or request for variance shall be taken within fifteen (15) days'
time after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the City Secretary a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith deliver to the City Secretary all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
Such notice of appeal properly filed as herein provided, shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by Court of record on application on notice
to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
Upon notice of appeal being given to the City Secretary, before such appeal shall be construed as having been
perfected the applicant must file with such notice of appeal to the City Secretary, and amount of money estimated
by the City Secretary to be sufficient to mail and publish all notices required herein, such amount in no case to be
less than $15.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/435
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: Applications for special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance shall be made in writing
on forms provided by the City Secretary by the prospective occupant and/or owner of the property. One such
application shall be accompanied by an amount of money estimated by the City Secretary to be sufficient to mail
and publish all notices required herein, such amount in no case to be less than $15.00.
A copy of such application shall be forthwith forwarded by the City Secretary to the office of the City Building
Inspector.
NOTICE: The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all special exceptions, granting of
variances and appeals and written notice of all such public hearings shall be sent by the City Secretary on forms
prepared by the City Attorney's Office to the applicant and all other persons deemed by the Board to be affected
thereby, and all owners of real property lying within two hundred (200') feet of the property on which the special
exception, grant of variance or appeal is proposed, such notice to be given not less than ten (10) days before the
date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property for City taxes as the ownership
appeals [appears] on the last approved City tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same properly
addressed and postage paid in the City Post Office. Notice shall also be given by publishing the same in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Bridgeport at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for hearing
which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing, provided, however, all provisions contained herein with
respect to the mailing and publishing of notices of hearing shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance
with this section, and is to be construed as directory and not mandatory.
THE HEARING: Upon the hearing any interested party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the facts necessary which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment must find before granting any special exception, variance or appeal as herein contained.
In exercising the powers herein granted, the Board may in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance reverse
or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the
powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to effect any variation of this ordinance or grant any
special exception hereto. No appeal, request or application to the Board of Adjustment shall be allowed on the
same piece of property prior to the expiration of six (6) months from a ruling of the Board of Adjustment on any
appeal, request or application to such body unless other property abutting or adjoining such property shall have
within such six (6) months period been altered or changed by a ruling of the Board of Adjustment, in which case
such change of circumstances shall permit the allowance of an appeal, request or application but shall in no way
have any force in law to compel the Board of Adjustment, after a hearing, to grant such subsequent appeal,
request or application but such hearing shall be considered on its merits as in all other cases.
Any special exceptions, variances or appeals authorized or granted by the Board of Adjustment either under the
provisions of this ordinance or under the authority granted to the Board of Adjustment under the statutes of the
State of Texas shall authorize the issuance of a building permit, or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be,
for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the favorable action on the part of the Board of Adjustment, unless
said Board of Adjustment in its minutes shall, at the same time, grant a longer period.
EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES DISTINGUISHED
A special exception is a permission given by the Board properly authorized by this ordinance in specific cases for
an applicant to use his property in a manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, provided such use serves
the general welfare and preserves the community interest.
A variance on the other hand, is an authorization by the Board providing relief and doing substantial justice in the
use of the applicant's property by a property owner where, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: A special exception may be granted an applicant when the Board of Adjustment finds:
That the granting of such exception will not be injurious or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, morals
and the general welfare of the general public, and;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/435
That the granting of such exception will not be detrimental or injurious to the property or improvements in such
zone or neighborhood in which the property is located, and;
That the granting of such exception will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance.
In determining its finding, the Board shall take into account the character and use of adjoining buildings and those
in the vicinity, the number of persons residing or working in such building or upon such land and traffic conditions
in the vicinity.
The Board of Adjustment may, after public notice and hearing and subject to the conditions and safeguards herein
contained, authorize special exceptions to this ordinance as follows:
Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied as a nonconforming use.
Permit the extension of a nonconforming use of a building upon a lot occupied as a nonconforming use.
Grant in relatively undeveloped sections of the City temporary and conditional permits for not more than two (2)
year periods for any use of land, excluding structures.
Permit the use of a lot or lots in any dwelling district adjacent to any other district, even if separated therefrom by
an alley or by a street, for the parking [of] passenger cars under such safeguards and conditions of the more
restricted property, provided no other business use is made of such lot or lots.
Permit in any district such modification of the requirements of this ordinance as the Board may deem necessary to
secure an appropriate development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on two or more sides there are buildings
that do not conform to these regulations.
Permit such modification of a yard, lot area or lot width regulation requirements as may be necessary to secure
appropriate improvement of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned on the effective date of this
ordinance, and is not adjacent to another parcel of the same ownership and where such parcel is of such size that
it cannot be improved without such modification or of such restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved
without such modification.
Grant conditional use permits in any zone where such uses are allowed conditionally by the provisions of this
ordinance.
In granting any special exception under the provisions of this ordinance the Board may designate such conditions
in connection therewith which, in its opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
VARIANCES: A variance may be granted to an applicant when the Board of Adjustment finds:
That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought,
which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building and do not generally apply to lands or
buildings in the same zone or neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or
building.
That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or
improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property is located, and;
That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance
is [as] granted by the Board is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.
That the literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of this ordinance will result in an unnecessary
hardship inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of this ordinance and that in granting such variance
the spirit of the ordinance will be preserved and substantial justice done.
In addition to considering the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity, the Board, in
determining its findings shall take into account the number of persons residing or working in such buildings or upon
such land and traffic conditions in the vicinity.
The Board of Adjustment may, after public notice and hearing and subject to the conditions and safeguards herein
contained, vary or adapt the strict application of any of the terms of this ordinance under the powers and authority
herein granted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/435
In granting any variance under the provisions of this ordinance, the Board may designate such conditions in
connection therewith which, in its opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
APPEAL FROM ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer,
or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board
and not thereafter. Judicial review of the Board's decision shall be conducted in accordance with Section 211.011,
Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 2012-07 adopted 6/19/12; Ordinance 2016-20 adopted 6/13/16)
[SECTION 16. RESERVED]
SECTION 17. ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS: Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance the Building Inspector for the City
of Bridgeport shall administer and enforce this ordinance, including the receiving of applications, the inspection of
premises and the issuing of building permits and certificates of occupancy and compliance. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except where the provisions of this ordinance have been complied
with.
BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED: No person shall erect or construct or proceed with the erection or construction of
any building or structure nor add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish any building
or structure or cause the same to be done in any zone district of the City of Bridgeport without first applying for and
obtaining a building permit therefor from the Building Inspector. All applications for such permits shall be in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and building code of the City of Bridgeport and unless upon
written order of the Board of Adjustment, no such building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
building where said construction[,] addition, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions
of this ordinance.
POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR: Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance, the Building Inspector may order the work stopped and also revoke the building permit
theretofore issued by notice in writing served on any person owning such property or their agent or on any person
engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop and cause to
be stopped such work until authorized by the Building Inspector to recommence and proceed with the work or
upon issuance of a building permit in those cases in which the building permit has been revoked and further, such
stop work order and revocation or [of] permit shall be posted on the work being done in violation of this ordinance.
Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this ordinance the
Building Inspector shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated by
notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued and such person shall
vacate such building or portion thereof within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice or make the building or
portion thereof comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
IN NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY: No person shall erect, excavate, construct, or proceed or continue with the
erection or construction of any building or structure or add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, repair, convert,
insulate or extend or demolish any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed
territory to the City of Bridgeport without first applying for and obtaining a building permit therefor from the Building
Inspector or the City Council as may be required herewith.
PERMITS ISSUED BY BUILDING INSPECTOR: In a territory newly annexed to the City of Bridgeport, no permit
for the construction of a building shall be issued by the Building Inspector other than a permit which will allow the
construction of a building permitted in the “R-1” District unless and until such territory has been classified in a
zoning district other than “R-1” District by the City Council in the manner prescribed in this ordinance.
PERMITS ISSUED BY CITY COUNCIL: An application for a permit for any other use than that specified in the
previous paragraph shall be made to the Building Inspector of the City of Bridgeport and by him referred to the City
Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. Whenever such
recommendation is filed with the City Council by the City Planning and Zoning Commission, such recommendation
shall be advisory in its nature and the Council shall be at liberty to affirm it or allow such construction as the facts
in their opinion may justify.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/435
PERMITS REQUIRED FOR BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION: The owner, lessee, or any other person, firm
or corporation owning, controlling, constructing, supervising or directing the construction of any building or
structure in process of construction and which is incomplete at the time the land upon which it is situated is
annexed to the City of Bridgeport before proceeding any further with the construction, alteration or completion
thereof shall apply to the Building Inspector of the City of Bridgeport authorizing further work on said building or
structure and shall attach to said application for such permit, plans and specifications relating to the construction of
said building or structure, which said application for building permit shall be promptly referred to the City Planning
and Zoning Commission for consideration and said commission shall promptly thereafter file with the City Council
its recommendation as to granting, modifying or rejecting said permit, the said recommendation to be advisory in
its nature and the City Council shall be at liberty to affirm it or allow such construction as the facts in their opinion
may justify. Said construction work shall be suspended until the permit provided for herein has been issued or until
final zoning regulations have been adopted, which permit the construction, use and occupancy of the structure or
building.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE
CITY SECRETARY: No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered, or extended
shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by City
Secretary of the City of Bridgeport stating that the building or proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of
this ordinance.
No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended without certificate of occupancy and
compliance having first been issued by the City Secretary of the City of Bridgeport therefor.
Application for a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be made with the application for a building permit or
may be directly applied for where no building permit is necessary and shall be issued or refused in writing within
five (5) days after the City Secretary has been notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for
occupancy.
The City Secretary shall maintain a record of all certificates and copies shall be furnished upon request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
No permit for excavation for or the erection or alteration of or repairs to any building shall be issued until an
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy and compliance.
No permanent water, sewer, electrical or gas utility connections shall be made to the land, building or structure
until and after a certificate of occupancy and compliance has been issued by the City Secretary of the City of
Bridgeport.
Upon request of the owner or authorized representative, the City Secretary may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for the temporary use and occupancy of a portion of a building prior to the completion and occupancy
of the entire building provided such temporary occupancy or use will not in any way or manner jeopardize life or
property.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 18. BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS
The electronic version of the zoning district map shall be the official zoning district map of the city.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the map
accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, the following rules shall apply:
(a) The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown and where the districts
designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by
street or alley lines, said street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
(b) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has been or
may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines,
and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are
bounded approximately by lot lines, said lot line shall be construed to be the boundary of such district
unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/435
(c) In unsubdivided property the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of
this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale contained on such map.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 05-18 adopted 4/19/05)
SECTION 19. INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intended by
this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between
parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall
govern. (Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 20. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
COUNCIL MAY AMEND: The City Council may from time to time by ordinance amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal the boundaries of the district of [or] the regulations herein established. Before taking any such
action, the City Council shall submit the same to the Zoning and Planning Commission for its recommendation and
report.
The applicant for a change or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall pay a fee in an amount established from
time to time by the City Council.
A. The following fees are hereby established:
1. For processing an application for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance: $150.00
2. For processing an application for a specific use permit: $150.00
3. For processing an application to the board of adjustment for an appeal, variance or special
exception: $150.00
B. If the city should incur additional costs for legal or engineering review, or services in connection
with processing an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, for a specific use permit, or
an appeal to the board of adjustment, the applicant is required to reimburse the city for such fees.
However, no such expenses shall be incurred or expended without first obtaining written consent and
agreement between the city and applicant based on estimated amount(s).
PROCEDURES BEFORE THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed changes in classification and written notices of
all such public hearings shall be sent by the Secretary of the Zoning and Planning Commission on forms prepared
by the City Attorney's office to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change
in classification is proposed, such notices to be given, not less than ten (10) days before the day set for hearing to
all such owners who have rendered their said property for City taxes as the ownership appears on the last
approved City tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid,
in the City Post Office. Where property lying within 200 feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in
territory which was annexed to the City after the final date for making renditions which are included on the last
approved City Tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by publication on forms provided by the City Attorney's
office by publishing the same once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Bridgeport at least 15 days
prior to the date set for hearing.
After such hearing, the Zoning and Planning Commission may, within its discretion, make one of the following
recommendations in connection with each proposed change in zoning classification:
Recommend against the change in zoning.
Recommend a change in zoning.
Recommend a change in zoning for such areas together with its recommendations as to
requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to the
public streets, provisions for drainage, parking spaces and street layouts and protective screening
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/435
and open spaces and any other requirements, which within the discretion of the Zoning and
Planning Commission will protect adjacent property and secure substantially the purpose and
intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
Each such recommendation made by the Zoning and Planning Commission shall be by the Secretary of said
commission reported to the City Council in writing and the applicant notified of the action of the Zoning and
Planning Commission.
The Secretary of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall set up and maintain a separate file for each
application received and shall record therein the names and addresses of all persons, firms and corporations to
whom notices are mailed, including the date of mailing and the persons by whom such notices were delivered to
the mailing clerk, Post Office, or mailbox, and all records and files therein provided shall be permanent and official
files of the City of Bridgeport.
PROCEDURE BEFORE CITY COUNCIL: A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adopting any
proposed amendment, supplement or change, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Bridgeport; and after receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission that the zone district be changed, or upon written request to the City Secretary by the applicant when
a recommendation has been made against such change in zoning district, the City Secretary-Treasurer is hereby
authorized and directed to publish such notices on forms prepared by the City Attorney's office and set the date for
hearing before the City Council at the earliest practical time, consistent with the time necessary for giving such
notices as provided by law.
When the Zoning and Planning Commission has recommended a change in zoning together with
recommendations as to requirements as provided in this section the City Council shall be at liberty to either accept,
reject or make other or additional requirements, and any such requirements, in the discretion of the City Council to
be made, shall become a part of the ordinance changing the zoning classification of such property, and such
requirements shall be considered as an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance is [as] applicable to such property.
Such requirements shall not be conditions precedent to the granting of the change in zoning or the granting of
building permits on such property, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate or
occupancy and compliance, and such requirements shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy and
compliance may be issued by the Building Inspector for the use or occupancy of the building, land or structure on
such property.
In case the Zoning and Planning Commission has recommended against a proposed amendment[,] supplement,
change or modification, or of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of
the area of the lots included in such property change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending
200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable note of four-fifths (4/5) of all the
City Council.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 02-14 adopted 5/7/02)
SECTION 21. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or who shall build, alter or occupy any building, structure of [or] land in
violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as
such hereunder.
The owner or tenant of any building or property or part thereof where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be
placed or shall exist and any architect, building contractor, agent, person, firm or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who have assisted in the commission of such violation, shall be guilty of separate
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
In addition to the remedies provided for in this ordinance, the Building Inspector may, in case of any buildings or
structures are erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, institute on behalf of the City of Bridgeport any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/435
structure of land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in or about such premises. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65; Ordinance 02-34 adopted 11/5/02)
SECTION 22. [ILLEGAL USES]
By the passage of this ordinance no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless
specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses
shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. (Ordinance adopted
10/21/65)
SECTION 23. SEPARABILITY
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the remaining portion hereof. (Ordinance adopted
10/21/65)
SECTION 24. [PUBLICATION ORDER]
“There shall be published in the Bridgeport Index on Friday, October 29, 1965, a descriptive caption stating in
summary the purpose of this ordinance and the penalty for violation a fine of not more than $200.00. Effective as
of the date of publication of this caption.” (Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
SECTION 25. [PUBLICATION OF CAPTION]
This ordinance shall be effective from and after its publication as follows:
“A Zoning Ordinance to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures, and land
for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes, the height, number of stories, and size of building
and other structures, the size of yards and other open spaces, and the density of population, and
for said purposes to divide the municipality into districts of such number, shape and area as may
be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations: To prescribe penalties for the violation of its
provisions and to provide for its enforcement. With a penalty of a fine of not more than $200.00 for
violation.”
(Ordinance adopted 10/21/65)
EXHIBIT B
AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE
BRIDGEPORT MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE
NO. 84-3
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES AND OBJECTS OF
NATURAL GROWTH, AND OTHERWISE REGULATING THE USE OF PROPERTY IN THE VICINITY OF THE
BRIDGEPORT MUNICIPAL AIRPORT BY CREATING THE APPROPRIATE ZONES AND ESTABLISHING THE
BOUNDARIES THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR CHANGES IN THE RESTRICTIONS AND BOUNDARIES OF
SUCH ZONES; DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN; REFERRING TO THE BRIDGEPORT MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT ZONING MAP WHICH IS INCORPORATED IN AND MADE A PART OF THIS ORDINANCE;
PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT; ESTABLISHING A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; AND IMPOSING
PENALTIES.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat. Ann. Article 46e-1 et seq. (1969).
It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of
Bridgeport Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing
and future instrument approach minimums of Bridgeport Municipal Airport, and that an obstruction may reduce the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/435
size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the
utility of Bridgeport Municipal Airport, and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) that Bridgeport Municipal Airport fulfills an essential community purpose;
(2) that the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance
and may injure the region served by Bridgeport Municipal Airport;
(3) that it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the
creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
(4) that the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible,
by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, the
elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and lighting of obstructions
are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF THE CITY OF BRIDGEPORT, TEXAS, AND
THE COUNTY OF WISE, TEXAS:
Section 1. Short Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “Bridgeport Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.” (Ordinance
84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 2. Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) AIRPORT - means Bridgeport Municipal Airport.
(2) AIRPORT ELEVATION - means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable
landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.
(3) AIRPORT HAZARD - means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace
required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data
acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight,
and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with or obstructing such
landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data
acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles.
(4) AIRPORT HAZARD AREA - means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might
be established if not prevented as provided in this Ordinance.
(5) AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT - means the point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area and so designated.
(6) APPROACH SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance. In plane the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
(7) APPROACH TRANSITIONAL HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES - These zones are set forth
in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
(8) BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT - A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the City
Council of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, as provided by Article 46e-10, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. (1969).
(9) CONICAL SURFACE - A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery or the
horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000)
feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/435
(10) HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION - An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect
on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
(11) HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance
and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
(12) HORIZONTAL SURFACE - A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
(13) JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD - means a board consisting of five (5) members, two (2)
members appointed by the City Council of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, and two (2) members
appointed by the Commissioners' Court of Wise County, Texas. The four (4) members so appointed
shall elect a fifth (5th) member who shall serve as Chairman of said Board.
(14) LANDING AREA - means the surface area of the Airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing
of aircraft.
(15) NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land
which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto.
(16) OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which
exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
(17) PERSON - means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor,
guardian, or other representative.
(18) PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end
of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface,
the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation
Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.
The width of a primary surface is five hundred (500) feet for utility runways having
nonprecision instrument approaches.
(19) RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its
length.
(20) STRUCTURE - An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including,
but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission
lines.
(21) TRANSITIONAL SURFACES - These surfaces extend outward at ninety (90) degree angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for
each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal surface.
(22) TREE - Any object of natural growth.
(23) VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
(24) UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by aircraft having
a landing speed of less than 121 knots and a wingspan of less than 79 feet.
(25) NONPRECISION INSTANT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/435
Section 3. Zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones
which include all of the land lying beneath the Approach Surfaces, Transition Surface, Horizontal Surface and
Conical Surface as they apply to Bridgeport Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the Bridgeport Municipal
Airport, Bridgeport, Texas, Airport Zoning Map consisting of one (1) sheet, prepared by the Texas Aeronautics
Commission, Austin, Texas, and dated February 18, 1983, which is attached to this Ordinance and made a part
hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) APPROACH ZONES
(a) Runway 17/35. Approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the ends of
runway 17/35 on Bridgeport Municipal Airport for nonprecision instrument landings and take-offs.
The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet which coincides
with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond each [end] of
the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet at a horizontal
distance of five thousand (5,000) feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its center being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(2) TRANSITION ZONES - Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface
adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces,
symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map.
Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the
runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the sides of the primary surface and
from the sides of approach surfaces.
(3) HORIZONTAL ZONE - The area beneath a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above
the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of five
thousand (5,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 17/35 and
connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
[(4)] CONICAL ZONE - The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of
four thousand (4,000) feet.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 4. Height Limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree
shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones
in question as follows:
(1) APPROACH ZONES
(a) Runway 17/35. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point five
thousand (5,000) feet from the end of the primary surface.
(2) TRANSITION ZONES - Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides
of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is eight hundred fifty-seven
(857) feet above mean sea level.
(3) HORIZONTAL ZONE - Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, or a
height of one thousand seven (1,007) feet above mean sea level.
(4) CONICAL ZONE - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and
extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/435
(5) EXCEPTED HEIGHT LIMITATIONS - Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting
the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to thirty-five (35) feet
above the surface of the land.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 5. Use Restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create
bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 6. Nonconforming Uses.
(1) Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this Ordinance shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently
prosecuted.
(2) Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this Section, the owner of any
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City Secretary of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, to
indicate to the operator of aircraft in the vicinity of the Airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers
and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Bridgeport, Texas.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 7. Permits.
(1) Future Uses - Except as specifically provided in (a) and (b) hereunder, no material change shall be made in
the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit
shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with Section 7, Par. (4).
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than
four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground; except when
such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any if [of] the height limits established
by this Ordinance except as set forth in Section 4, Par. (5).
(2) Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport
hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater
hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto of [or] than
it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be
granted.
(3) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the City Secretary, City Bridgeport determines the
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/435
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(4) Variances - Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree, or use his property, in violation of the regulations prescribed in this Ordinance, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by
a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the
relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the
spirit of this Ordinance. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this Ordinance may be
considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Bridgeport
Municipal Airport Advisory Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Bridgeport
Municipal Airport Advisory Board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the
Board of Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
(5) Obstruction Marking and Lighting - Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable
by the City Secretary, City of Bridgeport or the Board of Adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this Ordinance
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in
question to allow the City Secretary to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the City of Bridgeport,
Texas, such markings and lights as may be necessary.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 8. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the City Secretary of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, to administer and enforce the regulations
prescribed herein. Applications for permits shall be made to the City Secretary upon a form published for that
purpose. Applications required by this Ordinance to be submitted to the City Secretary shall be promptly
considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the Board of Adjustment by first
filing said application for variance with the City Secretary who shall forthwith transmit said application to the Board
of Adjustment for determination. (Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 9. Board of Adjustment.
(1) There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(a) to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Bridgeport City Secretary in the enforcement of this Ordinance;
(b) to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance upon which such Board of
Adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass;
(c) to hear and decide specific variances.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, plus two alternates, appointed by the City Council
of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, and each shall serve for a term of two years upon written charges, [sic] after a
public hearing.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions
of this Ordinance. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such times
as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be public. The Board
of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Secretary, City of Bridgeport and shall be a public
record.
(4) The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon
which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement,
decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(5) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the City Secretary or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/435
upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation in this Ordinance.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Editor's note–At the request of the city, the number and terms of members were amended for compliance with current city
practices as established by Ordinance 99-14 adopted October 26, 1999.
State law reference–Airport zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 241.032.
Section 10. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Bridgeport City Secretary made in his
administration of this Ordinance, if of the opinion that a decision of the City Secretary is an improper application of
these regulations, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
(2) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board of
Adjustment, by filing with the City Secretary a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Bridgeport City
Secretary shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
(3) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Secretary
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of City Secretary cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the City
Secretary and on due cause shown.
(4) The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
(5) The Board of Adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, in whole
or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 11. Judicial Review.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, may appeal to a court
of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 46e-11
(1969). (Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 12. Enforcement and Remedies.
The City Council of the City of Bridgeport, Texas, may institute in any Court of competent jurisdiction, an action to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this Ordinance or of any order or ruling made in connection with
its administration or enforcement including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by the
Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., art. 46-e12 (1969). (Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 13. Penalties.
Each violation of this Ordinance or of any regulation[,] order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200) and
each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 14. Conflicting Regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this Ordinance and any
other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 15. Severability.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/435
If any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the application hereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions of application of the Ordinance which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
Section 16. Effective Date.
WHEREAS, the immediate operation of the provisions of this Ordinance is necessary for the preservation of the
public health, public safety, and general welfare an EMERGENCY is hereby declared to exist, and this Ordinance
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the Airport Zoning Board and publication posting as
required by law. Adopted by the Bridgeport-Wise County Joint Airport Board this 16th day of March 1984.
(Ordinance 84-3 adopted 3/16/84)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL FEES
Sec. A1.001 Public information request fees
The city will charge the rates allowed by the state as prescribed by the attorney general for providing copies of
public information.
(1) Standard paper copy (up to 8-1/2" by 14"): $0.10 per page.
(2) Nonstandard copy:
(A) Nonstandard size paper copy (11" x 17"): $0.50 per page.
(B) Nonstandard size paper copy on specialty paper (e.g., mylar, blueprints, blueline, map,
photographic): Actual cost.
(C) Compact disc (CD): $1.00.
(D) Digital video disc (DVD): $3.00.
(E) VHS videocassette: $2.50.
(F) Audiocassette: $1.00.
(G) Diskette: $1.00.
(H) Magnetic tape, data cartridge, or tape cartridge: Actual cost.
(3) Personnel charge:
(A) For locating, compiling, and reproducing: $15.00 per hour.
(B) For programming: $28.50 per hour.
(4) Overhead charge: 20% of personnel charge.
(5) Microfiche or microfilm charge: Actual cost.
(6) Remote document retrieval charge: Actual cost.
(7) Computer resource charge:
(A) Mainframe: $10.00 per minute.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/435
(B) Midsize: $1.50 per minute.
(C) Client/server system: $2.20 per hour.
(D) PC or LAN: $1.00 per hour.
(8) Miscellaneous supplies: Actual cost.
(9) Postage and shipping charge: Actual cost.
(10) Fax charge: $0.10 per page.
(11) Motor vehicle accident report (pursuant to section 550.065 of the Texas Transportation Code):
(A) Report, not certified: $6.00.
(B) Report, certified: $8.00.
(Ordinance 2011-38 adopted 10/18/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.1100)
Sec. A1.002 Returned check processing fee
The city will charge the maximum processing fee of $30.00 per returned check or draft for payment, as allowed by
the state pursuant to section 3.506 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code. (Ordinance 2012-05 adopted
6/5/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.1200)
Sec. A1.003 Cemetery lots
(a) Lots for single casket interments are sold for cash in the amount of $450.00 per lot, in advance, as arranged
with the funeral director and/or the city.
(b) Lots for double casket interments are sold for cash in the amount of $500.00 per lot, in advance, as arranged
with the funeral director and/or the city.
(c) Lots previously purchased for single casket interments that are unoccupied may be converted to double
casket interment lots for an additional amount of $50.00, in advance, as arranged with the funeral director and/or
the city.
(Ordinance 2013-25 adopted 11/19/13; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.100)
Sec. A1.004 Airport fees
(a) Hangar rental.
(1) Monthly rental. Monthly hangar rental shall be as follows:
(A) Open T-hangar: $65.00.
(B) Open end T-hangar: $75.00.
(C) Enclosed T-hangar: $180.00.
(D) Enclosed end T-hangar: $195.00.
(E) Commercial hangar: $300.00.
(2) Land lease rates. All hangar lease and reversion agreements executed shall have a beginning
rate of $0.14 per square foot.
(b) Tie-down fee. $10.00 per night.
(Ordinance 2017-24 adopted 8/14/17)
Sec. A1.005 Fee for police officers at special events
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/435
The fee for a licensed police officer working at special events at the Bridgeport Stage Theater or the Bridgeport
Community Center that include the sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages as provided in
section 12.08.031(c) of the Code of Ordinances is $35.00 per hour (4-hour minimum). (Ordinance 10-05 adopted
2/16/10; 2001 Code, sec. 12.902)
ARTICLE A2.000 PARKS, LIBRARY AND OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Sec. A2.001 Requests to waive certain fees
(a) An individual or organization requesting a waiver of all or a portion of the rental rates and/or the required
deposit for use of the following city facilities shall be submitted initially to the parks and recreation director for
recommendation:
(1) Park pavilion rental.
(2) Northwest Park fees.
(3) Community Center rental.
(4) Lawdwin Ball Field rental.
(5) Law Enforcement Center community room fees.
(6) City council chambers fees.
(7) Bridgeport city pool fees.
(8) Bridgeport Stage fees.
(b) Upon a positive recommendation from the parks and recreation director, the city manager or the mayor may
administratively approve a request to waive all or a portion of the rental rates and/or the required deposits for use
of the city facilities set forth above for special events. The city manager or the mayor may choose to bring the
waiver request to the city council for consideration and action. If the city manager or mayor denies administrative
approval of the request for a fee waiver, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written
appeal to the city secretary within three (3) days of the denial. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(c) Requests for administrative approval of fee waivers shall be limited to one per year. Additional requests for
fee waivers shall be presented to the city council for consideration and action.
(Ordinance 2016-03 adopted 1/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A2.002 Library fees
(a) Overdue fines:
(1) Books/magazines/nonfiction DVDs: $0.10 per day to a maximum of $20.00.
(2) Books on CD and audiotapes: $0.10 per day to a maximum of $20.00.
(3) Fiction DVDs and videotapes: $1.00 per day to a maximum of $20.00.
(4) Maximum amount of fine is contingent on return of the item in good condition.
(b) Lost or damaged beyond repair materials: The list price of the replacement item, to be waived if the patron
provides a new copy in an identical format.
(c) Replacement library card: $1.00.
(d) Missing or damaged barcode: $1.00.
(e) Lost or damaged DVD/video case: $2.00.
(f) Lost or damaged media case (book on CD): $5.00.
(g) Lost or damaged DVD/video/media case cover insert: $2.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/435
(h) Interlibrary loan: Cost of return postage.
(i) Copier: $0.20 per page, $0.35 for two-sided.
(j) Facsimile: $1.00 first page, $0.50 each additional page, to phone numbers within the U.S. only.
(k) Meeting room rental:
(1) Personal use: $25.00 per event per day.
(2) Business use: $50.00 per event per day.
(3) Deposit: A deposit not to exceed $50.00 per event shall be charged with said deposit being
returned to the renter upon leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include
but not limited to all trash picked up and deposited in dumpster, floors swept and mopped, if needed,
lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms left clean.
(4) Rental and deposit fees will be waived for nonprofit organizations.
(Ordinance 2013-19 adopted 11/5/13; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.300)
Sec. A2.003 Harwood Park pavilion rental
(a) The city council hereby establishes a rental rate of $50.00 per day for rental of the park pavilion.
(b) A deposit not to exceed $100.00 shall be charged with said deposit being returned to the renter upon leaving
the facilities in an appropriate condition, to include but not be limited to all trash picked up, lights turned off, doors
locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(Ordinance 08-17 adopted 3/18/08; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.200; Ordinance 2016-34 adopted 9/26/16)
Sec. A2.004 Northwest Park fees
Daily rates:
(1) Personal off-road vehicle (POV) only:
(A) Nonresidents: $4.00.
(B) Residents: $2.00.
(Ordinance 10-33 adopted 9/21/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.500;
(2) All terrain vehicle (ATV)/bike:
Nonresident Resident Cost (with Discount)
1 day $15.00 $10.00
2 day $25.00 $15.00
3 day $35.00 $25.00
(3) Sport utility vehicle (SUV)/utility terrain vehicle (UTV)/Jeep:
Nonresident Resident Cost (with Discount)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/435
1 day $25.00 $15.00
2 day $40.00 $25.00
3 day $60.00 $40.00
(Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 4/24/17)
(4) Recreational vehicle (RV):
(A) Nonresidents: $10.00.
(B) Residents: $5.00.
(5) Overnight camping: $15.00 per vehicle.
(Ordinance 10-33 adopted 9/21/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.500;
(6) The city council hereby establishes a rental rate of $50.00 per day for rental of the Northwest
Park Pavilion.
(7) The city council hereby establishes a rental rate to be determined by the city for rental of the
Northwest OHV Park.
(Ordinance 2016-34 adopted 9/26/16)
Sec. A2.005 Community Center rental
(a) Rental rates:
(1) Community Center, all day: $400.00. (Ordinance 10-33 adopted 9/21/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec.
1.600)
(2) Fred Meyers banquet hall:
(A) 8:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.: $250.00.
(B) 5:00 p.m.–midnight: $250.00.
(C) 8:00 a.m.–midnight: $350.00.
(Ordinance 2016-34 adopted 9/26/16)
(3) Kitchen:
(A) 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.: $50.00.
(B) 5:00 p.m. to 12 midnight: $50.00.
(C) All day: $50.00.
(4) Small room:
(A) 2-hour rental: $50.00.
(B) Per additional hour: $25.00.
(C) Maximum: $100.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/435
(b) Nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit organizations will have free use of the small room only, but the deposit as
described below shall be required.
(c) Deposit. A deposit not to exceed $200.00 shall be charged with said deposit being returned to the renter
upon leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include but not limited to all trash picked
up, lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(d) Alcohol deposit. An additional alcohol deposit not to exceed $200.00 shall be charged with said deposit
being returned to the renter upon leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include but
not limited to all trash picked up, lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(Ordinance 10-33 adopted 9/21/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.600)
Sec. A2.006 Lawdwin Ball Field rates
(a) Rental rates:
(1) 1 field, all day: $100.00; with or without lights.
(2) 2 fields, all day: $150.00; with or without lights.
(3) 3 fields, all day: $200.00; with or without lights.
(b) Deposit. A deposit not to exceed $100.00 shall be charged with said deposit being returned to the renter
upon leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include but not limited to all trash picked
up, lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(c) Ninety-minute rental. Teams or individuals shall pay $25.00 per field for a 90-minute time slot for use of the
ball field lights (no deposit required). This fee shall not apply to associations that have a current facility use
agreement with the city.
(Ordinance 09-33, sec. 2, adopted 8/4/09; Ordinance 2012-03 adopted 3/20/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.700)
Sec. A2.007 Law enforcement community room rental
(a) Rental rates for Walter Dale Community Room:
(1) Personal use: $25.00 per event per day.
(2) Business use:
(A) Single day: $50.00 per event.
(B) 2 to 5 days: $35.00 per event per day.
(C) 6 to 10 days: $25.00 per event per day.
(b) Nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit organizations will have free use of the room only, but the deposit as
described below shall be required.
(c) Deposit. A deposit not to exceed $50.00 shall be charged with said deposit being returned to the renter upon
leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include but not limited to all trash picked up,
lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(Ordinance 09-33, sec. 2, adopted 8/7/09; Ordinance 10-44 adopted 12/21/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.800)
Sec. A2.008 City council chambers fees
(a) Governmental entities. Governmental entities not affiliated with the city, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Wise County;
(2) The North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG); and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/435
(3) The state department of transportation (TxDOT);
shall have free use of the city council chambers during normal city business hours only, and subject to the
availability and priority use by any organization affiliated with the city.
(b) Personal use: $25.00 per event per day, and subject to the availability and priority use by any organization
affiliated with the city.
(c) Business use: $50.00 per event per day, and subject to the availability and priority use by any organization
affiliated with the city.
(d) Nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit organizations will have free use of the city council chambers, but the
deposit as described below shall be required, and subject to the availability and priority use by any organization
affiliated with the city.
(e) Deposit. A deposit not to exceed $50.00 shall be charged with said deposit being returned to the renter upon
leaving the facilities undamaged and in an appropriate condition, to include but [not] limited to all trash picked up,
lights turned off, doors locked and restrooms satisfactorily cleaned.
(Ordinance 2011-31 adopted 9/6/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.900)
Sec. A2.009 City pool fees
(a) Daily rates.
(1) Individual, ages 10 years old and up: $3.00 per person.
(2) Individual, ages 4 to 9 years old: $2.00 per person.
(3) Individual, ages 3 years old and under: Free.
(4) Groups of 8 or more pre-arranged with the parks department: $1.00 per person.
(b) Season pass rates.
(1) Individual, ages 4 years old and up: $50.00 per person.
(2) Individual, ages 3 years old and under: Free.
(3) Family, up to 4 paying patrons: $130.00.
(4) Family, additional family members: $20.00 per person.
(c) Pool party rates.
(1) Wednesday or Thursday, 2 hour party:
(A) 1 to 50 people: $100.00.
(B) 51 to 100 people: $150.00.
(C) 101 to 200 people: $250.00.
(2) Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, 3-1/2 hour party:
(A) 1 to 50 people: $200.00.
(B) 51 to 100 people: $300.00.
(C) 101 to 200 people: $500.00.
(Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 3/22/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.1000; Ordinance 2016-34 adopted 9/26/16)
Sec. A2.010 Bridgeport Stage fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/435
Daily rates:
(1) 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $150.00.
(2) 4:00 p.m. to midnight: $200.00.
(3) All day (6:00 a.m. to midnight): $300.00.
(Ordinance 2014-11 adopted 6/17/14; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 1.1300)
ARTICLE A3.000 ANIMAL CONTROL RELATED FEES
Sec. A3.001 License fees
(a) 1-year license: $5.00.
(b) Duplicate tag: $4.00.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.100)
Sec. A3.002 Annual permit fees
(a) Dangerous dog: $100.00.
(b) Commercial animal establishment: $75.00.
(c) Reapplication: $25.00.
(d) FFA/4-H: $0.00.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.200)
Sec. A3.003 Impoundment fees
(a) Animal:
(1) 1st offense: $35.00 plus $10.00 per day boarding fee (fee shall be waived for licensed animal).
(2) 2nd or more offense: $50.00 plus $10.00 per day boarding fee.
(b) Livestock:
(1) 1st offense: $75.00 plus $20.00 per day boarding fee unless kept at a facility other than the
shelter, plus any roper's fee, boarding fee of facility other than the shelter, if applicable, veterinarian
costs, advertising costs, and all other expenses as needed.
(2) 2nd or more offense: $100.00 plus $20.00 per day boarding fee unless kept at a facility other than
the shelter, plus any roper's fee, boarding fee of facility other than the shelter, if applicable, veterinarian
costs, advertising costs, and all other expenses as needed.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.300)
Sec. A3.004 Quarantine fees
(a) Animal: $10.00 per day.
(b) Livestock: $20.00 per day plus any roper's fee, boarding fee of a facility other than the shelter, if applicable,
veterinarian costs, advertising costs, and all other expenses as needed.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.400)
Sec. A3.005 Disposal fees
(a) Animal:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/435
(1) Deceased: $25.00.
(2) Live (owned): $25.00.
(b) Livestock: Not available.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.500)
Sec. A3.006 Traps
(a) Deposit, small trap: $25.00.
(b) Deposit, large trap: $100.00.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.600)
Sec. A3.007 Voucher fees
(a) Rabies vaccination: $10.00.
(b) Rabies vaccination and spay/neuter: $45.00.
(Ordinance 2012-08, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/12; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.700; Ordinance 2015-06 adopted
3/17/15)
Sec. A3.008 Animal microchipping fees
(a) Microchip pets within the city limits: $19.99 per pet.
(b) Microchip pets outside the city limits: $24.99 per pet.
(Ordinance 2014-01 adopted 1/21/14; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 3.800)
ARTICLE A4.000 BUILDING RELATED FEES
Sec. A4.001 Building permit fees
(a) Permit fees:
Total Valuation Fee
$1.00 to $500.00 $55.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $55.00 for the first $500.00 plus $3.00 for each additional
$100.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and including
$2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $100.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $12.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and
including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $376.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $9.50 for each
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $613.50 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.25 for each
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/435
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $913.50 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.25 for each
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $2,713.50 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.25 for each
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof, to and
including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 $4,713.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.25 for each
additional $1,000.00 valuation, or fraction thereof
(b) Other inspections and fees:
(1) Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge - two hours): $50.00 per hour.(1)
(2) Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of section 305.8 of the building code: $50.00 per
hour.(1)
(3) Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge - one-half hour): $50.00
per hour.(1)
(4) Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans (minimum charge -
one-half hour): $50.00 per hour.(1)
(5) For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both: Actual costs.(2)
(Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 8/28/17)
(6) Plan review fees on all single-family and two-family residential new construction or major
additions, as determined by the building official, shall be $200.00.
(7) Plan review fees on all apartment, commercial and industrial new construction or major additions,
as determined by the building official, shall be 50% of the building permit fee.
(Ordinance 2018-02 adopted 1/22/18)
(1) Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision,
overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.
(2) Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
(Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 8/28/17)
Sec. A4.002 Building valuation tables
See section 3.04.002 of the Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance 03-12 adopted 5/6/03; 2001 Code, app. A, sec.
4.300)
Sec. A4.003 Electrical, plumbing, mechanical and swimming pool permit fees
(a) Electrical permit fees.
Options Fee Each
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/435
Base permit fee $30.00
Residential electric under 500 sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $10.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.05
Residential electric over 500 sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $25.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.05
Temporary pole $30.00
Electrical openings $3.00
Branch circuits $4.00
Feeder amps $15.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.10
Service amps $15.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.10
Swimming pool/hot tub/spa $35.00
Commercial electric from 1 to 1,000 sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $20.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.05
Commercial electric from 1,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $30.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.04
Commercial electric from 10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $75.00 + ____ sq. ft. x $0.03
Commercial electric from 50,000 + sq. ft. (figured in sq. ft.) $400.00 + ___ sq. ft. x $0.03
Temporary utilities (letter required) $40.00
(b) Plumbing permit fees.
Options (minimum fee $30.00) Fee Each
Base residential per bathroom $46.00
Residential wet bar $8.00
Water heater $10.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/435
New water line $20.00
Water pipe repair $25.00
New sewer line $20.00
Drainage pipe repair $25.00
Gas line/test $30.00
Gas pipe system (1 to 4) outlets $5.00
Gas piping system (add-on outlets over 4) $1.00
Commercial plumbing fixture $8.00
Commercial rainwater systems $8.00
Commercial interceptors $30.00
Irrigation/backflow protection (1 to 4 devices) $45.00
Backflow protection (add-on devices over 4) $1.00
Apartment 1 bedroom $30.00
Apartment 2+ bedroom $40.00
Private sewage disposal fee $500.00
(c) Mechanical permit fees.
Options (minimum fee $30.00) Fee Each
Residential heat/air up to 1 ton $30.00
Residential heat/air up over 1 ton ____ x $3.00 + $30.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/435
Miscellaneous equipment $25.00
Exhaust hoods $25.00
Commercial tonnage from 1 to 5 tons $45.00
Commercial tonnage (additional over 5 tons) ____ x $3.00 + $45.00
Apartment heat/air (per apartment) $25.00
Manufactured home heat/air $35.00
(Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 8/28/17)
(d) Swimming pool permit fees (fees each).
(1) Building permit:
(A) In-ground pool: $85.00.
(B) Above-ground pool with depth of 24" or more: $20.00.
(C) Hot tub/spa: $20.00.
(2) Electrical permit: $35.00.
(3) Plumbing permit: $75.00.
(Ordinance 2013-08 adopted 6/18/13; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.400)
Sec. A4.004 Sign permit fees
Nonrefundable application fee $25.00
Plus display area $15.00 or $0.15 per sq. ft. for each
display surface, whichever is greater
Plus height above grade - feet
1–20 $15.00
21–30 $30.00
31–40 $45.00
41–50 $60.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/435
51–60 $75.00
Over 60 $105.00
Plus electrical - amps
1–40 $21.00
41–60 $30.00
61–80 $45.00
81–100 $60.00
Over 100 $90.00
Issuance fee $10.00
Reinspection fee $20.00
Filing an application for a variance $150.00
Storage of impounded signs $5.00 per day
(Ordinance 03-12 adopted 5/6/03; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.500; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A4.005 Temporary and portable sign permit fees
(a) Temporary annual sign permit fee: $0.00.
(b) Portable sign permit fee:
(1) Portable signs that do not require an inspection: $5.00.
(2) Portable signs that require an inspection and/or submission of an electrical plan: $15.00.
(Ordinance 10-09 adopted 3/2/10; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.501)
Sec. A4.006 Other inspections and fees
(a) Demolition (with utilities connected): $100.00.
(b) Demolition (without utilities connected): $25.00.
(c) Moving fees: $50.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/435
(d) Change of occupancy permit fee: $20.00.
(e) Ordinance inspection fee (per inspector): $20.00.
(f) Encroachment variance letters: $25.00.
(g) Zoning verification letters: $10.00.
(h) Contractor registration (valid for one year): $25.00.
(i) Storage building, detached buildings with no electrical, plumbing, or mechanical: $10.00.
(Ordinance 2011-23 adopted 6/21/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.600)
(j) Curb, driveway approach: $30.00. (Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 8/28/17)
(k) Work not completed for inspection: When an inspection is requested and the work is not completed for
inspection, the fee for the next inspection may be doubled.
(l) Permit for temporary or seasonal uses:
(1) Temporary office or construction building: $100.00.
(2) Temporary outdoor sales: $25.00.
(3) Seasonal sales: $25.00.
(4) Snow cone stands, and other similar seasonal refreshments: $25.00.
(5) Carnivals and circuses: $25.00.
(6) Model homes: $25.00.
(Ordinance 2011-23 adopted 6/21/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.600)
Sec. A4.007 Parkway contractor registration and permit fee
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to perform the work of a parkway contractor, as defined in division 3 of
article 3.12 of the Code of Ordinances, without first having registered with the city annually. The fee shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable at the time of registration. Further, for each job the parkway contractor shall
obtain a permit, from the director of public works, the fee for which shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) to do such work.
(Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 8/28/17)
Sec. A4.008 Fire inspection and plan review fees
(a) Fire sprinkler:
(1) < 50 heads: $100.00.
(2) 50–100 heads: $150.00.
(3) > 100 heads: $200.00.
(b) Fire alarm/detection permit: $50.00.
(c) Third party review: Third party review fee.
(Ordinance 08-60 adopted 8/5/08; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 4.800)
ARTICLE A5.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. A5.001 Alcoholic beverage licenses and permits
TABC Code
Section
Permit or License Description State Fee Local Fee
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/435
(2-Year) (1-Year)
12.02 Brewer's permit $3,000.00 $750.00
12A.03 Brewer's self distribution permit $250.00 $125.00
14.02 Distiller's and rectifier's permit $3,000.00 $750.00
15.02 Distiller's agents permit $10.00 $5.00
16.02 Winery permit $150.00 $37.50
18.02 Wine bottler's permit $450.00 $112.50
19.02 Wholesaler's permit $3,750.00 $937.50
20.02 General class B wholesaler's permit $600.00 $150.00
21.02 Local class B wholesaler's permit $150.00 $37.50
22.02 Package store permit $1,000.00 $250.00
23.02 Local distributor's permit $200.00 $50.00
24.02 Wine only package store permit $150.00 $37.50
25.02 Wine and beer retailer's permit $350.00 $87.50
25.13(c) Food and beverage certificate $200.00 $50.00
26.02 Wine and beer off-premises retailer's permit $120.00 $30.00
27.12 Special three-day wine and beer permit $30.00 $7.50
28.02(a) Mixed beverage permit* original (years 1 and 2) $6,000.00 $0 - year 1
$0 - year 2
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/435
28.02(b) Mixed beverage permit - 1st renewal (years 3 and 4) $4,500.00 $0 - year 3
$1,125.00 - year 4
28.02(c) Mixed beverage permit - 2nd renewal $3,000.00 $750.00 - year 5
$70.00 - year 6
28.02(d) Mixed beverage permit - 3rd and subsequent renewals $1,500.00 $375.00
29.02 Mixed beverage late hours permit* $300.00 $150.00
30.02 Daily temporary mixed beverage permit (maximum of 10 per
year)
$50.00 (per day) $25.00 (per day)
31.02 Caterer's permit* $1,000.00 $250.00
44.02 Beverage cartage permit $40.00 $10.00
46.02 Bonded warehouse permit $300.00 $75.00
47.02 Local industrial alcohol manufacturer's permit $200.00 $50.00
49.02 Market research packager's permit $200.00 $50.00
51.05 Minibar permit (original) $4,000.00 $1,000.00
51.05 Minibar permit (1st renewal) $3,000.00 $750.00
51.05 Minibar permit (2nd renewal) $2,000.00 $500.00
51.05 Minibar permit (3rd and later renewals) $1,500.00 $375.00
52.05 [52.02] Package store tasting permit $50.00 $12.50
62.02(a) Manufacturer's license (first establishment) $1,500.00 $375.00
62.02(a) Manufacturer's license (second establishment) $3,000.00 $750.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/435
62.02(a) Manufacturer's license (third, fourth and fifth establishment) $8,550.00 each $2,137.50 each
62.02(a) Manufacturer's license (establishments in excess of five) $16,800.00 each $4,800.00 each
64.02 General distributor's license $600.00 $150.00
65.02 Local distributor's license $150.00 $37.50
66.02 Branch distributor's license $150.00 $37.50
67.02 Importer's license $40.00 $10.00
68.02 Importer's carrier's license $40.00 $10.00
69.02 Retail dealer's on-premises license $300.00 $75.00
70.02 Retail dealer's on-premises late hours license $500.00 $125.00
71.06 [71.02] Retail dealer's off-premises license $120.00 $30.00
74.02 Brewpub license $1,000.00 $250.00
*No local fees are authorized during the three-year period following the original issuance of the permit.
All local fees are for a period of 1 year only to be paid annually on January 1.
(Ordinance 2011-02 adopted 1/18/11; Ordinance 2014-24 adopted 10/21/14; 2001 Code, app. A, art. 11.000)
Sec. A5.002 Solicitors
(a) Application fee. At the time of filing the application, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to cover the
cost of processing and investigation. An application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will apply only to those
selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller.
(b) Permit fees.
(1) Computation of fees:
(A) Ten dollars ($10.00) per month, or part thereof, for each person soliciting.
(B) Ten dollars ($10.00) per month, or part thereof, for each helper or assistant, which helpers
must procure the individual permit and license as herein provided for solicitors.
(C) No fee shall be required of one selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by
the seller.
(2) Applicants demonstrating a valid claim of interstate commerce shall be exempt from the fee
requirements herein, but shall be otherwise regulated by the provisions of article 4.03 of the Code of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/435
Ordinances.
(3) The city manager may, upon application, exempt any person, company or organization from the
payment of the peddler permit fee if the city manager finds that the payment of the fee would cause an
undue financial hardship or would unduly infringe upon the person's, company's or organization's ability
to conduct solicitation activities.
(Ordinance 2018-13 adopted 6/11/18)
Sec. A5.003 Garage sale permit
The permit fee shall be $5.00. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 2/1/94; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 5.400)
Sec. A5.004 Oil and gas drilling and production fees
(a) Oil or gas well permit: $8,500.00.
(b) Amended oil and gas well permit: $450.00.
(c) Inspection of an oil or gas well: $2,200.00.
(d) Refracture permit: $2,500.00.
(e) Appeal of suspension or revocation of well permit: $2,200.00.
(f) Seismic surveying permit: $200.00.
(Ordinance 09-01 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, app. A, art. 12.000)
Sec. A5.005 Sexually oriented businesses
(a) License application fee: $1,000.00.
(b) License renewal processing fee: $500.00.
(c) Employee permit processing fee: $50.00.
(d) Replacement fee for lost or stolen identification card: $25.00.
(Ordinance 09-03 adopted 1/6/09; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 5.500)
ARTICLE A6.000 SUBDIVISION RELATED FEES
(a) Plats. The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid to the city when any plat is submitted to the
development services department, planning and zoning commission, or any other authorized board or agency of
the city. Each of the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in advance, and the city shall take no action
until said fees and charges have been received by the officer designated herein. The city council or their deputies
or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Land study, if required: $100.00 plus $2.00 per acre (for 5 acres or more only).
(2) Preliminary plat: $130.00 plus $2.00 per lot.
(3) Final plat - nonresidential: $130.00 plus $20.00 per acre.
(4) Final plat - residential: $130.00 plus $2.00 per lot.
(5) Replat: $130.00 plus $2.00 per lot.
These fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the planning and zoning commission
and whether the plat is approved or denied by the city council.
(b) Construction permit. The city engineer shall compute the construction permit fee for the development of a
subdivision, or parts thereof, based on the following schedule:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/435
Complete subdivision and any separate projects: 0.5% of construction cost
Streets, storm sewers, etc.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 1/21/14; 2001 Code, app. A, art. 7.000)
ARTICLE A7.000 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
Sec. A7.001 Special expense for issuance and service of warrant of arrest
A special expense not to exceed $25.00 is adopted for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest under
section 7.03.001 of the Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance 85-7 adopted 10/15/85; 2001 Code, art. 7.200)
Sec. A7.002 Technology fund fee
The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). (Ordinance 99-11 adopted 9/21/99; 2001 Code, app. A, sec.
8.100)
Sec. A7.003 Building security fund fee
All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be required to pay a three
dollar ($3.00) security fee as a cost of court. (Ordinance adopting 2001 Code; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 8.200)
Sec. A7.004 Juvenile case manager fund fee
A defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall pay a juvenile case
manager fee, not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) per offense, as a court cost. (Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/11/17)
ARTICLE A8.000 UTILITY RATES AND FEES
Sec. A8.001 Service charges
(a) The customer shall pay the service charge for restoring service of $25.00 per service call to have water
and/or electric services restored if disconnected in accordance with section 13.02.021 (unauthorized use of
services) of the Code of Ordinances. The customer shall be required to pay all charges before service is resumed.
(b) The customer shall pay the service charge of $15.00 per utility service for water and/or electric services
subject to disconnection in accordance with section 13.02.023 (discontinuance of service by city) of the Code of
Ordinances.
(c) The customer shall pay the service charge of $100.00 per identified violation of tampering with the city's
meters, equipment or other property in accordance with section 13.02.020 (tampering with city's meters,
equipment or other property) of the Code of Ordinances. If the meter, equipment or other property is broken,
damaged, or inoperable and must be replaced due to tampering, the customer is responsible for the full
replacement cost of the meter, equipment, or other property. The customer shall be required to pay all penalties
imposed that will appear on the customer's next billing statement following replacement.
(d) The customer shall pay the service charge of $25.00 per subsequent scheduled appointment to have water
and/or electric services connected if the customer fails to be present for the initially scheduled connection pursuant
to section 13.02.002 (general regulations for providing service) of the Code of Ordinances. The customer shall be
required to pay all penalties imposed that will appear on the customer's initial billing statement.
(e) The customer shall pay the trip charge of $25.00 per utility service call and the hourly rate of $55.00 per hour
during normal business hours or the hourly rate of $65.00 per hour after normal business hours if the service call is
determined to be a repeat issue previously determined to be the customer's responsibility for repair in accordance
with section 13.02.004 (liability and responsibility for damage or injury) of the Code of Ordinances. The hourly rate
shall be prorated; however, the minimum amount of time billed shall be 15 minutes. The customer shall be required
to pay all penalties imposed that will appear on the customer's next billing statement following the investigation of
the complaint. Customers may dispute the service charge by submitting a written statement from a licensed
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/435
contractor within fifteen (15) days to the city manager proving the issue to be the city's responsibility for repair. All
expenses incurred by the customer for the licensed contractor shall be the responsibility of the customer.
(Ordinance 2011-20 adopted 5/17/11; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 9.100; Ordinance 2016-08 adopted 3/14/16;
Ordinance 2016-09 adopted 3/14/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A8.002 Security deposits
(a) Applicants for permanent city utility service shall be required to pay to the city a security deposit as follows:
(1) Property owners, renters and/or applicants with no history presenting a credit reference from
another public utility with no more than one (1) delinquent bill in a twenty-four-month period or zero (0)
in a twelve-month period will not be required to pay a deposit.
(2) Property owners, renters and/or applicants with no history presenting a credit reference from
another public utility with more than one (1) delinquent bill in a twenty-four-month period or zero (0) in a
twelve-month period will be required to pay a minimum deposit of $150.00.
(3) Any applicant with unfavorable credit history will be required to pay a minimum deposit of
$300.00.
(4) Any applicant who has previously had service with the city, but left an unpaid balance owing to
the city, will be required to pay a deposit of $300.00 plus all outstanding amounts.
(5) Contractors and landlords will be required to pay a minimum deposit of $75.00 for temporary
service not to exceed a maximum of 14 days for single-family structures. Landlords and property
owners of multifamily structures will be required to pay a permanent minimum deposit of $75.00 to be
applied to a landlord account as agreed upon in a landlord agreement subject to approval by the
director of financial services.
(6) Garbage-only customers will be required to pay a minimum deposit of $45.00.
(7) A commercial customer's security deposit will be decided based on estimated usage of the
utilities; however, in no event shall the deposit be less than $75.00 or the estimated monthly bill,
whichever is greater.
(b) If the applicant for water and/or electric service is a member of a household that has relocated to a different
address within the city with the intent to establish a new utility account with the city under another household
member's name, the city may require a utility deposit from the applicant in the minimum amount of $300.00 if (i) a
utility account in the name of a household member remains unpaid at the time of relocation, and (ii) the person in
whose name the unpaid utility account was established remains a member of the household after the household
has relocated to a different address.
(Ordinance 09-35, sec. 4, adopted 8/18/09; 2001 Code, sec. 13.201)
Sec. A8.003 Water rates
Monthly rates for water service shall be as follows:
(1) Residential customers within the city limits(RI):
Base charge $31.82 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $2.73 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $4.31 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $5.99 per 1,000 gallons
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/435
(2) Residential customers outside the city limits (RO):
Base charge $45.74 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $4.53 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $6.33 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $8.46 per 1,000 gallons
(3) Commercial customers within the city limits (CI):
Base charge $39.68 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $3.64 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $5.09 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $7.11 per 1,000 gallons
(4) Commercial customers outside the city limits (CO):
Base charge $55.63 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $5.38 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $7.53 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $10.09 per 1,000 gallons
(5) Large commercial customers inside the city limits (CLI)
Base charge $36.19 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $3.98 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $5.58 per 1,000 gallons
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/435
Greater than 10,000 gallons $6.90 per 1,000 gallons
(6) Commercial compound meter customers inside the city limits (CCI):
Base charge $35.96 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $3.20 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $4.55 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $6.34 per 1,000 gallons
(7) Metered bulk water customers (temporary rented and hydrant meters) (POR):
Base charge $47.93 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $5.13 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $7.19 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $8.91 per 1,000 gallons
(8) Residential customers outside the city limits with water only provided through third party (WT):
Base charge $78.75 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $6.36 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $6.36 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $8.19 per 1,000 gallons
(9) Commercial customers outside the city limits with water only provided through third party (WW):
Base charge $50.40 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $5.85 per 1,000 gallons
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/435
3,001–10,000 gallons $5.85 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $5.85 per 1,000 gallons
(10) Municipal services (Z):
Base charge $24.25 per month, minimum bill
0–3,000 gallons $3.20 per 1,000 gallons
3,001–10,000 gallons $4.55 per 1,000 gallons
Greater than 10,000 gallons $6.34 per 1,000 gallons
(Ordinance 2018-25 adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. A8.004 Sewer rates
(a) Monthly rates for wastewater service for nonresidential customers shall be based on monthly-metered water
consumption. Monthly rates for residential wastewater service shall be based on the monthly-metered water
consumption of January and February, averaged to determine a single flow referred to as the “winter average.”
This averaged flow or winter average, beginning with the April billing of each year, will be used to determine
monthly wastewater service through the March billing of the following year; provided, however, for the purpose of
determining wastewater flows and monthly rates for wastewater service for residential customers, said averaged
flow or winter average shall not exceed 30,000 gallons. In the event that a water average is not available to
calculate a wastewater bill, the account holder's prior account through the city may be used to calculate the
wastewater charges.
(b) If a customer has no water history or usage to determine a winter average, or if a customer installs a
separate irrigation meter to provide for the separate metering of domestic and irrigation water consumption,
wastewater service shall be based on 6,500 gallons per month until such time that water consumption and/or the
winter average can be determined.
(Ordinance 2014-12 adopted 6/17/14; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 9.500)
(c) Monthly rates for wastewater service shall be as follows:
(1) Residential customers within the city limits (RI):
(A) Base charge: $18.95 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: 0–30,000 gallons maximum: $4.43 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Residential customers within the city limits (new) (RIN):
(A) Base charge: $48.85 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage included in base charge.
(3) Residential customers outside the city limits (RO):
(A) Base charge: $24.79 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: 0–30,000 gallons maximum: $9.65 per 1,000 gallons.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/435
(4) Residential customers outside the city limits (new) (RON):
(A) Base charge: $90.17 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage included in base charge.
(5) Commercial customers within the city limits (CI):
(A) Base charge: $26.61 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $4.84 per 1,000 gallons.
(6) Commercial customers outside the city limits (CO):
(A) Base charge: $31.43 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $9.65 per 1,000 gallons.
(7) Large commercial customers within the city limits (CLI):
(A) Base charge: $26.61 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $5.79 per 1,000 gallons.
(8) Large commercial customers outside the city limits (CLO):
(A) Base charge: $31.43 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $9.65 per 1,000 gallons.
(9) Apartments on individual meters (RAP):
(A) Base charge: $18.95 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $4.43 per 1,000 gallons.
(10) Apartments on single meter multiple customers (CAP):
(A) Base charge: $18.95 per month, per unit, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $4.84 per 1,000 gallons.
(11) Municipal services (Z):
(A) Base charge: $17.26 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: $4.54 per 1,000 gallons.
(d) For wastewater customers who do not receive water service from the city, the monthly rates for wastewater
service shall be as follows:
(1) Residential customers within the city limits (wastewater only) (RIN):
(A) Base charge: $48.85 per month, minimum bill.
(2) Residential customers outside the city limits (wastewater only) (RON):
(A) Base charge: $78.90 per month, minimum bill.
(3) Commercial customers within the city limits (wastewater only) (CIN):
(A) Base charge: $52.65 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: Will be assessed through contract or third-party water volume.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/435
(4) Commercial customers outside the city limits (wastewater only) (CON):
(A) Base charge: $90.17 per month, minimum bill.
(B) Usage charge: Will be assessed through contract or third-party water volume.
(Ordinance 2018-25 adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. A8.005 Water and sewer taps
(a) Water taps.
(1) The charge for tapping the water mains within the city limits and conveying water up to and
including the curb-stop, water meter and box, at or about the property line, shall be as follows:
3/4" $2,932.00
1" $2,989.00
2" $3,461.00
(2) The water tap fee for larger than a 2" tap shall be determined by the city utility department based
on the cost of equipment and labor.
(3) An additional charge of $378.00 shall be applied for taps located under concrete.
(b) Sanitary sewer taps.
(1) The sewer tap fee for all sewer connections within the city limits shall be $2,609.00 for up to 6"
connection.
(2) The sanitary sewer tap fee for connections larger than 6" shall be determined by the city utility
department based on cost of equipment and labor.
(3) An additional charge of $378.00 shall be applied for taps located under concrete.
(c) Fee where mains not in place. Where water and/or sewer mains are not in place, the fee shall be as follows:
(1) Water. The person requesting service shall bear the entire cost of material and labor plus any
tapping fees.
(2) Wastewater. The person requesting service shall bear the entire cost of material and labor plus
any tapping fees.
(Ordinance 2018-26 adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. A8.006 Electric schedule of rates
The monthly rates to be charged to customers for public electric utility services billed as of January 1, 2019, shall
be in accordance with the schedules as follows:
(1) Schedule R - Residential.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to residential customers for all domestic usage where all energy is
taken through a single meter. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the
established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service.
(B) Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/435
(C) Rate.
(i) Service charge: $16.00 per month; plus
(ii) Energy charge: $0.0381 per kWh for all kWh per month; plus
(iii) Power cost recovery factor: As determined under subsection (8).
(D) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be
the service charge of $16.00 per month.
(E) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(2) Schedule SC - Small commercial.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to nonresidential customers billed through a single meter whose
power transformer for electric service is between 0 and 15 KVA. Service will be furnished under
this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of
service.
(B) Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase
120/240, or 240/480 volts; three-phase 120/240/208, 120/208, 277/480 volts as available at point
of service. Three-phase customers served via under-ground primary to pad-mounted transformers
will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service.
(C) Rate.
(i) Service charge: $30.00 per month for service; plus
(ii) Energy charge: $0.0391 per kWh for all kWh per month; plus
(iii) Power cost recovery factor: As determined under subsection (8).
(D) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be
the service charge of $30.00 per month.
(E) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(3) Schedule MC - Medium commercial.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to all commercial customers where service is taken through one
meter at one point of delivery and where the power transformer for electric service is greater than
15 but no more than 100 KVA. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the
established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. Before service is
furnished hereunder, an individual service agreement contract between the customer and the city
may be required outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and
the obligations of each party.
(B) Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase
120/240 or 240/480; three-phase 120/240/208, 120/208, 277/480 volts as available at point of
service. Three-phase customers served via under-ground primary to pad-mounted transformers
will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service.
(C) Rate.
(i) Service charge: $95.00 per month for service; plus
(ii) Energy charge: $0.0366 per kWh for all kWh; plus
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/435
(iii) Power cost recovery factor: As determined under subsection (8).
(D) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be
the service charge of $95.00 per month.
(E) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(4) Schedule LC- Large commercial.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to all commercial customers where service is taken through one
meter at one point of delivery and where the power transformer for electric service is greater than
100 KVA. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and
regulations of the city covering this type of service. Before service is furnished hereunder, an
individual service agreement contract between the customer and the city may be required
outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and the obligations of
each party.
(B) Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 or 240/480 volts;
three-phase 120/240/208, 120/208, 277/480 volts as available at point of service. Three-phase
customers served via under-ground primary to pad-mounted transformers will be furnished only
120/208 or 277/480 volt service.
(C) Rate.
(i) Service charge: $215.00 per month for service; plus
(ii) Energy charge: $0.0324 per kWh for all kWh; plus
(iii) Power cost recovery factor: As determined under subsection (8).
(D) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be
the service charge of $100.00 per month.
(E) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(5) Schedule M - Municipal.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to all city-owned and city-operated facilities whose uses are not
covered by a specific rate schedule.
(8) Character of service. A.G., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase
120/240 or 240/480; three-phase 120/240/208, 120/208, 277/480 volts as available at point of
service. Three-phase customers served via under-ground primary to pad-mounted transformers
will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service.
(C) Rate.
(i) Energy charge: $0.0376 per kWh for all kWh; plus
(ii) Power cost recovery factor: As determined under subsection (8).
(D) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(6) Schedule ED - Economic development.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/435
(A) Applicability. Applicable to entities considering location of facilities in the city's service
territory. Service rendered under this rate is subject to the established rules and regulations of the
city.
(B) Character of service. Determined by contractual agreement with the city.
(C) Rate. Determined by contractual agreement with the city.
(D) Power cost recovery factor. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be
increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment
calculated in accordance with schedule PCA provided however that the adjustment shall never be
less than zero (0).
(7) Schedule SL - Security lights.
(A) Applicability. Applicable to all security lights installed and maintained by the city for
customers at their request. The customer will be required to contract for security light service for a
minimum period of three (3) years. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to
the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service.
(B) Additional construction costs for installing security lights. The standard security light
monthly fee includes installation of the security light on existing city-owned utility poles. The total
cost for any additional poles, cables or other equipment as calculated by the electrical division
must be paid in full by the customer prior to the installation of the security light.
(C) Rates per month per light.
(i) 100 watt: $11.00.
(ii) 250 watt: $16.00.
(iii) 400 watt: $32.00.
(iv) 1,500 watt: $72.00.
(D) Only those security lights connected prior to the effective date of this section shall qualify
for service under schedule SL-security lights and shall be billed in accordance with schedule SLsecurity
lights. The city shall continue to repair and maintain such existing security lights, until
there is a termination of service, at which time the existing security light service under schedule
SL shall be discontinued.
(E) Following the effective date of this section, any new security lights shall be installed by the
customer and the customer shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of the security lights.
Security lights shall be connected on the customer side of the meter and the customer will be
billed the usage associated with the security light as part of the total energy consumption on the
customer's meter.
(8) Schedule PCRF (power cost recovery factor).
(A) The purpose of this schedule is to accurately recover from city customers the cost of total
delivered wholesale power purchases and to reduce the volatility of the recovery of total delivered
wholesale power purchases.
(B) Wholesale power purchases shall include but are not limited to transmission charges,
ERCOT fees, delivery charges, and any other delivery fees necessary. All wholesale power cost
realized shall be billed by the city on its monthly bills as a power cost adjustment, determined in
accordance with the provisions set forth below. On a periodic basis, though not exceeding 12
consecutive months, the city will compare the total amount of PCRF which should be recovered to
the actual power cost adjustment revenues received in the previous city billing period(s), adjusted
as necessary for anticipated. increases or decreases. Any difference realized will be added or
subtracted from the amount of power cost adjustment to be recovered in the next city billing
period(s).
(C) The formula for calculation of the power cost adjustment factor is as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/435
PCRF = WC - PCCF
S
Definitions:
PCRF = Power cost adjustment ($ per kWh).
WC = Total delivered cost of power, including but not limited to transmission charges,
ERGOT fees, and delivery charges purchased by the city from its supplier for the preceding
wholesale billing period(s)
(S) = Total estimated sales (kWh) to city customers for the current city billing period(s)
PCCF = Power cost correction factor which is applied to compensate for the prior period's
over or under collection of power costs due to the variance between actual power costs
including fuel and revenues received from application of the power cost recovery factor.
(Ordinance 2018-24 adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. A8.007 Registration of retail electrical providers
The city shall assess a reasonable administrative fee for the registration in the amount of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), which fee shall be assessed on an annual basis. (Ordinance 01-46 adopted 12/18/01; 2001 Code, app.
A, sec. 9.900)
Sec. A8.008 Charge for switchover of electric facilities
The switchover fee consists of a charge per meter and, as applicable, an idle facilities charge. The charge per
meter shall be as follows:
Type of Customer First Meter Each Additional Meter
Residential service $500.00 $250.00
Small commercial service (monthly kilowatt demand
does not exceed 15 kW)
$750.00 $500.00
Medium commercial service (monthly kilowatt demand
is between 16 kW and 100 kW)
$1,000.00 $750.00
Large commercial service (monthly kilowatt demand is
between 101 kW and 250 kW)
$1,500.00 $1,000.00
Industrial service (monthly kilowatt demand exceeds
250 kW)
$2,000.00 $1,500.00
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1010)
Sec. A8.009 Electrical service connect fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/435
(a) Residential service. The residential connect fee is $250.00 and includes service conductor and metering
equipment costs.
(b) Commercial service. The commercial connect fee is $500.00 and includes service conductor and metering
equipment costs.
(c) Industrial service. The industrial connect fee is $750.00 and includes service conductor and metering
equipment costs.
(Ordinance 10-23 adopted 7/20/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1011)
Sec. A8.010 Water well permit and inspection fees
(a) Permit fee. Upon receiving satisfactory approval of the city council, specific requirements shall be
documented upon permitting and a permit fee of $500.00 shall be required.
(b) Annual inspection. An inspection fee of $50.00 shall be collected annually for purposes of defraying cost to
inspect the private water system and verify no cross-connection exists with the public system. The inspection will
also verify the backflow prevention device is capable of operating properly.
(Ordinance 00-6 adopted 3/7/00; 2001 Code, app. A, sec. 9.800)
Sec. A8.011 Disposal of residential septic tank waste
A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be charged for each load of household septic waste that is dumped (a
load is defined as a tank capacity not to exceed 2,000 gallons). Such fee shall be charged and due the city
whether such tank is full or partially full. (Ordinance 97-1 adopted 2/18/97; Ordinance 97-3 adopted 3/4/97; 2001
Code, art. 6.400; 2001 Code, app. A, art. 6.000)
Sec. A8.012 Registration of users of public right-of-way
All users of the public rights-of-way shall register with the city. The fee for registration and renewal of registration
shall be $200.00. (Ordinance 10-41 adopted 12/7/10; 2001 Code, sec. 13.1116)