7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/221
City of Big Lake
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 5
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 180320-
02 adopted 4/3/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Big Lake, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Big Lake, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Big Lake, Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/221
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Big Lake, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Big Lake, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Reagan, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/221
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/221
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of
the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/221
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.02.001–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Records Management*
Sec. 1.02.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/221
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Municipal records. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings,
microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state,
created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public
business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this division or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.02.038 of this division.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management committee. The committee established in section 1.02.035 of this division.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.02.034 of this division.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.02.036 of this division.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.01)
Sec. 1.02.032 City records declared public property
All municipal records as defined in section 1.02.031 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such
records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal
from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (1997 Code, sec. 31.02)
Sec. 1.02.033 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their [creation to their]
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1997 Code, sec. 31.03)
Sec. 1.02.034 Records management officer
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/221
(a) Designation. The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records
management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or
her name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking
up the office, as applicable.
(b) Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation
of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this
division;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13) of this section; and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/221
(1997 Code, sec. 31.04)
Sec. 1.02.035 Records management committee
A records management committee consisting of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, the city treasurer, the municipal
judge, and the city attorney is hereby established. The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing
the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.05)
Sec. 1.02.036 Records management plan
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential
records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical
value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties
prescribed by state law and this division effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, or microfilmed [in accordance with the plan].
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
division and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a
basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.06)
Sec. 1.02.037 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this division;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this division.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/221
(1997 Code, sec. 31.07)
Sec. 1.02.038 Records liaison officers
(a) Designation. Each department head shall serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the
records management program in his or her department. If the records management officer determines that in the
best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for
a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records
management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the
records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained
by his or her department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the city
council of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the records management officer shall promptly
designate another person to fill the vacancy.
(b) Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this division, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct and/or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in
preparation for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.08)
Sec. 1.02.039 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by
the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the members of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.09)
Sec. 1.02.040 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.02.036
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures
of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/221
or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for
an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(1997 Code, sec. 31.10)
Sec. 1.02.041 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not been listed on a approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has
been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1997 Code, sec. 31.11)
Sec. 1.02.042 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.02.036, shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of
the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.02.036. (1997
Code, sec. 31.12)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.03.001 National Incident Management System adopted
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance
050906-1 adopted 9/6/05)
Secs. 1.03.002–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.03.031 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city, and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division.
(3) He or she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate
responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director.
(b) (1) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the city
officers and employees so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as
organized volunteer groups.
(2) The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/221
(1997 Code, sec. 33.01)
Sec. 1.03.032 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within the city, and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures that would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and recommending that the city council adopt all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster.
(A) The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days,
except by or with the consent of the city council.
(B) Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) (A) Issuance of proclamations, regulations or directives necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this division.
(B) Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means
calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances
attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, shall be promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the city
emergency management organization.
(7) Maintenance of the liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any city department to aid
in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located, and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions that may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services that could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/221
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Tex. Gov't Code, ch. 418).
(1997 Code, sec. 33.02)
Sec. 1.03.033 Emergency management plan
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state.
(1) The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and
functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to
carry out the provisions of this division.
(2) As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management.
(3) Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management.
(4) When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions
assigned by the plan, and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all
times.
(b) The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this division, and shall have the
effect of law during the time of disaster.
(1997 Code, sec. 33.03)
Sec. 1.03.034 Interjurisdictional program
(a) The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the
county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county.
(b) The mayor shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as it may affect the city.
(1997 Code, sec. 33.04)
Sec. 1.03.035 Override
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith. (1997 Code, sec. 33.05)
Sec. 1.03.036 Liability
(a) This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health and safety of its inhabitants.
(b) Neither the city, its agents and representatives, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to
comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this division. shall be liable
for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity.
(c) Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation
grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/221
any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending
or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his or her successors in interest, if
any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under
such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
(1997 Code, sec. 33.06)
Sec. 1.03.037 Commitment of funds
(a) No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council; nor shall any person
have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
council, unless during a declared disaster.
(b) During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed
prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property.
(1997 Code, sec. 33.07)
Sec. 1.03.038 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any members of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(1997 Code, sec. 33.08)
Sec. 1.03.039 Limitations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, or with any military or
naval order, rule or regulation. (1997 Code, sec. 33.09)
Sec. 1.03.040 Penalty
Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine to be set by the municipal
court of the city. (1997 Code, sec. 33.99)
ARTICLE 1.04 EDUCATION FINANCE CORPORATION*
Sec. 1.04.001 Findings
(a) Pursuant to the authority granted by section 53A.35(b), Texas Education Code, as amended (the “Act”),
the city council desires to authorize the creation of a nonprofit corporation (the “corporation”) to act on its
behalf in financing and refinancing, under the Act, educational facilities and facilities incidental, subordinate or
related thereto, including, specifically and not by way of limitation, housing facilities, all for the purpose of
aiding institutions of higher education and accredited primary and secondary schools within the limitations set
forth in chapter 53A, Texas Education Code.
(b) The corporation may exercise the powers granted in the Act for such purposes as may be consistent with
the Act and subject to the approval of the city from time to time.
(Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 1, adopted 6/3/08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/221
Sec. 1.04.002 Articles of incorporation
The city council hereby approves the articles of incorporation (the “articles”) for the corporation in substantially
the form attached to Ordinance 080603-1 as exhibit A, and authorizes the filing of the articles with the secretary
of state in accordance with the Act. (Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 2, adopted 6/3/08)
Sec. 1.04.003 Board of directors
The city council hereby appoints those persons named in the articles, each of whom on the date of his
appointment is duly qualified in accordance with the Act, to serve as the initial members of the board of
directors of the corporation, such service to be at all times subject to the powers of the city council under the
articles. (Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 3, adopted 6/3/08)
Sec. 1.04.004 Authority to issue bonds or other obligations
The corporation is authorized to finance the projects described in section 1.04.001 hereof through the issuance of
one or more series or issues of revenue bonds, notes or other obligations that are payable solely from revenues to
be received by or on behalf of the corporation pursuant to agreements between the corporation and institutions of
higher education or accredited primary or secondary schools or amounts to be received from persons acting on
behalf of such educational entities, with the city having no obligation to pay the corporation or any other person,
including, specifically, the holders of such obligations, any amounts with respect to such obligations. Such
obligations shall never constitute a debt or pledge of the faith and credit of the taxing power of the city.
(Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 4, adopted 6/3/08)
Sec. 1.04.005 Designation as instrumentality of city
It is intended that the corporation be a duly constituted authority and instrumentality of the city, with the power
to act on its behalf and to accomplish the public purposes of the state within the meaning of regulations and
revenue rulings of the Treasury Department of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States promulgated
under sections 103 and 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. (Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 5,
adopted 6/3/08)
Sec. 1.04.006 Bylaws
The city council hereby approves the initial bylaws for the corporation in substantially the form and substance
attached to Ordinance 080603-1 as exhibit B. (Ordinance 080603-1, sec. 6, adopted 6/3/08)
ARTICLE 1.05 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 1.05.001 Josh Mitchell Memorial Park
(a) The city council feels that the Josh Mitchell Memorial Park is an asset to the city, and is very popular with
the citizens and children of the city, and as such, it should be kept clean and orderly with rules and regulations to
abide by.
(b) The rules and regulations shall apply to all occupants of the Josh Mitchell Memorial Park; and are as
follows:
(1) Park hours 6:00 a.m.–10:00 p.m.
(2) No alcohol.
(3) No glass containers.
(4) No unattended children under the age of six (6).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/221
(5) No more than 2 children on police car and 1 on fire truck.
(6) No dogs or horses.
(7) No fireworks.
(8) No vehicles off pavement.
(9) No loud music or excessive noise.
(10) No loud, obscene or abusive language.
(11) No display or use of firearms or weapons of any kind.
(12) No foreign objects (rocks, bicycles, etc.) in play area.
(13) All trash must be placed in trash receptacles.
(14) No destruction of property or vegetation.
(15) No concessions (vendors, bounce houses, etc.)
(c) The city asks that you enjoy this park and treat it with respect. If you see anyone violating any of the
posted rules or mishandling park equipment, please call 325-884-2424.
(d) Any person violating any of the rules and regulations in this section shall be fined, upon conviction, not
more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ordinance 13-10-01-1 adopted 10/1/13)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Abandoned. A dog, cat, or any other animal which has been deserted by its owner, to wit, such animal has been
left at an unoccupied residence, has no food nor water provided, roams at large and is not tagged nor licensed.
Animal. An animal organism other than a human being.
Animal control authority. The animal control office of the city.
Animal control officer. Any person designated by the city as an officer who is authorized to perform animal
control duties under the laws of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/221
Animal establishment. Any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, performing animal exhibition, kennel, or
animal shelter, except this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities,
facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the USDA under the
provisions of U.S. Public Laws 89544 and 92579.
Animal shelter. Any facility designated or recognized by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for
animals held under the authority of this chapter and state law.
At large. Off the premises of the owner and not under the complete control, either by leash, cord, chain, or
effective verbal command, of the owner, who is then physically present with the animal; or on the premises of
the owner and not within the direct, constant, and immediate presence of a person having effective verbal
command of the animal, or otherwise confined to said premises by means of a leash, cord, chain, or enclosure.
Cat. All members of the feline family of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized.
Cruelly treated. Tortured, seriously overworked, unreasonably abandoned, unreasonably deprived of necessary
food, care, or shelter, cruelly confined, or caused to fight with another animal.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the dog is being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
Dog. All members of the canine family of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized.
Fowl. Any bird of any kind.
Harbors or harboring. The act of keeping or caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal
returns for food, shelter, or care for a period of three days or more.
Humane manner. Care of an animal, including but not limited to adequate heat, ventilation, and sanitary shelter,
wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size,
species, and breed.
Kennel. An establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or boarding dogs or cats or engaged in
training dogs or cats.
Licensed veterinarian. A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state board of veterinary medical
examiners.
Livestock. Any horse, mule, jack, jenny, cow, cattle, sheep, goat, rabbit, or pig or hog.
Neutered or sterilization. The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat to render the animal
unable to reproduce.
New owner. A person who is legally competent to enter into a binding contract and who is adopting a dog or cat
from a releasing agency.
Nuisance. A dog or cat, or other animal, either licensed or unlicensed, which:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/221
(1) Molests passersby;
(2) Chases passing vehicles;
(3) Is not vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter;
(4) Is repeatedly at large;
(5) Turns over garbage containers;
(6) Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, loud, continuous fashion so as to unreasonably disturb
nearby persons;
(7) Howls, growls, or hisses in an excessive, loud, continuous fashion so as to unreasonably disturb
nearby persons;
(8) Damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public
walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the
owner;
(9) Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions:
(10) Molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other domestic animals; or
(11) Is without an owner.
Owner. A person, firm, partnership, company, association, or corporation who has, harbors, keeps or causes or
permits to be harbored or kept, or has in his care, or who permits a dog, cat, or other animal on or about his
premises for a period of three days or longer.
Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a
unit.
Pet shop. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or company conducting business at a properly zoned
location therefor, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise other than a
kennel, that engages in the business of buying or selling at retail dogs or cats or other animals for profit-making
purposes.
Poultry. Domesticated birds that are normally kept for eggs or meat. “Poultry” includes, but is not limited to,
chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, and guineas.
Property. Any object of value that a person may lawfully acquire and hold; that which may be owned, as land, a
residence, a vehicle, an animal, and the like.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.001)
Quarantine. Strict confinement of an animal specified in an order of the city council or its designee:
(1) On the private premises of the animal's owner or at a facility approved by the city council or its
designee; and
(2) Under restraint by closed cage or paddock or in any other manner approved by city council
rule.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.001; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/221
Rabies. An acute viral disease of man and animal affecting the nervous system and usually transmitted by an
animal bite.
Releasing agency. A public or private animal pound, shelter, or humane organization.
Residence. A house, apartment, room, or duplex inhabited as the principal dwelling place of a person or persons.
Residential building. A structure or building designed, constructed, or converted for use as a residence.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the local animal control
authority.
Stray. Roaming with no physical restraint beyond the premises of an animal owner or keeper.
Trap. Any device placed by an animal control officer, employed or used in the capture of animals, which is not
under the constant supervision of an officer and which functions in such a manner as to confine any animal
entering same.
Vaccination. An injection of vaccine which has been approved by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services.
Vicious animal. Includes any animal, wild or domestic, which demonstrates a propensity toward the unprovoked
biting or attacking of animals or humans, or which demonstrates a disposition toward savagery or ferociousness
toward animals or humans or which represents a physical threat to animals or humans.
Wild animal. Any nondomestic animal normally found in a natural habitat.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.001)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalties
(a) General penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, except such sections set
forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than
$10.00 nor more than $2,000.00.
(b) Violations involving dangerous dogs.
(1) In addition to the fine set forth in subsection (a) of this section, an offense under article 2.03 of
this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in
which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor.
(2) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under article 2.03 of this
chapter is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. An attorney having civil jurisdiction in
the county or an attorney for a municipality where the offense occurred may file suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this section shall be retained
by the county or municipality.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/221
(c) Any person who violates any of the provisions of article 2.07 and article 2.08 of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the $2,000.00 maximum fine hereunder shall only apply if the violation is
a violation of a provision governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of
refuse; if the provision does not govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of
refuse, the maximum permissible fine shall be $500.00 rather than the $2,000.00; provided further, no penalty
shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of this state. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day any violation occurs or continues.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.999)
Sec. 2.01.003 Nuisance animals prohibited
(a) Any dog or cat or other animal which meets the definition of a nuisance in section 2.01.001 of this chapter
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any dog or cat or other animal which is a nuisance may be picked up by the department of animal control.
(c) Any person who owns, keeps, or harbors a dog or cat or other animal which is declared to be a nuisance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.002)
Sec. 2.01.004 Citations
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, any animal control officer or peace officer is hereby authorized to
issue to any owner or other person who violates any provision of this chapter a citation, which shall be dated and
signed by the issuing officer. The citation shall set forth the general nature of the violation charged, and shall
direct the violator to appear in the municipal court of the city on or before a certain day. The violator shall sign
the summons to indicate his agreement to appear. In the event a violator refuses to sign the agreement to appear,
a peace officer may be called to the scene and, upon the continued refusal of such person to sign, may arrest
such person. In those instances wherein the violator is not present, the citation may be issued, a complaint filed,
and procedure followed as permitted by law. (1997 Code, sec. 90.003)
Sec. 2.01.005 Authority of municipal court
(a) Upon written complaint wherein any dog or cat or other animal is alleged to be a nuisance as defined in
section 2.01.001 of this chapter, the municipal court of the city shall have the authority to order and hold a
hearing upon giving notice to the owner of such dog or cat or other animal, and if such court shall determine at
such hearing that such dog or cat or other animal is vicious or dangerous to persons or animals or has bitten or
attacked any person or other animal, the court may order that such dog or cat or other animal be kept muzzled, or
that same be kept within a sufficient enclosure, or that same be delivered to the poundmaster and by him be
destroyed, or assess a fine against the owner thereof as provided herein, or any combination of the foregoing.
(b) If such court shall determine that any dog or cat or other animal disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood or occupant of any adjacent premises by loud, unusual, or prolonged barking or howling, the court
may order that such dog or cat or other animal be removed permanently beyond the city limits or delivered to the
poundmaster and by him be destroyed, and failure or refusal to do so within 24 hours after receiving said order
shall be deemed an offense. A substantial copy of such order for hearing detailing the time, date, place, and
purpose therefor,personally delivered or enclosed in a correctly addressed envelope to such owner, postage
prepaid, and deposited in the United States mail within not less than 14 days prior to the date of such hearing,
shall be deemed sufficient and proper notice.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/221
(c) Provided, however, if it appears upon trial thereof that any person attacked or bitten was trespassing upon
the property of the owner or person having control of such dog or cat or other animal, or if any person attacked
or bitten was provoking or teasing such dog or cat or other animal, or if such loud, unusual, or prolonged barking
or howling was provoked as the result of teasing or harassment by persons other than the owner, such conduct
shall be a complete defense to any complaint brought hereunder.
(d) A person commits an offense if he knowingly possesses and fails to release to the animal control officer, or
any peace officer under his direction, a dog or cat or other animal that has been charged by sworn complaint as
provided in this section.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.004)
Sec. 2.01.006 Tampering with traps set by animal control department
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, damage, spring, or cause to malfunction any trap set
by the department of animal control or to release any dog or cat from any such trap. (1997 Code, sec. 90.005)
Sec. 2.01.007 Prohibited traps
(a) Traps harmful to animal prohibited. No person shall set up or allow to be set up on his property steel jaw
traps, spring traps with teeth or perforated edges on the holding mechanism, or any type of trap with a holding
mechanism designed in such a fashion as to reasonably ensure the cutting, slicing, tearing, or otherwise
traumatizing of the trapped prey for the purpose of ensnaring domestic or wild animals within the city limits,
unless the use of such traps is specifically deemed necessary by the department of public health in or for the
control of communicable disease.
(b) Exception for pest control. This section is not to be construed to include those traps designed to kill
common rodents, such as rats, mice, gophers, and groundhogs; provided that the owner is responsible for taking
care that any of the above said rodent traps are not placed or used on or about his property in such a manner as to
reasonably ensure the trapping of any other domesticated or wild animal or of a human.
(c) Violations. It shall be a prima facie violation of this section that the traps prescribed herein were, in fact,
set up by the person in question; no intent or further culpable mental state shall be required to prove such a
prima facie violation.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.006)
Sec. 2.01.008 Interference with animal control department
(a) No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the animal control department in the
performance of any duty of the agent, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control
department or its agents.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference
alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech only.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.007)
Sec. 2.01.009 Duties of driver striking animal with vehicle
The driver of any vehicle which collides with or strikes any domesticated animal shall immediately stop such
vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible without interfering with traffic, render
reasonable assistance to said animal, and then and there either locate and notify the owner of said animal or
report said accident and the injury to the department of animal control, the county sheriff's department, or the
local humane society. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any emergency vehicle or to a driver
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/221
taking an ill or injured person to medical care, nor shall it require assistance to an animal if providing such
assistance would place any person in danger from the animal or traffic. (1997 Code, sec. 90.008)
Sec. 2.01.010 Reward for information leading to arrest for malicious poisoning
A reward may be offered by the city, as set by the city council, to any person who shall furnish testimony or
evidence leading to the conviction of any person or persons who have willfully poisoned any dog or cat within
the city. (1997 Code, sec. 90.009)
State law reference–Cruelty by poisoning nonlivestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092(b)(2).
Sec. 2.01.011 Destruction of animals by animal control department
(a) Animals in pain and suffering. Any animal which has been injured to the extent of broken legs, severe
lacerations, internal injuries, and the like may be immediately put to death in a humane manner if, within the
judgment of the director of the department of animal control, the animal is in pain and suffering, and it is the
judgment of the director that the nature or extent of the injury is such that the animal cannot reasonably be
expected to survive the injury.
(b) Diseased animals. Any animal which has the mange, distemper, or any other disease which may be
reasonably calculated to endanger the life and health of other animals may, in the discretion of the director of the
department of animal control, be humanely put to death in lieu of impoundment.
(c) Notification of owner. Prior to any animal being put to death pursuant to the terms of this section, the
employees of the department of animal control shall make reasonable inquiry as to the owner of said animal,
and, if the owner can be identified and notified, the owner shall be notified. In the event the owner shall agree to
immediately proceed to the location of the animal and does so, the animal shall not be destroyed except upon
permission of the owner. In the event the animal is not injured, but is infected with a disease calculated to
endanger other animals, and the ownership can be ascertained, then, in that event, the animal shall not be
destroyed until the owner is notified and gives his consent or refuses to immediately reclaim the animal, or, if
the owner is not notified, all reasonable means of notifying the owner and receiving a response within a 24-hour
period have been exhausted.
(d) Policy and procedure. The director of the department of animal control shall, in deciding whether or not
the facts warrant the immediate destruction of any animal, act in a reasonable manner and according to policy
and procedure established by the city secretary.
(e) Nonliability. The city, its officers, agents, and employees shall never, in any event, be liable in damages
for the destruction of any animal pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.010)
Sec. 2.01.012 Disposal of large dead animals at city landfill
The city council has set a fee per animal to dispose of deceased large animals at the city landfill by city
employees, said fee to be as provided for in the fee schedule. (Ordinance 070501-1 adopted 5/1/07)
Sec. 2.01.013 Slaughtering animal within public view
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter an animal within public view.
(b) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
in a sum of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed when
any violation occurs or continues.
(Ordinance 080617-1, secs. 130.40, 130.99, adopted 6/17/08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/221
ARTICLE 2.02 KEEPING DOGS OR CATS
Sec. 2.02.001 Registration required; fee
(a) Registration required. All cats and dogs harbored or maintained by their owners within the city shall be
registered.
(b) Application for registration; issuance of tags. Registration tags shall be issued under the direction of the
animal control officer or any designated person assigned by the city secretary. Applicants for a license shall state
the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
(2) The kind and breed of dog or cat, if known;
(3) The sex of the dog or cat; if neutered, so state;
(4) The coloration of the dog or cat and any other distinguishing characteristics; and
(5) Proof of vaccination.
(c) Time allowed for registration. All dogs and cats presently in the city shall be registered within six months
of the effective date of this section. All newly acquired dogs or cats shall be registered within 30 days of their
acquisition. All newly born dogs or cats shall be registered within four months of their birth. This requirement
will not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the corporate limits of the city for no longer than 30
days.
(d) Fees. Fee shall be as provided for in the fee schedule.
(e) Expiration date. The license shall be valid for one year, and all licenses shall expire after the date on which
said cat or dog last received a rabies vaccination.
(f) Notice of expiration. On or before the expiration date of the license, the city shall send a notice of
expiration to the owner, indicated by the records of the city, for the annual fee. If the owner has not reported the
death of the dog or cat or its removal from the city before the annual fee becomes due, he is still liable for the fee
currently due.
(g) Failure to pay fee. If the owner of a dog or cat has not paid the annual license fee within 30 days of the
date it is due, the owner of the animal to which the fee applies may be cited in the manner set out in section
2.01.004 of this chapter.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.020)
State law reference–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.002 Rabies vaccination
(a) No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat over four months old within the corporate limits
unless such dog or cat is vaccinated against rabies and licensed (registered). (1997 Code, sec. 90.021)
(b) All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with Texas
Administrative Code, sec. 169.28, et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated. Each owner shall also
receive a durable vaccination tag indicating the year in which it was issued.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/221
(d) The owner of any dog or cat within the city shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian each calendar year.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.021)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.003 Restraint required; confinement of vicious dogs and female animals in heat
Every person who owns, keeps, or is in charge of a dog or cat shall restrain the dog [or cat] at all times. No dog
of fierce, dangerous, and/or vicious propensities shall be allowed upon any street, avenue, highway, alley,
sidewalk, parkway, park, or other public place in the city. The animal shall be confined within a building or a
secure enclosure unless such animal is securely muzzled and under the control of the owner or any other person
by either leash, cord, chain, or otherwise. No female dog or female cat in heat shall be allowed upon any street,
avenue, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, or other public place in the city whether said dog is under the
control of the owner or any other person either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise. (1997 Code, sec. 90.022)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.02.004 Running at large prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat owned or kept by him to run at large within the city.
Any cat or dog found running at large in violation of this section may be impounded and subject to the citation
imposed under section 2.01.004 of this chapter. (1997 Code, sec. 90.023)
Sec. 2.02.005 Care and maintenance; removal of waste
(a) Care of a dog or cat must include, but is not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, and sanitary shelter,
wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size,
species, and breed.
(b) The owner of every dog or cat shall be responsible for the sanitary disposal of, and shall dispose of, any
feces deposited by his animal on public walks, streets, or recreation areas, or upon private property not within
the control, possession, or supervision of said owner.
(c) It shall be unlawful to keep, shelter, or enclose any dog or cat within any residential building or property
which is not occupied as a residence by a person.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.024)
(d) All dogs within the city shall be cared for in accordance with the following:
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner, caregiver or keeper of any dog to permit such dog to run at
large within the city. A dog is at large if it is not within an enclosure adequate to contain the dog upon
or within property owned or leased by its owner, caregiver or keeper or restrained by a leash or
harness personally held by the owner, caregiver or keeper of the dog.
(2) It shall be required for the owner, caregiver or keeper of any dog over twenty-five (25) pounds
that is upon any public street or park to have the dog properly muzzled.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner, caregiver or keeper of any dog to restrain or anchor a dog by
means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being personally
held by the owner, caregiver or keeper of the dog. No dog may be attached to an inanimate object.
(4) Any dogs confined within a fenced yard or run must be provided with at least 100 square feet
of space for each dog. Any dog kept within a house without a yard shall be provided an enclosure or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/221
run for such dog with at least 100 square feet for each dog. The enclosure shall be constructed of
chain link or similar type material with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient
height to prevent the dog from escaping from the enclosure. The top of the enclosure shall be covered
with sufficient material to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements.
(Ordinance 040803-1 adopted 8/17/04)
Sec. 2.02.006 Keeping more than three dogs or cats
(a) Dogs.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or shelter more than three dogs, plus one
litter to age of three months, within the city, without a written permit. Any person desiring to keep,
maintain, or shelter more than three dogs plus one litter to age three months shall request from the
director of the department of animal control a written permit to keep a specified number of dogs. The
director of the department of animal control may issue such permit if he determines that such person
has a proper and adequate enclosure in which to keep the dogs, and a proper and sanitary shelter for
the dogs.
(2) After issuance, a permit may be revoked by the director of the department of animal control in
the event either of the criteria in subsection (a)(1) is not maintained, the dogs become a nuisance, the
person issued the permit is convicted of any violation of this chapter, or if any one of the dogs is on
two separate occasions caught by an animal control officer while at large.
(b) Cats. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall equally apply to the keeping of cats. It is
specifically provided, however, that any person may keep up to three cats, plus one litter to age of three months,
without a permit, and may, with a permit, keep a larger number of cats.
(c) Permit fee. The fee for a permit pursuant to this section shall be as provided for in the fee schedule.
(d) Exemptions. The terms, provisions, and limitations of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats kept upon
the business premises of any veterinarian, kennel, animal shelter, pet shop, or scientific research institution.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.025)
ARTICLE 2.03 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Sec. 2.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Animal control authority. A municipal or county animal control office with authority over the area where the
dog is kept, or a county sheriff in an area with no animal control office.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.035)
Sec. 2.03.002 Designation of dangerous dog; appeals
(a) For the purposes of this article, a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 822.041(2)(A);
or
(2) The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is dangerous.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/221
(b) If a person reports an incident described by Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 822.041(2), the animal
control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the
animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of that fact.
(c) An owner, not later than the 30th day after the date the owner is notified that his or her dog is a dangerous
dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to a municipal court of competent jurisdiction.
An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other civil cases.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.036)
Sec. 2.03.003 Requirements for owner
No later than the 30th day after a person learns that he is the owner of a dangerous dog, he shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority of the city;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure; and
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to
a person.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.037)
Sec. 2.03.004 Registration
(a) The animal control authority of the city shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of:
(A) Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by Tex. Health & Safety Code,
section 822.042;
(B) Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(C) The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee as provided for in the fee schedule.
(b) The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later
than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which
the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and
payment of a fee of $25.00, the animal control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the
dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered
of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.038)
Sec. 2.03.005 Attack by dangerous dog
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/221
(a) A person commits an offense if he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an
unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog
destroyed by a person listed in Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 822.004.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.039)
Sec. 2.03.006 Violations
A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if he fails to comply
with Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 822.042. (1997 Code, sec. 90.040)
ARTICLE 2.04 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.04.001 Impoundment of nuisance animals; authority to destroy certain animals
Dogs and/or cats which are a nuisance shall, if reasonably possible, be captured or taken by an animal control
officer, or other designated employee of the city if an animal control officer is not available, impounded in an
animal shelter and there confined in a reasonably humane manner with necessary food and shelter. In the event
of actual and immediate danger of bodily injury to any person because of the vicious nature or actions of a dog
or cat, or in the event a dog or cat which constitutes a threat to the health of people, or other dogs or cats, is
about to elude capture by an animal control officer, the officer shall be justified in immediately destroying the
dog or cat by the use of any reasonable means available to him, without liability of any nature to the owner for
the death of the cat or dog. (1997 Code, sec. 90.050)
Sec. 2.04.002 Procedures for animals running at large
An animal control officer shall, upon observing a dog or cat at large, pursue said dog or cat and capture same if
possible. If said dog or cat, during pursuit, goes upon private property, said officer shall continue pursuit onto
said private property. Should any dog or cat, after pursuit, be captured on private property, the officer shall make
inquiry of anyone present on said property as to ownership. In the event ownership of the dog or cat is
determined, said officer shall issue a citation to the owner and deliver the dog or cat to said person upon said
person exhibiting acceptable identification. In the event a dog or cat at large is captured and the owner is not
located, or ownership is not determined, it shall be impounded. (1997 Code, sec. 90.051)
Sec. 2.04.003 Holding period
Unless reclaimed as herein provided, all impounded dogs and/or cats shall be kept for not less than five days, the
first day of which shall be the day next following the day of impoundment. (1997 Code, sec. 90.052)
Sec. 2.04.004 Notification of owner
If the owner of an impounded dog or cat can be readily identified, the animal control officer or his agent shall,
within 24 hours after impoundment, notify the dog's or cat's owner by telephone, if possible, or by mail if no
telephone number is available. (1997 Code, sec. 90.053)
Sec. 2.04.005 Release of animal to owner
If the dog or cat is four months old or older and not wearing a collar with valid rabies and license tags attached,
the owner must present a certificate showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated and licensed within the
immediate preceding 12 calendar months. If such a certificate of vaccination and/or the license cannot be
produced, and the animal is three months old or older, a warning notice shall be issued to the owner and the
animal may be released to its owner on the condition that the owner shall immediately have the animal
vaccinated against rabies and purchase a city license. In that event, the animal shall be vaccinated and/or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/221
licensed, as herein provided, and acceptable proof thereof exhibited to the director of animal control or his agent
within 72 hours after the animal's release. If acceptable proof of vaccination and/or licensing is not presented
within the 72 hours, the director shall cause a complaint to be filed against such owner in the municipal court.
Animals which are not at least three months of age may be released without immediate vaccination and licensing
being required. However, the department of animal control may give written notice to the person claiming said
animal that proof of vaccination and licensing must be presented, as required herein, on or before a certain date.
The date shall be a date estimated as falling between the third and fourth month following the animal's birth. In
the event such written notice is given and the proof of vaccination and licensing is not provided on or before the
date stipulated, the director of the department of animal control shall cause a complaint or complaints to be filed.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.054)
Sec. 2.04.006 Fees
The city council has set impoundment fees as provided for in the fee schedule. (Ordinance 070501-1 adopted
5/1/07)
Sec. 2.04.007 Disposition of unclaimed animals; adoption
(a) Any animal not reclaimed by its owner in compliance with the provisions of section 2.04.005 within the
five days excluding the day of impoundment shall become the property of the city, and shall be either placed for
adoption or humanely put to death by an animal control officer.
(b) An impounded animal which is not claimed and redeemed by its owner within the five-day period may, if
in good health and not having been observed to be vicious, be adopted by any person who pays an adoption fee
as provided for in the fee schedule and the cost of impoundment plus cost of vaccination, provided that the
requirements of section 2.04.005 must be met by such person, and provided that it shall be unlawful for any
person to adopt or attempt to adopt any impounded animal in an effort to avoid or circumvent the penalties
applicable to owner/violators.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.056)
ARTICLE 2.05 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.05.001 Duty of physicians to report animal bites and scratches
It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner or medical facility to report to the animal control
department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites or scratches inflicted by animals, together with
such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. (1997 Code, sec. 90.065)
Sec. 2.05.002 Disposition of suspected rabid animal
(a) Killing or removal prohibited. No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal
suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human or is suspected of having
bitten a human, except as herein provided, nor remove same from the city limits without permission from the
animal control department.
(b) Surrender of carcass of dead animal. The carcass of any dead animal suspected of having been exposed to
rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control department.
(c) Disposition of animal determined rabid. The animal control department shall direct the disposition of any
animal found to be infected with rabies.
(d) Compliance with orders of animal control department. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine, destruction, or disposal as required herein when demand is made by the animal control
department.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/221
(1997 Code, sec. 90.066)
Sec. 2.05.003 Quarantine of animals that have bitten or scratched person
(a) Upon being presented a sworn affidavit that a dog or a cat has bitten or scratched a person, the animal
control officer shall quarantine the dog or cat so identified for a period of ten days.
(b) Quarantine shall be at the following places:
(1) Dogs or cats of unknown ownership will be quarantined at the dog or cat shelter.
(2) A licensed veterinarian hospital at the expense of the owner, upon the owner's request.
(3) Home quarantine is permissible when the city's police authority agrees that home quarantine is
warranted and believes the following requirements are satisfied:
(A) The owner of the dog or cat is a resident of the city and agrees to keep the dog or cat at
his residence in the city;
(B) The dog or cat was properly restrained at the time the bite occurred; and
(C) The dog or cat was properly protected by rabies vaccination.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.067)
Sec. 2.05.004 Failure to surrender animal for quarantine
Upon the demand made by the animal control department, it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to surrender
any dog or cat which has bitten or scratched a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for
quarantine, which expenses shall be borne by the owner (1997 Code, sec. 90.068)
Sec. 2.05.005 Release of animal to owner
The quarantined dog or cat may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, and upon payment of the
fees set forth in section 2.02.001 and upon compliance with the vaccination provisions set forth in section
2.02.002. (1997 Code, sec. 90.069)
Sec. 2.05.006 Pathological examination
(a) When a dog or a cat under quarantine, diagnosed by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid or suspected of
being rabid, dies while under observation, the animal control department shall immediately send the head of
such dog or cat to the health department for a pathological examination. The animal control department shall
notify the proper health officer of reports of human contacts, and then diagnosis shall be made of the suspected
dog or cat after the pathological examination has been made.
(b) When a dog or a cat bites or scratches a person so that the city health officer believes that the quarantine
observation period cannot be observed because of danger of developing rabies, the city health officer shall order
that the animal control department immediately forward the dog's or cat's head for pathological examination.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.070)
Sec. 2.05.007 Quarantine fees
(a) The owner of the quarantined suspect dog or cat shall pay all fees incident to the quarantine prior to release
of the dog or cat from quarantine by the veterinarian, with the following exceptions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/221
(1) Should a dog or cat bite or scratch a person while such dog or cat is vaccinated against rabies
and registered with the city within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the bite or
scratch incident, and is properly confined or restrained on the premises of the owner, as required by
other sections of this chapter, the person so bitten or scratched by the dog or cat shall be liable, in
advance, for all fees incident to said veterinary examination and quarantine, provided the person so
bitten or scratched was on the property without the actual or implied consent of the owner and the
person bitten demands quarantine. Otherwise, no quarantine is required, unless ordered by the animal
control department, in which case the dog or cat shall be quarantined at the facilities of the animal
control department at no expense to the owner.
(2) Should any dog or cat bite or scratch the owner or a member of his immediate family, such dog
or cat may be quarantined at the home of the owner without regard to vaccination, registration, or
restraint status of said dog or cat at the time of the incident, provided the veterinary examination of
said dog or cat at the beginning of the quarantine period reveals no reason to suspect the presence of
rabies in said dog or cat. Should there be any doubt as to the rabies status of said dog or cat by the
examining veterinarian, then quarantine shall be accomplished by one of the methods described in
this article, or the dog or cat destroyed as described herein. Said dog or cat must be examined at the
conclusion of the quarantine by a veterinarian and all other portions of this chapter shall apply.
(b) In the event the owner of a suspect dog or cat is unknown, said dog or cat shall be considered a stray and it
shall be quarantined at the city pound. Should a person subsequently appear and claim said dog or cat, then said
person shall be considered as the owner and be liable for all fees incident to the quarantine as described herein.
If all fees are not paid within three days following the quarantine period at the city pound, said dog or cat may be
sold or destroyed by the poundmaster.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.071)
Sec. 2.05.008 City-wide quarantine
(a) A city-wide quarantine may be invoked for a period of 30 days by the city council upon the
recommendation of the animal control department after it has been notified by the city health officer of a
positive diagnosis of rabies of a dog or cat or after an investigation has determined there exists an immediate
threat of rabies.
(b) In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring within the 30-day period of city-wide
quarantine, such period of quarantine shall be extended for an additional reasonable period of time.
(c) During such period of city-wide rabies quarantine, every dog or cat bitten by a rabid animal shall be dealt
with in accordance with the Compendium of Animals as advised by the city veterinarian.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any dog or cat in the streets or any other public place
during the period of quarantine.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.072)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
ARTICLE 2.06 LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY; BEEKEEPING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.06.001 Beekeeping
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any bees or engage in the practice
of beekeeping within the city for longer than 48 hours, unless he or she has an unrevoked permit from the city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/221
council to do so.
(b) Application for permit; fee. Any person desiring a permit to keep or maintain bees or bee hives or engage
in the practice of beekeeping within the city shall file with the city secretary a sworn application furnished by the
city. The permit fee shall be as provided for in the fee schedule.
(c) Issuance of permit. The city council may issue a special permit for the keeping of bees or the practice of
beekeeping. Said permit shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of issuance.
(d) Maximum number of hives. No permit holder shall own or possess more than three standard size bee hives
at any one location within the city limits. No more than one permit shall be issued per person or location within
the city limits.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.090)
Secs. 2.06.002–2.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit for Keeping Livestock or Poultry
Sec. 2.06.031 Required; application; fee
(a) No person shall keep livestock or poultry within the city limits without first obtaining and thereafter
keeping in force a permit allowing him to do so.
(b) The procedure and requirements for granting and keeping in force approved permits shall be as follows, to
wit:
(1) Any person desiring a permit to keep livestock or poultry within the city limits shall file an
application with the city secretary on a form provided by the secretary for that purpose. Said
application shall, among other things, call for the name and address of the applicant, estimated
average number and types of livestock or poultry to be kept, description of the structures and
facilities to be used for the enclosure of the livestock or poultry and for the disposal of manure and
debris incident to their maintenance and care, and the distance to the adjacent residence from the
outside boundaries of the structure or fence in which the livestock or poultry are to be enclosed.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount as set forth in the
fee schedule.
(c) The application, with the opinion of the city health officer and/or animal control officer attached, shall then
be submitted to the city council, which shall then pass on the application.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.085)
Sec. 2.06.032 Inspection prior to issuance
When an application has been filed in due form, the city secretary shall turn the same over to the city health
officer and/or animal control officer, who shall inspect the facilities wherein the livestock or poultry is to be
kept, and prepare an opinion as to whether the same are in compliance with the regulations hereinabove
provided. (1997 Code, sec. 90.086)
Sec. 2.06.033 Periodic inspections; cancellation of permit
The city health officer and/or animal control officer may periodically, on his own initiative, and shall upon
written complaint of the county sheriff's office or any other resident of the city, make an inspection as to whether
the regulations as hereinbefore provided are being observed. If he finds that the aforesaid regulations are
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/221
violated, he shall prepare and file a statement to that effect with the city clerk. The city council shall then give
ten days' notice, by publication, of a hearing. If, after a hearing, the city council finds the aforesaid regulations
have been violated, it shall then order the permit to be cancelled. In addition to the cancellation of the permit,
charges may be filed in municipal court as provided in this chapter against any person violating the terms of this
division. (1997 Code, sec. 90.087)
Sec. 2.06.034 Conditions; distance requirements
Permits may be granted and allowed to remain in force only when the regulations as follows are observed:
(1) Livestock or poultry shall be kept within structures or enclosures and not permitted to run at
large.
(2) To prevent the same from serving as breeding places for insects and from emitting noxious
odors, manure or dung incident to the maintenance and care of the livestock or poultry shall be
scraped from roosts and floors and raked from the structures or enclosures within 24 hours after
being dropped or deposited by the livestock or poultry. The manure or dung so collected shall either
be placed and kept in containers that are watertight and insect-proof until removed, or treated and
kept treated with chemicals that will effectively repel flies and other insects.
(3) The structure or enclosure within which any livestock or poultry are confined shall not be less
than 150 feet from any residence and 300 feet from any hotel, restaurant, or other food establishment,
hospital, or business establishment.
(4) The city council may make exceptions and waive the distance requirements in subsection (3)
above when:
(A) The application for permit includes:
(i) Signed, notarized affidavits from each resident and the owner of each residence
within 150 feet of the enclosure of said livestock stating that they do not object to said
livestock being within those boundaries of their residence; and
(ii) Signed, notarized affidavits from the authorized agent of each hotel, restaurant, or
other food establishment, hospital, or business establishment within 300 feet of the
enclosure of said livestock stating that they do not object to said livestock being within
those boundaries of their hotel, restaurant, or other food establishment, hospital, or
business establishment; and
(B) Said livestock is not in violation of any deed restriction, subdivision restriction, or zoning
ordinance.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.088)
Sec. 2.06.035 Keeping hogs or pigs prohibited; exceptions
(a) Prohibition. Hogs and pigs are specifically excluded from the permitting procedure of the city, and may
not be kept within the city limits.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) Hogs and pigs may be allowed within the city limits when kept in association with a school
program and then only [when] kept on licensed property and supervised by said school.
(2) Potbellied pigs may be allowed and may be granted a permit when:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/221
(A) They weigh less than 100 pounds and are kept on premises that are completely enclosed
and solidly walled; and
(B) The applicant has satisfied all other requirements of this chapter.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.089)
ARTICLE 2.07 DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.07.001 Dangerous wild animals
Dangerous wild animals, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.101, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter E, section 822.101
et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.08 ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.08.001–2.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 2.08.031 Required; fee schedule
No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this
division. The permit period shall begin the first day of the fiscal year and shall be valid for one year. Renewal
applications for permits may be made within 60 days prior to the expiration date. Application for a permit to
establish a new breeding animal establishment under the provisions of this division may be made at any time.
Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee as provided in the fee schedule. (1997 Code,
sec. 90.120)
Sec. 2.08.032 Applicability of fees; inspections; denial or revocation
(a) A person who maintains a kennel of four dogs or cats for breeding purposes may pay an annual permit fee.
Every facility regulated by this section shall be considered a separate enterprise in compliance with zoning
regulations.
(b) Under the provisions of this section, no permit fee shall be required of any animal shelter. All other
provisions shall apply. Any change in the category under which a permit is issued shall be reported to the city
within 60 days, whereupon reclassification and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee shall be made.
(c) Failure to comply with the provisions of this section is subject to a fine.
(d) The city may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the permit or license refuses or fails to
comply with this section, the regulations promulgated by the city, or any other law governing the protection and
keeping of animals.
(e) If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on the application, the city
may refuse to issue or may revoke a permit or license.
(f) It shall be a condition of issuance of any permit for an animal establishment that the city shall be permitted
to inspect any and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time during
normal business hours. Where a permit is revoked for any cause, or pending appeal of any such action, the city
shall have power of entry on the premises and into all areas where animals are being kept.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/221
(g) A person denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least 30 days. Each reapplication shall disclose
any previous denial or revocation.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.121)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Registration of building contractors
(a) Fees. Fees for first-year registration and renewal registration of contractors shall be as provided in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Definition. A building contractor is defined for the purpose of this section to mean any business entity or
individual who for a fixed price, commission, wage or other compensation constructs, supervises or manages the
construction of a new home, a material improvement to a home other than an improvement to solely repair a
roof of an existing home, or a material improvement that either increases or decreases the home's total square
footage of living space and also modifies the home's foundation, perimeter walls, or roof; or an interior
remodeling/renovation project that exceeds $10,000.00 (ten thousand dollars).
(c) Registration required. A building contractor by definition is required to register with the city and pay the
appropriate registration and/or renewal fee prior to permitting any building project on any property within the
city and provide the following information:
(1) Proof of registration with the state residential construction commission.
(2) A current Texas driver's license.
(3) Contact information such as addresses and phone numbers.
(4) Required to designate any secondary or designated agents, and those agents will also be
required to register.
(5) Current copy of any applicable insurance or bonding requirements from their insurance
company.
(d) Homeowner exemption. Homeowners are exempt from contractor registration and renewal provisions only
where the homeowner on their own property is performing the building construction and whose property is
legally homesteaded under all applicable state and federal laws in their name as the recorded legal owner.
However, homeowners are not exempt from the city's permitting requirements.
(Ordinance 080805-1 adopted 8/5/08)
State law reference–Texas Residential Construction Commission Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch. 401 et seq.
Sec. 3.01.002 Permit fees
Building permit fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule. (1997 Code, sec. 150.02)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/221
Sec. 3.01.003 Enclosure of subfloor area required on permanent habitations
All structures used as places of habitation, including mobile homes and conventional structures, shall have the
outside wall of said habitation extend to, or below, the ground level on which such habitation is located, on or
before the [date] of February 22, 1986, as a factor of safety to preclude access by children, animals or trash
beneath the habitation. (1997 Code, sec. 152.05)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.02.001–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Codes*
Sec. 3.02.051 Adoption
(a) The 2009 editions of the International Building Code and the International Residential Code are hereby
adopted by reference as if copied fully herein. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(1), (B))
Secs. 3.02.052–3.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.02.101 Adoption
(a) The most recent edition of the Standard Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully
herein.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(6), (B))
Secs. 3.02.102–3.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Gas Code
Sec. 3.02.151 Adoption
(a) The most recent edition of the Standard Gas Code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully herein.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/221
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(3), (B))
Secs. 3.02.152–3.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Electricity*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.201 Enforcement by civil action; injunction
As a cumulative means and remedy for enforcement of this division, the city may sue for and collect any fine or
fines imposed for violations hereof by civil action in any court having jurisdiction, and in the same or separate
action may obtain an injunction against further or threatened violations hereof. (1997 Code, sec. 151.19)
Secs. 3.02.202–3.02.230 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.02.231 Adoption
(a) The most recent edition of the National Electrical Code is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth fully
in this division.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 151.01)
Sec. 3.02.232 Compliance
All persons, whether licensed electrical contractors, those working under their supervision or persons doing
work in their own homes, shall do all work of the kind regulated in this division in the way and manner and
using materials as specified herein. (1997 Code, sec. 151.02)
Sec. 3.02.233 Permit required
No person shall do or cause another to do any work upon or install any electrical work, such as is regulated by
this division, at any place in this city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the electrical inspector,
except as specifically allowed otherwise herein. (1997 Code, sec. 151.03)
Sec. 3.02.234 Permit and inspection fees
Fees as listed in section 3.01.002 shall be paid to the city for all electrical work done in the city for which a
permit is issued or is required by this division. Such fees shall be paid to the city secretary or his designated
agent and will be payable upon completion of the work in each instance or on such other terms as may be
allowed by the electrical inspector. (1997 Code, sec. 151.04)
Sec. 3.02.235 Approval by electrical inspector required prior to turning on current
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/221
No person shall turn or cause any other person to turn an electric current into any newly installed or previously
used electrical work, or into any electrical work previously used and which has been disconnected and repairs or
additions made thereon, until and unless authorized by the electrical inspector. (1997 Code, sec. 151.05)
Secs. 3.02.236–3.02.270 Reserved
Part III. Electrical Inspector
Sec. 3.02.271 Office created
There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector. The inspector shall be appointed by the city council.
Such appointee shall be a practical and skillful electrician, and have had at least five years of practical
experience. (1997 Code, sec. 151.15)
Sec. 3.02.272 Powers and duties
(a) Certificate of inspection for work covered by permit. Upon the completion and receipt of final inspection
papers covering work upon which a permit has been issued, the electrical inspector's department shall make final
inspection, and if found to comply with this division a certificate of inspection shall be issued stating that the
work has been done according to the provisions of this division and the rules governing the respective class to
which it belongs.
(b) Additions to old work. The electrical inspector may refuse to issue a permit on an addition to old work
where the old work is in an unsafe condition, until such a condition is changed to come up to a satisfactory
condition, and all light, heat, and power companies shall be notified not to make service connections until they
receive clearance permission from the city electrical department.
(c) Inspection of buildings generally. Upon the application of any individual and upon the payment of the
applicable fee or fees, the electrical inspector shall inspect any building in the corporate limits of this city, and if
the work is not safe, a statement of the changes necessary to make it conform to these regulations shall be
issued, provided the electrical work in such building or structure has been done by a duly licensed electrician.
(d) Dangerous wiring. The electrical inspector may inspect and reinspect all overhead, underground, and
interior wires and apparatus conducting current for light, heat and power, and when said apparatus is found to be
in a condition dangerous to life or property, he shall notify the owner thereof to replace it in a safe condition
within 48 hours, or be subject to the penalties provided in this code; except, in cases where more than 48 hours
are required to do such work, the electrical inspector may extend such time. Whenever it shall become necessary,
the electrical inspector shall call upon the department of police, which shall assist in the enforcement of this
division.
(e) Inspection of light plants. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to inspect all public and isolated
light plants now or hereafter in operation at least once in each year, or more often if application is made by the
owners thereof. They shall see that any dangerous or defective machinery, wires or apparatus is removed or
repaired immediately at the expense of the owner, or his agent, of said property.
(f) Unused apparatus outside buildings. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to cause all dead wires,
unused poles or electrical apparatus on the outside of buildings or in streets or alleys to be removed at the
expense of the owners thereof by giving said owners written notice.
(g) Inspection of electric lines. The electrical inspector shall make a thorough inspection of all lines of all
companies owning wires in the corporate limits of this city, at least once each year, and where such lines are
defective and dangerous to life and property, he shall notify the company owning same to repair the defective
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/221
material at once. Any company refusing or failing to make such repairs within 48 hours after notification shall
be subject to the penalties provided in this code.
(h) Inspection of new buildings during construction. The electrical inspector may be called upon as many
times as required to inspect new buildings in the course of construction in order not to delay construction, and
must inspect such work within 48 hours from the time notice is received, such time to start from the time
stamped upon the ticket by the city secretary, Sundays and holidays excepted.
(i) Concealed wiring. The electrical inspector shall have the authority to demand building contractors or other
persons in charge to open such work that in any manner conceals electrical wiring that has been closed without
his knowledge or permission, and in no case shall the inspector issue clearance until he is satisfied that the work
is in accordance with the provisions of this division. The inspector shall also have the right to refuse to issue a
clearance on any wiring that is concealed in such manner [that he can] not fully satisfy himself that it has been
done in compliance with this division.
(j) Permits. The electrical inspector shall issue permits for electrical work in conformity with this division.
When he deems it necessary, he may require plans and specifications and a complete feeder layout of electrical
work, and when such plans, specifications, and layout are demanded it shall be a violation of this division for
any person to install any part of the electrical work concerned until the electrical inspector approves the
proposed installation.
(k) Notice to repair unsafe installation. The electrical inspector is authorized to make an inspection of any
electrical work within this city at any time, and where he finds any electrical work to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition or is deemed to be an interference with the work of the fire department, he shall notify the person
owning, using, or operating such electrical work to place same in a safe, secure, and non-interfering condition.
Any person failing, neglecting, or refusing within ten days after receiving such notice to commence the making
of necessary repairs or changes shall be deemed guilty of violating this division, and every day which shall
elapse thereafter until such person shall commence the making of such repairs or changes shall be a separate
offense. At the time the electrical inspector gives the above notice, he shall also notify the public utilities which
supply electricity to or through such electrical work of such condition, and, unless the necessary repairs or
changes have been made within said period of ten days, it shall be the duty of such public utilities to disconnect
the current so supplying such work with electricity.
(1997 Code, sec. 151.16)
Sec. 3.02.273 Appeal of decisions
Any person aggrieved by a decision or ruling by the electrical inspector shall have the right to appeal to the
board of electrical examiners by giving a notice in writing to the city secretary stating briefly his grievance and
giving his correct name and address. The board may set a hearing on such appeal at any time after three days
from its filing and shall hear the relevant testimony of all parties concerned and promptly render a decision,
which shall be final. (1997 Code, sec. 151.17)
Sec. 3.02.274 Interference with inspector
No person shall obstruct the electrical inspector in the performance of any of his duties under this division, nor
deny or impede his access to any building or other place necessary for his entrance in making the inspections
herein required. (1997 Code, sec. 151.18)
Secs. 3.02.275–3.02.320 Reserved
Division 6. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 3.02.321 Adoption
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/221
(a) The most recent edition of the Standard Mechanical Code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully
herein.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(5), (B))
Secs. 3.02.322–3.02.370 Reserved
Division 7. Unsafe Buildings Code*
Sec. 3.02.371 Adoption
(a) The most recent edition of the Standard Code for the Elimination or Repair of Unsafe Buildings is hereby
adopted by reference as if copied fully herein.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(2), (B))
Secs. 3.02.372–3.02.420 Reserved
Division 8. Housing Code*
Sec. 3.02.421 Adoption
(a) The most recent edition of the Standard Housing Code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully
herein.
(b) Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.01(A)(4), (B))
ARTICLE 3.03 DANGEROUS AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.03.001 Definitions; prohibited conditions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Dangerous structure. Any building, residence, house, fence, shed, awning, or other structure of any kind, or any
part thereof, as well as the premises on which it stands or is attached, that falls within the definition of a “public
nuisance” according to this section.
Person in charge (of a dangerous building). Includes the owner, occupant, person in possession, caretaker,
lessor, agent, and lienholder of any dangerous structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/221
Public nuisance. Any structure as described and defined as follows shall be, and the same is, hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and is unlawful:
(1) Any building with roof, ceiling, floors, sills, or foundations, or any combination thereof, rotted
or decayed and falling apart, windows out, uninhabitable, untenantable and unsightly, due to the
obsolescence and deterioration caused by neglect or vandalism or fire damage or old age or exposure
to the elements;
(2) Any building in danger of falling and injuring any person or any property of another;
(3) Any building which is a fire menace due to its dilapidated condition or which has an
accumulation of rubbish or trash which is likely to become a fire, or be set on fire, in and around said
building and endanger the person or property of another; or
(4) Any building which is damp or in an unsanitary condition, which is likely to spread or cause
disease or sickness.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.15)
Sec. 3.03.002 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article for which no specific penalty is provided
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1.01.009 of this Code of Ordinances.
(b) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof be fined in any sum not less than $10.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the $2,000.00 maximum fine hereunder shall only apply if the violation is a violation of a provision
governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse; if the provision does
not govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, the maximum
permissible fine shall be $500.00 rather than the $2,000.00; and each and each [every] day's violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or other person in charge of such dangerous
structure, under the provisions of this article, shall be a corporation and shall violate any of such provisions, then
such corporation or the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation, or manager, agent,
or employee of such corporation, shall be severally liable for the penalties herein provided for violation in
accordance with the provisions of Tex. Penal Code, sections 7.22 and 7.23.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.99)
Sec. 3.03.003 Authority of building inspector
(a) The city council shall appoint a person to be the building inspector for the city and the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector, any building, fence, shed, awning, or any erection of
any kind, or any part thereof, appears to be a dangerous structure in accordance with this article, the building
inspector shall order the person in charge of the dangerous structure to commence repairs or to take down and
remove the same or any part thereof within ten days after notice is served or published as directed by order of
the building inspector.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.16)
Sec. 3.03.004 Examination of buildings and structures; notice of violation
(a) Examination of structure; written notice of violation. The building inspector shall examine or cause to be
examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous, damaged, or unsafe, and if such is
found to be an unsafe or dangerous structure under the provisions of this article or other effective ordinances of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/221
the city, the building inspector shall give the person or persons in charge of the dangerous structure written
notice stating the defects found to exist in violation of this article or in violation of any other effective chapter or
ordinance of the city.
(b) Service of notice. Service of notice from the building inspector may be by personal service or certified
mail, return receipt requested. Notice is presumed to be received by mailing such notice to the address of said
person in charge of the dangerous structure as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or of record in the county
clerk's office. Notice to any lienholder shall be presumed to be effective when sent by certified mail to the
lienholder's last known address.
(c) Time limits; vacation of structure. The notice from the building inspector shall require the person in charge
of the building or premises to commence the required repairs, improvements, or demolition and removal of the
dangerous structure within ten days from the date such notice is mailed to the person in charge of such
dangerous structure, and all such work shall be completed within 30 days from the date of notice. Such notice
shall also require the dangerous structure to be vacated forthwith and not occupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the building inspector.
(d) Abatement by city upon failure to comply with notice. In the event the person in charge of such dangerous
structure shall fail or refuse to commence repairs or to remove the dangerous structure or any part thereof within
ten days after notice is served or published as directed by order of the building inspector, then the city council
shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of the city on account of the person or persons
in charge of the dangerous structure and assess the expense on the property on which the structure stands or to
which it is attached in such manner as may be directed in the order of the city council.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.17)
Sec. 3.03.005 Placarding
If the dangerous structure is inhabited at the time the notice is served, the building inspector shall cause to be
posted at each entrance at such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY, Building
Inspector, City of Big Lake.” Such notice shall bear the date of posting and remain posted until the required
repairs, demolition, or removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the
building inspector, and no person, except the building inspector or his designee, shall enter the building except
for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the building. (1997 Code, sec. 150.18)
Sec. 3.03.006 Notice of hearing; contents and service of notices
(a) The city council shall give to the person or persons in charge of such dangerous structure notice of the
public hearing before the city council regarding possible action to be taken by the city council on the inspector's
order directing the removal or completion of the work and assessing the cost thereof against the property.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.19)
(b) Notice of all proceedings shall be given:
(1) By personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the
affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the
records in the office of the county clerk if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the
deed of trust establishing the lien and/or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the
county clerk; and
(2) To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement
situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/221
(c) The notice must be posted and either personally delivered or mailed on or before the 10th day before the
date of the hearing and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation on one occasion on or before the 10th day before the date fixed
for the hearing.
(Ordinance adopting Code
(d) If the person in charge of the dangerous structure shall appear before the city council at such hearing, no
further notice or notices shall be required, but if he fails to appear, the notice of any order of the city council
made at such hearing shall be served by mailing a copy of such order to the person in charge of the dangerous
structure at the person's last known address by certified mail or, if there is no last known address, by publication
of a copy of such order at least one time in a newspaper of [general circulation] in the city, or other newspaper of
general circulation.
(e) Service of any notice shall be complete on the date which the notice is mailed or upon the date said notice
is published in the newspaper.
(f) A notice of a hearing sent to a person in charge of any dangerous structure shall include a statement that
the person in charge will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(g) Any notice served on any person in charge of a dangerous structure by the building inspector shall include
the physical address of the property, a statement that said property is in violation of this article, the nature of
such violation, and a statement that the repair, removal, or demolition to remedy said violation shall be
commenced within ten days of the date of notice.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.19)
Sec. 3.03.007 Hearing procedures; order by council
(a) Within ten days from the date the order of the city council is signed, the city shall file a copy of the order
in the office of the city secretary and publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing
the street address or legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the
results of the order, and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(b) Promptly after the hearing, the city shall mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the
order to the owner of the dangerous structure, and if the owner does not take the ordered action within the
allotted time, the city shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to any
other person in charge of the dangerous structure.
(c) At the public hearing held under this article, the city shall require the person in charge of the dangerous
structure to take the following measures within 30 days of the public hearing: secure the structure from
unauthorized entry, or repair, remove, or demolish the structure, unless the person in charge establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably performed within 30 days.
(d) If the city council allows the person in charge more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the
structure, the council shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work
and shall require the person in charge to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry
while work is being performed, as determined by the council.
(e) All required work shall be completed no later than 90 days after the hearing unless the person in charge
submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing and establishes at the hearing that the work
cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. The person in
charge of the dangerous structure shall submit to the city council progress reports to the city council as to any
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/221
work performed after 90 days. The council may require the person in charge to appear before the council to
demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.20)
Sec. 3.03.008 Abatement by city
Should the owner or other person in charge of such building fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or demolish said building or structure or portion thereof, the building inspector shall notify
the city council of such act and the city council may, after public hearing, order the completion of the work
specified in such notice or order such building or structure demolished or removed and may cause the cost of
such work to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property. (1997 Code, sec. 150.21)
Sec. 3.03.009 Recovery of city's expenses; lien
After the demolition or repairs have been made at the expense of the city, a statement of the expenses shall be
mailed to the person or persons in charge of the dangerous structure. In the event the statement shall remain
unpaid for a period of 30 days, then the city may commence an action in any court having jurisdiction to recover
the expenses assessed by the city council and for court costs and attorneys' fees for prosecuting the action. In
addition to the remedies set out in this section, the city may attach a lien against the property, unless the property
is a homestead, in the amount of the expenses incurred by the city for repairs, demolition, postage, publication
costs, recording fees, and any other costs related to the prosecution of the matter. (1997 Code, sec. 150.22)
Sec. 3.03.010 Disposition of personal property not removed by owner
(a) Any personal property not removed by the owner or person in possession of the building that may be found
in any dangerous structure that is considered by the building inspector or city council to have sufficient value
may be removed and sold at a public sale, and the consideration received shall be used to reimburse the city for
the cost of demolition or repairs and the cost of transporting, storing, and selling such personal property.
(b) In the event that the property is offered for sale to the public and the property does not sell, it may be
disposed of in any manner authorized by the city council.
(c) The city is not obligated to remove any personal property or other fixtures from the building prior to
demolition.
(1997 Code, sec. 150.23)
ARTICLE 3.04 MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the words defined in this section shall have the following meanings:
Application. The form prescribed by the city council and designated “application for a mobile home permit.”
Building officer or inspector. The legally designated inspection authority of the city or his authorized
representative.
Chassis. A metal frame with cross-members and bracing, with one or more permanent axles, and wheels which
may or may not be removable, upon which a mobile home is built, and to which it is permanently attached for
the purpose of making a structure capable of being towed from place to place.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/221
City health authority. The legally designated head of the health department of the city or his authorized
representative.
City official. The legally designated head of a city department or his authorized representative when acting in an
official capacity.
Fire marshal. The legally designated fire inspection/prevention officer of the city or his authorized
representative, when acting in an official capacity.
Individual, or Individually. Either of these words shall refer to a mobile home placed on a mobile home lot
which is interspersed among conventional structures; a mobile home not in a mobile home park.
Mobile home. A portable structure used as a permanent or semi-permanent habitation or place of work, built on a
permanent chassis, with or without a permanent foundation, and including, in the context of this article, those
structures commonly referred to as mobile homes, doublewide mobile homes, and trailer houses, and shall
include all appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, electrical
system, steps or porches, and add-ons.
Mobile home lot. A plot of ground designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home not within the
boundaries of a mobile home park.
Mobile home park. A tract of land, laid out and developed, to provide two or more mobile home spaces for rent
or lease to mobile home owners, or to rent or lease mobile homes owned by the management of the mobile home
park, total development of which is confined to a specified tract of land in compliance with article 10.02 which
regulates subdivision development.
Mobile home space. A plot of ground designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home within a mobile
home park.
Permanent. When referring to a mobile home, RV, or any other portable dwelling shall be considered permanent
structure, such mobile home, RV, or portable dwelling is used as a place of habitation or a place of work for
forty-five (45) days.
Plot plan. A graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land
included in the plane and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the
relation of each use to that adjoining the boundaries of the property.
Recreational vehicle or RV park. A tract of land, laid out and developed, to provide two or more RV spaces for
rent or lease to RV owners, or to rent or lease RVs owned by the management of the RV park, total development
of which is confined to a specified tract of land in compliance with article 10.02, which regulates subdivision
development.
Recreational vehicles or RVs. Those vehicles specifically manufactured for the purpose of recreation, vacation,
or travel. They include, but are not limited to, travel trailers, motor homes, and campers.
Replacement. The act of moving a mobile home from a mobile home space and replacing it with another mobile
home or with the same mobile home.
RV space. A plot of ground designed for the accommodation of one (1) RV.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. I, adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.002 Penalty; additional remedies
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association in violation of any part of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor offense, and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined in any amount not exceeding $200.00; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/221
each day such violation is continued shall be considered a separate offense. The city, its officers, agents or
employees are hereby specifically authorized to enforce this article by all legal and equitable remedies,
including, but not limited to, the remedy of injunction by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ordinance 11-08-
02-1, sec. X, adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.003 Permit for placement of mobile home
(a) Approval required; application procedure; inspection of installation. This application, available at the city
office, shall be completed in its entirety by each mobile home owner, and shall be routed to the building officer.
The building officer shall inspect and approve the placement of each mobile home prior to final placement of
any mobile home on a mobile home space. Failure of the mobile home owner to comply with the procedures and
requirements of this article shall result in rejection of the application by the building officer and shall result in
withholding of utilities until compliance is obtained. In the event utilities have been connected in an emergency
situation where health of the occupants of a mobile home might be endangered, with or without the consent of
the building officer, upon termination of the emergency, the building officer may require utilities be
disconnected not in compliance with the requirements of this article and/or other applicable ordinances of the
city, until compliance is obtained.
(b) Application fee. This fee, though designated as an application fee, is in actuality, a fee for inspection, and
shall be imposed prior to the time of initial placement of every mobile home, and at every time of replacement,
because inspection will be required at each of the above named. The fee assessed for this purpose shall be those
amounts prescribed by the city council from time to time, whether the mobile home is used as a habitation or a
place of work.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. III, adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.004 Compliance with codes and standards
(a) No mobile home nor any RV nor any other structure which would be regulated by this article will be
permitted to be set up, nor shall any utilities be furnished to any such structure, when the lot or space said
structure is to be set on does not meet the specifications set forth in this article, or the building and city codes of
the city. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. II, adopted 8/2/11)
(b) The building and fire codes adopted by the city council, and in current use by the city, shall be the
authority in every situation of contention, and shall be administered by the building officer, fire marshal, city
health authority and city officials providing utility services. Where necessary, the building officer shall serve as
liaison between all parties, and shall act on the final decision of all.
(c) A copy of the building and fire codes in current use by the city shall be available for study by the public in
the office of the city secretary during regular business hours.
(d) No mobile home shall be permitted within a designated fire district established by the city council, nor
shall any recreational vehicle be permitted within a designated fire district when deemed to be permanent.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. IV, adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.005 Specifications for installation of mobile homes
Mobile homes, having qualities unique to them, are subject to additional requirements not required of standard
construction. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Tie-downs. Each mobile home placed on any mobile home space or on a mobile home lot
within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, shall be securely anchored to the
ground as specified in the building code in current use by the city within a reasonable length of time
after placement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/221
(2) Skirting or underpinning. Each mobile home placed on any mobile home space or on any
mobile home lot within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, shall have
skirting or underpinning on all sides to preclude the entrance of children and animals and
accumulation of trash in the area between the chassis of the mobile home and the ground space
within forty-five (45) days of placement.
(3) Utilities; encroachment on street or easement; use of alleys. As with all structures, gas risers,
both at the meter and at the structure, shall be of metal, and gas service lines shall be buried. All
plumbing, with the exception of yard faucets, shall be contained beneath the structure and shall not
extend beyond this area except beneath the ground surface. Alleys, streets, rights-of-way and
easements shall be scrupulously observed with no encroachment. Alleys shall not be used as
thoroughfares nor for parking.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. V, adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.006 Lot requirements for recreational vehicles placed in mobile home park or on mobile home
lot
(a) RVs placed in mobile home parks or on mobile home lots less than forty-five (45) days are excluded from
tie-down and underpinning requirements.
(b) RVs placed in mobile home parks or on mobile home lots at any time must meet the same lot requirements
as set down for mobile homes.
(1) Width. Minimum of forty (40) feet on the narrow dimension.
(2) Length. Minimum of eighty (80) feet on the long dimension.
(3) Total area. Minimum total area not to be less than three thousand, five hundred (3,500) square
feet.
(4) Spacing. Minimum of twenty (20) feet from mobile homes at all points.
(c) Any and all RVs whether individually placed or in mobile home parks which are permanent must meet
those requirements as set down for mobile homes. Those requirements include but are not limited to tie-down,
underpinning, lot and space size.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. IX(B), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.007 Exception for recreational vehicle parked at premises of permanent resident
Any recreational vehicle parked at the premises of a permanent resident, whether for storage by the resident, or
by visitors to the resident, when parked off public property, rights-of-way, easements, and private property of
others, and occupied only occasionally as a guest habitation for a period of not more than forty-five (45) days
continuously, and when not attached to public utilities, other than water by a garden hose and/or electricity by
extension from the dwelling of the resident, shall not be required to make application for a mobile home permit,
nor shall such travel trailer, motor home or recreational vehicle be subject to any other of the requirements of
this article. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. IX(A), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.008 Minimum size of mobile home space and mobile home lot
(a) Width. A mobile home space or mobile home lot shall be not less than forty (40) feet on the narrow
dimension, whether the mobile home is individually placed or in a mobile home park.
(b) Length. A mobile home space or mobile home lot shall be not less than eighty (80) feet on the length
dimension, whether the mobile home is individually placed or in a mobile home park.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/221
(c) Total area. A mobile home space or mobile home lot shall provide for a minimum area of not less than
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
(d) Distance between mobile homes. The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be
twenty (20) feet.
(e) Placement. A mobile home shall be placed on a mobile home space or mobile home lot to conform with
requirements for all other structures, having the same setback requirements. Placement requirements shall
include, but not be limited to, appurtenances of all types, and other buildings not a part of the mobile home
property.
(f) Exception. A mobile home space or mobile home lot, occupied on the effective date of this article, shall
not be affected by the requirements of this article, so long as the occupancy of such mobile home space or
mobile home lot is continuous by the same mobile home; with the exception that tie-downs will be mandatory
within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this article. Replacement, at any time following the effective
date of this article shall require that the mobile home space or mobile home lot so vacated conform to the
dimensional requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VI, adopted 8/2/11)
Secs. 3.04.009–3.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Mobile Home Parks
Sec. 3.04.041 Development
Development of a mobile home park shall be in compliance with article 10.02, which sets forth requirements and
specifications for subdivision development both within the city and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city,
except that the dimensional requirements for minimum size of a mobile home space of this article shall prevail.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VII(A), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.042 Maintenance
Maintenance of a mobile home park to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the community is the
responsibility of the mobile home park owner, and shall include, but not be limited to, freedom from weeds, tall
grass, junk, trash, garbage, unsightly and unsanitary situations, fire hazards, and nuisances generally, and shall
include maintenance of access roadways and alleys. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VII(B), adopted 8/2/11)
Secs. 3.04.043–3.04.080 Reserved
Division 3. Recreational Vehicle Parks
Sec. 3.04.081 Development
Development of a recreational vehicle park shall be in compliance with article 10.02, which sets forth
requirements and specifications for subdivision development both within the city and in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VIII(A), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.082 Maintenance; utilities
(a) Maintenance. Maintenance of an RV park to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the community is the
responsibility of the RV park owner, and shall include, but not be limited to, freedom from weeds, tall grass,
junk, trash, garbage, unsightly and unsanitary situations, fire hazards, and nuisances generally, and shall include
maintenance of access roadways and alleys. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VIII(B), adopted 8/2/11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/221
(b) Utilities.
(1) All utilities in an RV park shall be the responsibility of the management of such parks.
(2) Said utilities shall include but not be limited to water, sewer, gas, electricity, and garbage
service.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VIII(C), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.083 Placement and spacing of recreational vehicles
(a) Placement of a recreational vehicle in a recreational vehicle park shall be limited to forty- five (45) days
except those which are for rent or lease by the management of that recreational vehicle park.
(b) No RV will be placed closer than five (5) feet to property lines and all setback lines will be observed.
(c) There will be a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet spacing between recreational vehicles at all points.
(Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VIII(D), adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 3.04.084 Mobile homes in recreational vehicle parks
Mobile homes in RV parks are expressly forbidden except when used as the habitat or business office for the
management of said park. (Ordinance 11-08-02-1, sec. VIII(E), adopted 8/2/11)
ARTICLE 3.05 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in Tex. Water Code sections 16.311 through 16.319, delegated the responsibility
to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council
does ordain this article. (1997 Code, sec. 153.01)
Sec. 3.05.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.02)
Sec. 3.05.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/221
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas.
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that the property is in a flood area.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.03)
Sec. 3.05.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage.
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.04)
Sec. 3.05.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a
request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is
refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/221
Development. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Elevated building. A nonbasement building, built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or, in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V,
to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated
building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. in the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated
building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of 44 CFR
60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the boundaries of the flood; mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related
erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zone A, M, and/or E.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 CFR 60.3, the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/221
floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term
“manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started; or, if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition,
substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.05)
Sec. 3.05.006 Applicability; jurisdiction
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (1997 Code, sec.
153.06)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/221
Sec. 3.05.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM), Community No. H-01, dated 12/19/75, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this article. (1997 Code, sec. 153.07)
Sec. 3.05.008 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (1997 Code, sec. 153.08)
Sec. 3.05.009 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (1997 Code, sec. 153.09)
Sec. 3.05.010 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements,
liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes. (1997 Code, sec. 153.10)
Sec. 3.05.011 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.11)
Secs. 3.05.012–3.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Development Permit
Sec. 3.05.041 Required
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. (1997 Code,
sec. 153.20)
Sec. 3.05.042 Application
Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by
him or her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location
of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/221
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.05.072(2).
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.05.101.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.21)
Sec. 3.05.043 Approval or denial
Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner.
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems.
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.22)
Secs. 3.05.044–3.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction Standards
Sec. 3.05.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/221
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage.
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.30)
Sec. 3.05.072 Specific standards where base flood elevation data provided
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.05.007, 3.05.101, or 3.05.073(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section
3.05.042(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1) of this section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/221
(1997 Code, sec. 153.31)
Sec. 3.05.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with
sections 3.05.002 through 3.05.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall meet development permit requirements of sections 3.05.041 through 3.05.043 and the provisions of this
division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.05.007 or 3.05.101 of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.32)
Secs. 3.05.074–3.05.100 Reserved
Division 4. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 3.05.101 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
(a) The city secretary is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR parts 59 through 77 (National Flood Insurance
Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/221
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state commission on environmental quality, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.05.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3 of this article.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.40)
Sec. 3.05.102 Variance procedures
(a) The city council, acting as the appeal board, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from
the requirements of this article. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.05.043 have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause; a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination
that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/221
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(j) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in
subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1997 Code, sec. 153.41)
ARTICLE 3.06 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.06.001 Petition to close streets
(a) Contents; use of tax rolls. All persons desiring to have the city council exercise its powers under Tex.
Transp. Code section 311.008 regarding the abandoning, altering, closing and vacating of streets, alleys, and
other public ways and portions thereof shall file their petition with the city secretary, in writing, directed to the
city council. Such petition shall contain a description of the street, alley, or portion thereof, as the case may be,
and attached to said request shall be a list of all owners abutting said street, alley, or portion thereof, as the case
may be, together with the last known address of all such owners. In the event that all abutting property owners
do not join in said petition, a statement shall be attached to said request showing the reason for nonparticipation
of those who have not signed. The Reagan County tax appraisal district shall make the city tax rolls available to
any petitioner under this section for the purpose of determining the names and addresses of all abutting property
owners, and the tax rolls shall be conclusive as to the names of the abutting property owners for the purpose of
this section.
(b) Fee. Upon the filing of such request with the city secretary as provided in subsection (a), an administration
fee shall be deposited with the city secretary in the amount of $75.00 to cover the expense of administering the
procedure outlined in this section, and the cost of mailing notices and release forms to all abutting property
owners. Such fee is nonrefundable.
(c) Notice to abutting property owners. Upon the filing of such request and fee as provided in subsection (a)
and (b), the city secretary shall mail notices of said request and release forms by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to all abutting property owners.
(d) Closing of portion of street. In the event the petition requests that only a portion of a through street, alley,
or public way which is open to public access from either direction is to be abandoned, altered, closed, or
vacated, then it shall be necessary for the petitioner to provide the city secretary with the names and last known
mailing addresses of all abutting property owners both for the portion to be closed and for that portion which is
to remain open in either direction up to the next intersection with another street, alley, or public way. Notices and
release forms will be mailed to all such abutting property owners for the closed and open portions of said street,
alley, or public way as provided in subsection (c) above.
(e) Action by council. The proposed action by the city council shall be placed on the agenda for the next
public meeting of the city council after the filing of the petition or such public meeting as the city council may
set, provided that at least ten days have elapsed from the date said request is filed until the date of said meeting
in order to allow sufficient time for the mailing of notices and release forms to the abutting property owners, and
provided further that the notice provisions of Tex. Gov't Code sections 551.001 through 551.146 are complied
with. The city council shall not act on such petition until such time as the city secretary has received an executed
release form from each of the abutting property owners listed in the petition. Notwithstanding any other
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/221
provisions of this section, the authority to open, close, or vacate any street or alley shall be at the sole discretion
of the city council, after due notice has been given to the abutting property owners. Such petition, if not acted
upon at the first public meeting at which it appears on the agenda, may be continued on the agenda to subsequent
public meetings if it is in the best interest of the parties and the public as the city council may in its sole
discretion determine.
(1997 Code, sec. 94.01)
State law reference–Closing of street or alley by general-law municipality, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.008.
Sec. 3.06.002 Street and road crossing
(a) Installation. No person shall install pipelines, electric lines, phone lines, fiber optic lines, or any other line
running across city streets or roads or adjacent to and in city street or road right-of-way except in the following
manner:
(1) Lines must be a minimum depth of 60 inches from the top of the bore, and shall run through a
metal conduit, SDR-7 poly conduit or C-900 PVC conduit extending beyond city right-of-way.
Conduit selection has to be listed on the road bore application for approval.
(2) The top of the bore shall be at least 60 inches beyond the lowest point of the city right-of-way
at the crossing point.
(3) Pipeline operators shall place a clearly identifying sign at the entrance and exit points of city
right-of-way. All signs shall state the appropriate notice as required by OSHA and/or DOT (noticewarning-
danger, the pipeline operator's name, the pipeline operator's 24 hour phone number and the
content of the pipeline).
(4) Pipeline operators shall bore under all city streets and roads, whether paved or unpaved. At no
time shall pipeline operators cut ditches across city streets or roads.
(5) Prior to construction of any line crossing and/or running in the city street or road right-of-way,
approval must be given by the city, through individual city secretary, public works director or the city
council as a whole.
(6) City cattle guards shall not be used as a conduit for a road crossing point for pipelines, etc.
(7) At no time shall city regulations circumvent federal or state pipeline guidelines or laws.
(8) Operator must contact city supervisor before covering a ditch.
(9) The city reserves the right to inspect, accept or reject road crossing construction.
(10) Track vehicles must be hauled when crossing city streets or roads.
(11) Some leeway may be granted for existing lines. However, all lines (in use or abandoned) shall
meet the marking standards required by the city, county and/or other regulatory agencies.
(12) All new construction shall meet all listed guidelines.
(13) Violators will be held responsible for all damages.
(14) The city secretary and/or public works director may approve the proposed underground road
crossing. If the application is denied, the applicant can appeal to the full city council, by requesting
the item be placed on the agenda at a regular city council meeting.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/221
(b) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00; and each day's
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. A person's conviction of an offense under this section
does not preclude the person's liability in a civil court.
(Ordinance 180320-01 adopted 3/20/18)
Secs. 3.06.003–3.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations*
Part I. In General
Secs. 3.06.031–3.06.070 Reserved
Part II. Protection of Utility Lines
Sec. 3.06.071 Penalty
Violation of any requirement of this part by any person, firm or corporation required herein to give notification
of intent to excavate shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as
prescribed in section 1.01.009. (1997 Code, sec. 94.99)
Sec. 3.06.072 Compilation of list of excavators; notification of damage prevention program
(a) It shall be the duty of the director of utilities of the city to compile and maintain a current list of all
persons, firms, or corporations having occasion to excavate for whatever purpose within the area where gas or
other utilities might be located within the city, and to update such list on an annual basis and maintain a file of
such persons, firms, or corporations for public examination at all times.
(b) All persons, firms, or corporations identified in accordance with subsection (a) hereof shall be notified by
mail of the purpose and intent of the damage prevention program, and a copy of the ordinance from which this
part derives shall be included therewith.
(1997 Code, sec. 94.10)
Sec. 3.06.073 Requirements prior to excavating
It shall be the duty of every person, firm, or corporation, before excavation is begun in the streets, alleys, rightsof-
way, or easements of the city, first to notify the city office at city hall of the intent to excavate, and then to
delay all excavation until such time as a line location order is issued by the city for such excavation, and until
utility lines in the area are located by the director of utilities, or his agent, and said lines are marked and/or
pointed out to the excavator. (1997 Code, sec. 94.11)
Sec. 3.06.074 Line location order
A line location order will be used to record the notification of intent to excavate by any person, firm, or
corporation. The line location order will be a consecutively pre-numbered form, each form to be accounted for
by the director of utilities for a period of not less than three years. Each line location order shall contain the
following information:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/221
(1) Name of the person giving notification.
(2) Name of the excavator who will perform the excavation.
(3) Telephone number of the excavator.
(4) Location of the planned excavation.
(5) Date and time excavation is to begin.
(6) Such other information as may be pertinent for clarity of the order.
(1997 Code, sec. 94.12)
Sec. 3.06.075 Marking of utility lines
The director of utilities, or his agent, shall respond to the notification by the excavator within two working days
after notification, and shall, by an on-site meeting with the excavator, make the excavator aware of the existence
of utility lines in the area, and shall locate such lines, and mark them with flags, paint, or other means as
necessary in the opinion of the director of utilities. (1997 Code, sec. 94.13)
Sec. 3.06.076 Post-excavation inspection
The director of utilities shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of the excavation site after excavation is
completed or [prior] to covering said excavation, if it is deemed necessary [due to] proximity to utility lines or
because of the nature of excavation, and shall inspect such lines for leaks or other line damage. The excavator
shall be notified of this requirement at the time of issuance of the line location order, and shall be present at the
inspection if such inspection is required. (1997 Code, sec. 94.14)
Sec. 3.06.077 Liability for damages
The excavator shall be liable for any and all other damage and/or loss to any and all injured parties, whether
public or private. Whether or not a line location order is obtained prior to excavation, the excavator shall be
liable to the city for actual damages incurred, including material, equipment and labor for repairs by city
employees, and the value for loss of commodity. (1997 Code, sec. 94.15)
ARTICLE 3.07 SIGNS*
Sec. 3.07.001 Height restrictions
(a) Signs may not be erected that exceeds an overall height of 42-1/2 feet.
(b) A roof sign that has a solid sign face surface may not at any point exceed 24 feet above the roof level.
(c) A roof sign that has an open sign face in which the uniform open area between individual letter or shapes
is not less than 40 percent of the total gross area of the sign face may not at any point exceed 40 feet above roof
level.
(d) Permitted signs may not be erected closer than 900 feet apart.
(e) A permitted sign may not be erected within five feet of the highway or street right-of-way.
(f) A sign face may not exceed 672 square feet in area, 25 feet in height or 60 feet in length.
(g) A sign may not contain or be illuminated by flashing, intermittent, or moving lights, including any type of
screen using animated or scrolling displays.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/221
(h) Except for a relocated sign or any new sign may be illuminated but only by:
(1) Upward lighting of no more than 4 luminaries per direction of the sign face or faces of the
structure; or
(2) Downward lighting of no more than 4 luminaries per direction of the sign faces or faces of the
structure.
(i) Lights that are a part of or illuminate a sign:
(1) Must be shielded, directed, and positioned to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed
at any portion of the traveled ways of a highway;
(2) May not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause vision impairment of a driver of any
motor vehicle on a regulated highway or otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor
vehicle; and
(3) May not obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal.
(j) A temporary protrusion may not be illuminated by flashing or moving lights or enhanced reflective
material that creates the illusion of flashing or moving lights.
(k) Reflective paint or reflective disks may be used on a sign face only if the paint or disks does not cause an
undue distraction to the traveling public.
(l) A sign may not be located in a place that creates a safety hazard, causes a driver to be unduly distracted, or
interferes with an official traffic sign, signal or device.
(Ordinance 14-11-18-1 adopted 11/18/14)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 4.01.001 Salt water disposal facilities prohibited
No salt water disposal facilities shall be allowed within the incorporated city. (Ordinance 14-10-21-1 adopted
10/21/14)
ARTICLE 4.02 AMUSEMENTS*
Sec. 4.02.001 Applicability
(a) In this article, section 4.02.004 shall apply to all shows, performances, exhibitions, medicine shows,
panoramic or view shows, menageries, carnivals, wild west shows or rodeo shows, acrobatic performances, wax
shows, dramatic or theatrical productions, skating rinks or wrestling arenas held in or exhibited upon the streets
or under any tent, or in any airdome, hall or building, within the city limits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/221
(b) Each person aiding or abetting the holder of such exhibitions, shows, or performances shall be equally
guilty of a violation of this article when said exhibitions, shows, or performances attempt to show or operate
without a permit.
(1997 Code, sec. 110.01)
Sec. 4.02.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to an organization established for the purpose of holding intermittent events for the
advancement of better living conditions, better agriculture, more and better livestock, or more efficient farm and
home equipment in the county and the advancement of the potential possibilities of the city, industrially,
commercially and financially. Neither shall the provisions of this article apply to any scholastic event, church
activity, or other not-for-profit activity. (1997 Code, sec. 110.02)
Sec. 4.02.003 Authority of council
The city council shall have full supervision of the regulating and policing of all exhibitions, shows, and
performances as set out in section 4.02.001(a). (1997 Code, sec. 110.03)
Sec. 4.02.004 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, conduct, exhibit, or maintain any show, performance, exhibition, or
place of amusement of any character whatsoever, within the city limits, unless a permit to hold such exhibitions,
shows, or performances is first obtained as provided in section 4.02.006. (1997 Code, sec. 110.04)
Sec. 4.02.005 Application for permit
All applications for a permit under this article shall be made to the city secretary at least 24 hours in advance of
the proposed opening date or time of an exhibition, show, or performance. Said application shall state the type of
exhibition, show, or performance; whether it will be in a tent, building, airdome, or open arena; the number of
people to be employed; the proposed opening date; the period of time for which the permit is wanted; and the
hours and days of the week said exhibition, show, or performance will be open to the public. (1997 Code, sec.
110.05)
Sec. 4.02.006 Issuance of permit; fees
(a) If, in the opinion of the city secretary, the proposed exhibition, show, or performance appears to be
composed of lawful amusements or is a lawful enterprise, he shall issue a permit under this article upon the
payment of the fee herein provided for.
(b) The fee for any permit issued under this article shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. This permit fee
and charge is intended to be used only for the purpose of defraying the expense of the city in regulating and
inspecting exhibitions, shows, or performances and the employment of extra police necessary to handle unusual
crowds, and such fee is hereby appropriated to use as salary for such purpose.
(1997 Code, sec. 110.06)
Sec. 4.02.007 Location; hours of operation
The location and hours of an exhibition, show, or performance shall be subject to the approval of the city. (1997
Code, sec. 110.07)
Sec. 4.02.008 Operation without valid permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an exhibition, show, or performance, in whole or in part, after its
permit expires or after it is revoked for cause, and all persons assisting in such operation shall be guilty of an
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/221
offense. (1997 Code, sec. 110.08)
ARTICLE 4.03 ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS*
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Interstate commerce. Soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to take orders for, any goods, wares,
merchandise, photographs, or magazines which at the time the order is taken are in another state or will be
produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders.
Itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor. Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
engaged in going from house to house or from place to place in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or
offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines
or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines.
(1997 Code, sec. 111.01)
Sec. 4.03.002 Purpose
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state, and the city, for the public
safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of said city, and all of the provisions hereof
shall be constructed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
Sec. 4.03.003 License or permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association, including those
having no permanent business location in the city, to go from house to house or from place to place, or setting up
a temporary business location within the city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, soliciting, selling,
taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs,
newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, without having first applied for and
obtained a license or permit to do so from the city secretary of said city. It shall be unlawful to sell or solicit in
the city without carrying such license or permit while engaged in selling or soliciting any of the aforementioned.
Sec. 4.03.004 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in
the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law.
Sec. 4.03.005 Application for license or permit
All itinerant merchants or vendors in interstate commerce or otherwise, shall first make written application to the
city secretary for a license or permit providing the following information:
(1) Name, home address and local address, if any, photo identification, home and work phone
numbers of registrant.
(2) Name, address, and phone number of the person, firm, or corporation, if any, that he or she
represents or for whom or through orders are to be solicited or cleared.
(3) Nature of the products or services which are to be sold, or for which orders are to be solicited.
(4) Whether registrant, upon any sale or order shall demand or receive or accept payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/221
(5) Period of time registrant wishes to solicit or sell within the city or ETJ.
Sec. 4.03.006 License or permit fees
Each itinerant merchant or vendor proposing to sell on foot, by hand cart or push cart, from a wagon, motor
vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance shall pay a permit or license fee as listed in the fee schedule.
Sec. 4.03.007 Door-to-door hours
Door-to-door sales shall only be permitted between one half-hour after sunrise and one half-hour before sunset.
Sec. 4.03.008 Surrender license or permit
Itinerant merchants or vendors shall, upon request by the code enforcement officer or other person designated by
the city secretary of the city, or upon request by any law enforcement officer, immediately surrender the license
or permit.
Sec. 4.03.009 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article or failing to observe any provisions
hereof, shall upon conviction, be fined a sum of not less than $10.00, nor more than $500.00. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day any violation occurs or continues.
(Ordinance 171219-01 adopted 1/3/18)
ARTICLE 4.04 OIL AND GAS WELLS*
Sec. 4.04.001 Regulations adopted by reference
The city hereby adopts by reference, as if set forth in full in this section, the most recent ordinance regulating oil
and gas well drilling within the city limits. Copies of such ordinance shall be available for public inspection at
city offices during regular business hours. (1997 Code, sec. 112.01)
ARTICLE 4.05 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Purpose and intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
(b) The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
(c) Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this article to restrict or deny adults access to sexually
oriented entertainment, or to restrict or deny distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment access
to their intended market.
(d) Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.01)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/221
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult video store.
(1) A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or
rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
(A) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, compact disc visual discs, digital visual discs,
computer pictures, slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(B) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
(2) A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized
as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as either:
(A) Two percent or more of its gross revenue is derived from the sale or rental of the
specified materials that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(B) Two percent or more of its inventory consists of the specified materials that depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of total nudity or semi-nudity;
(2) Live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact visual discs, digital visual discs, computer
pictures, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; [and] provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact visual
discs, digital visual discs, computer pictures, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; including
those that have a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult
type of photographic reproductions;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/221
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours or based on an
hourly rate; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours or based on an hourly rate.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, compact visual discs, digital visual discs, computer pictures, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown, which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity, or live performances characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person,
or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a body rub, bathing of the body, or
striptease for another person for the purpose of sexual arousal.
Escort agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Establishment. Any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical
areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or state of nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola
of the breast.
Permittee. A person in whose name a special use permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued,
and the person who owns the building and/or land on which the business is located, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit.
Person. An individual human, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership, or other such company, joint venture, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association, corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context.
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and/or areola of the
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers any of the following for consideration:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/221
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex, when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more internal
portion of the female genitals.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) through (3) above.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than 25%, as the floor area existed on the effective date of this article, or under a certificate of occupancy
therefor.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, leasing or subleasing of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.02)
Sec. 4.05.003 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/221
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.03)
Sec. 4.05.004 Location
(a) This article allows the opportunity for consideration of special use permits to be issued for sexually
oriented businesses in the commercial district zoning only.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.04)
(b) The following uses may be permitted within the city by special use permit only in the industrial zoning
district:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(c) No use listed in subsection (b) above shall be established within the locational restrictions as set forth in
the zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(d) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises as described in subsection
(c) above, or to the nearest boundary of any residentially zoned district, or from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which a sexually oriented business is proposed to be located to the nearest exterior wall of any other
sexually oriented business.
(e) For the purposes of this section, if sexually oriented businesses cannot be located within a minimum of 3%
of the existing zoning districts within the city limits, including all nonconforming use sexually oriented
businesses, due to limitations as set forth in this section, the city will, upon written request from an applicant,
review the current zoning districts and shall allow zoning alterations as necessary so that a minimum of 3% of
the city-wide zoning, cumulatively within the city limits, can be occupied by a special use permitted sexually
oriented business, including all nonconforming use sexually oriented businesses.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/221
(1997 Code, sec. 113.04)
Sec. 4.05.005 Exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, compact visual disc, digital visual disc, computer picture, slide or other video reproduction that
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The application for a special use permit for a sexually oriented business shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises, showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
(A) A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
(B) The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be
conspicuously posted.
(C) A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint
shall not be required.
(D) However, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus one foot.
(E) The building official may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications, if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of
the premises is correct and has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the
prior approval of an amendment to the special use permit.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is
on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises, excluding restrooms, to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose.
(A) Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
(B) If the premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view, from at least
one of the manager's stations, of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose.
(C) The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) above
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/221
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times,
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated
as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1).
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (9) above commits a misdemeanor if he or she
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.05)
Sec. 4.05.006 Exemptions
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
(B) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.06)
Sec. 4.05.007 Violations
(a) A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she:
(1) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a special use permit. All
sexually oriented businesses shall be located within the commercial zoning district, unless such
business qualifies as a nonconforming use.
(2) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a permit to operate a
sexually oriented business.
(3) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within within the locational
restrictions as set forth in the zoning ordinance. (Ordinance adopting Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/221
(4) Causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented
business.
(5) Causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business, as defined herein, in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a)(3) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure in which any, or
any part of any, sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises described in
subsection (a)(3) of this section.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a)(4) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.08)
Sec. 4.05.008 Nonconforming uses
(a) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article that is in violation of
this section [section 4.05.004] shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
(1) The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed ten years,
unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more.
(2) Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use.
(3) If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
(b) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant of a special use permit for a sexually oriented business, of a church,
public or private day care, elementary or secondary school, institute of higher learning, public park, library,
playground or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business.
(1) This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit.
(2) This provision does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit
and/or license has expired or has been revoked.
(c) All nonconforming sexually oriented business uses in existence at the time of passage of this article within
the city limits shall have 60 days to apply for a permit to operate such sexually oriented business.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.09)
Secs. 4.05.009–4.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/221
Sec. 4.05.041 Required; applicants for permit
(a) All sexually oriented businesses located within the city limits must have a special use permit or qualify as
a nonconforming use and have a permit to operate as provided herein.
(b) Each person having ownership interest, control or owning the property upon which the sexually oriented
business is to be located must have filled out an application, and his or her name must appear on the permit.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(A))
Sec. 4.05.042 Operation without permit; posting; control of premises
A commercial establishment that is a sexually oriented business, as herein defined, shall at all times of operation
within the city limits have a valid permit.
(1) A person commits an offense if that person conducts business as a sexually oriented business
within the city, unless a valid special use permit has been issued by the city for the conduct of such
business.
(2) A person commits an offense if that person conducts business as a sexually oriented business
within the city limits, unless the person has a valid permit that is posted at or near the principal public
entrance to the business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the
premises, or behind the bar in a conspicuous manner.
(3) (A) Every permittee shall have and maintain exclusive occupancy and control of the
entire permitted premises in every phase of the operation of the sexually oriented business on
the permitted premises.
(B) A permittee commits an offense if the permittee attempts to avoid such responsibility by
creating any device, scheme or plan that surrenders control of the employees, premises or
business of the permittee to persons other than the permittee.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(B))
Sec. 4.05.043 Issuance or denial
A permit, renewal or transfer permit shall be issued unless one or more of the following conditions exists:
(1) The applicant has located the sexually oriented business in violation of this article, unless the
business is a nonconforming use as defined herein.
(2) The applicant(s) failed to supply all of the information required on the application.
(3) (A) The applicant, or any one applicant, gave fraudulent or untruthful information on
the application.
(B) This does not apply to clerical errors.
(4) The applicant, or any one applicant, has been convicted of a felony for which not less than ten
years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for
the conviction, whichever is the later date, or a misdemeanor for which less than two years have
elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever date is the later date, of a crime in any state involving:
(A) Public lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child, as described in the Texas
Penal Code;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/221
(B) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child, as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(C) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual
performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or promotion of child
pornography, as defined in the Texas Penal Code;
(D) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses;
or
(E) Any similar offense to those described above under the criminal or penal code of another
state.
(5) (A) Any applicant, or any one applicant, refuses to provide a complete and current
NCIC and TCIC criminal history of the applicant obtained by the applicant from the state
department of public safety.
(B) The criminal history must be completed within 15 days of the date the application is
submitted to the building official.
(6) Permit fees are not paid in full.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(C))
Sec. 4.05.044 Application requirements
(a) Initial permit requests for a special use permit require each owner having an interest of 10% or more in the
sexually oriented business to submit a complete application and to update the application as changes in
ownership occur (herein the “applicant” or “permittee”).
(b) The information required in this section must be provided with each application and, as changes occur,
updated within ten days of any change in the information required in the application.
(c) The following information must be provided on the application form:
(1) The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant and each and
every owner with greater than 10% ownership interest;
(2) Two copies each of recent photographs of the applicant showing full face and each side face
profile;
(3) A complete set of fingerprints on forms from the police department;
(4) (A) A complete and current NCIC and TCIC criminal history of the applicant obtained
by the applicant from the state department of public safety;
(B) The criminal history must be completed within 15 days of the date the application is
submitted to the building official;
(5) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number and, if applicable, his or her
state or federally issued tax identification number;
(6) The name under which the establishment is to be operated, and a general description of the
services to be provided;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/221
(7) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that
of the applicant, he or she must:
(A) State the sexually oriented business's assumed name; and
(B) Submit the required registration documents;
(8) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a
crime specified in section 4.05.043(4), and, if so, the nature of the offense(s) and the date, place and
jurisdiction of each offense;
(9) (A) Whether the applicant has had a previous license or special use permit under this
article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for
which the license or special use permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
the denial, suspension or revocation; and
(B) Whether the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business
ordinance whose license or special use permit has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license
or special use permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation;
(10) Whether the applicant holds any other license or special use permit under this article or other
similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses;
(11) The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be
located;
(12) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment
for which the license or special use permit is sought, and the date on which the establishment began
operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the special use permit is sought;
and
(13) (A) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which must be
expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the special use permit);
(B) If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of
the special use permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling
work or other cause of the expected delay, and a statement of the owner's time schedule and
plan for accomplishing the construction, repair or remodeling work.
(d) All applications for a special use permit must include the following:
(1) If the establishment is a State of Texas corporation, a certified copy of the articles of
incorporation, together with all amendments thereto.
(2) If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to
transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto.
(3) If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the State of Texas, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/221
(4) If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto.
(5) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be
situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed, along with the current address(es) and telephone
number(s) of the owner(s).
(6) If the person(s) identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land are not also the owners of the
establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the
establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract, or portion thereof, that is to be
used for the purpose of the operation of the establishment, together with the correct address and
telephone number of each person with an ownership interest in the property.
(7) If the property is owned by other than a natural person, the complete name, address and
telephone number of each person with an interest in the entity must be included in the application.
(8) (A) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to
application by a registered land surveyor, depicting the property lines of any established use
listed in section 4.05.004(c) within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified.
(B) For purposes of this division, a use is considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted.
(9) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
(A) The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a
designated scale no smaller than 1/4 inch equals one foot, with marked dimensions of the
placement of the building on the tract of land and the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
(B) All locational requirements must be approved by the building official within 60 days
from the time the application is filed.
(10) Any of items (1) through (9) above will not be required for a renewal application if:
(A) They were previously presented; and
(B) The applicant states that the documents previously furnished to the building official with
the original application, or previous renewals thereof, remain correct and current.
(e) Every application for a special use permit must contain a statement made under oath that:
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that
the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and
(2) The applicant has read the provisions of this article.
(f) The applicant for a sexually oriented business special use permit must be qualified according to the
provisions of this article.
(g) (1) If the applicant who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, that
individual must sign the application for a special use permit as the applicant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/221
(2) If the applicant who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual,
each individual who has greater than 10% interest in the business must sign and provide all the
information required by the application for a special use permit as an applicant, and will be
considered an operator if a special use permit is granted.
(h) (1) The fact that a person possesses any other valid license, certificate or permit required by
law does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business special use
permit.
(2) A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses another business license,
certificate or permit must comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as well as the
requirements and provisions of the law concerning the other license, certificate or permit.
(i) (1) All applications must include a nonrefundable application fee as provided for in the fee
schedule.
(2) An application will not be considered to have been filed until all applicable fees are paid and all
information required by the application form has been submitted.
(j) (1) The applicant must supplement an application with new information received after the
date the application was deemed completed.
(2) Permittees must supplement application information within ten days of any change in
information provided in the application.
(k) (1) All sexually oriented businesses located within the city and in operation as a lawful use
conforming to the zoning ordinance before the effective date of this article are granted a one-time
waiver of the application fee.
(2) Upon satisfactory completion of the application and surrender of the existing business's current
certificate of occupancy, a new special use permit will be issued.
(l) A copy of all applications and supporting documentation for special use permits will be maintained by the
building official.
(m) Upon receipt of an application or supplemental information, the building official will review the
application to determine if all required and necessary information has been submitted.
(1) The building official will issue a letter within a reasonable time after receipt of the application
or supplemental information, and advise the applicant whether supplemental information must be
submitted.
(2) The applicant must provide any supplemental information within 30 days or the application
will be returned and the filing fee forfeited.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(D))
Sec. 4.05.045 Public notice of pending application
(a) After the building official has issued a letter advising the applicant that the application is complete, the
building official will cause signs (at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size) to be placed on the property subject to
the proposed special use permit of occupancy, that provide notification by specifically stating, with letters at
least three inches wide and six inches tall, “SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION
PENDING.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/221
(1) All lettering on the signs, other than that described above, will be at least one and one-half
inches by two inches in size for each letter.
(2) The sign will also include the name, city and state of residence of each applicant, the date on
which the application was filed, and the time and place of the hearings.
(3) The signs will be placed on the property in sufficient quantities and locations to identify the
property as being subject to a proposed sexually oriented special use permit of occupancy.
(4) One sign will be erected on each lot corner to identify the boundaries of the property, in
addition to one sign for each 300-foot increment of each public road or highway frontage on the
property existing or any part thereof.
(5) The signs will be erected within seven days after the building official has issued a letter
advising the applicant that the application is complete, and will remain erected until the application
has been approved or denied by the city council.
(b) The city will give notice of the application and scheduled public hearings by publication in two
consecutive issues of the city's official newspaper. Each notice will:
(1) Be printed in ten-point, boldface type;
(2) Indicate that a sexually oriented business special use permit has been applied for;
(3) Include the exact location, including the street address, of the place of business for which the
certificate is sought;
(4) Include the names of each owner of the business and, if the business is operated under an
assumed name, the trade name together with the names of all owners;
(5) Include, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers, directors and
shareholders of 10% or more of the corporation;
(6) Include the dates and times of the public hearings; and
(7) Be published at least 15 days before each public hearing.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(E))
Sec. 4.05.046 Renewal
(a) A permit shall be valid for one year from its date of issuance.
(b) A permit must be renewed annually by:
(1) All persons having ownership interest or control of the sexually oriented business; and
(2) All persons owning the property upon which the sexually oriented business is located.
(c) Failure to renew the permit voids the permit.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(F))
Sec. 4.05.047 Transfer
(a) A permit is personal to the persons designated in the application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/221
(b) A permit may not be transferred except pursuant to and in compliance with this division.
(c) A transfer application must be filed within 30 days of any change of persons designated on the current
permit.
(1) A transfer application shall allow continuation of business under an existing permit while a new
application is being processed.
(2) Any transfer application shall require and be treated in all respects as an original permit
application.
(3) In the event that a transfer application is not timely filed, then the existing permit shall be
invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of the business.
(4) Provided, however, that nothing in this division shall affect the nonconforming use provisions
herein.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(G))
Sec. 4.05.048 Revocation
Any violation of this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit. A permit shall be revoked for
any of the following violations:
(1) The permittee(s) have located the sexually oriented business in violation of this article, unless
the business is a nonconforming use as defined herein.
(2) The permittee(s) failed to supply all of the information required on the application.
(3) (A) The permittee(s) gave fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.
(B) This does not apply to clerical errors.
(4) The permittee, or any one permittee, has been convicted of a felony for which not less than ten
years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for
the conviction, whichever is the later date, or a misdemeanor for which less than two years have
elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever date is the later date, of a crime in any state involving:
(A) Public lewdness, indecent exposure or indecency with a child, as described in the Texas
Penal Code;
(B) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child, as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(C) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual
performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or promotion of child
pornography, as defined in the Texas Penal Code;
(D) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses;
or
(E) Any similar offense to those described above under the criminal or penal code of another
state.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/221
(5) In any consecutive 12-month period, there are committed on the permitted premises more than
four criminal offenses that fall in one or more of the following categories:
(A) Public lewdness, indecent exposure or indecency with a child, as described in the Texas
Penal Code;
(B) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child, as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(C) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual
performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or promotion of child
pornography, as defined in the Texas Penal Code; or
(D) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
(6) Any person under the age of 18, not otherwise permitted by the laws of the state to view the
material contained on the premises, is permitted to enter the premises.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(H))
Sec. 4.05.049 Appeals
(a) All denials and revocations of permit applications and renewals must be appealed to the city council.
(b) If an application for issuance or renewal of a permit is denied or a permit is revoked, upon notice of the
denial or revocation of a permit, the aggrieved applicant or permittee shall have ten days to appeal the decision
to the city council.
(c) The appeal of the revocation of a permit to the city council shall abate the revocation of the permit until
such time as the city council may hold a public hearing.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(I))
Sec. 4.05.050 Fees
(a) Each application for a permit, including renewal or transfer, shall be accompanied by an application fee as
provided for in the fee schedule.
(b) In addition to the fees required for an initial license, the applicant, at the time of making an initial
application, shall pay a nonrefundable fee as provided for in the fee schedule for the city to conduct a survey to
ensure the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the location restrictions set forth in section
4.05.004.
(c) Additionally, for each applicant identified thereon, there shall be an additional fee as provided for in the
fee schedule.
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(J))
ARTICLE 4.06 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, MOBILE
FOOD UNITS AND ROADSIDE FOOD VENDORS*
Sec. 4.06.001 Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Texas Board of
Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/221
regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction.
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
Authorized agent or employee. The employees of the regulatory authority.
Edible goods. All food products designed for human consumption.
Food service establishment. Any business that sells edible goods from a fixed location and has been inspected
and approved by the environmental health department, and shall specifically exclude accessory or self-serve
retail food sales.
Food truck court, food truck park or food truck plaza. Any commercial establishment designed specifically to
accommodate two (2) or more mobile food vendor units with water, sewer, and electrical hook ups and also
possesses a current food truck court permit from the city.
Mobile. The state of being in active, but not necessarily continuous movement; capable of being moved and not
permanently fixed or placed.
Mobile food vendor. Any person that sells edible goods from a mobile unit within the city, except a person who
has been issued a permit to operate an ice cream sales vehicle.
Mobile unit. Includes:
(1) Concession cart. A mobile vending unit that must be moved by non-motorized means from
which a mobile food vendor offers for sale or sells edible goods to the public; or
(2) Concession trailer. A vending unit that is pulled by a motorized unit and has no power to move
on its own from which a mobile food vendor offers for sale or sells edible goods to the public.
(31) Mobile food truck. Self-contained motorized unit from which a mobile food vendor offers for
sale or sells edible goods to the public;
Municipality of Big Lake or city. Shall be understood to refer to the City of Big Lake.
Regulatory authority. The City of Big Lake.
State rules. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and
sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Stationary location. Position of the mobile unit when not in motion and addressing the public for the purpose of
sales.
Sec. 4.06.003 Permits and exemptions
(a) A person may not operate a food establishment without a health permit issued by the regulatory authority.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as
otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by
this article.
(b) A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting
requirements of this article, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may
require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this
exemption.
Sec. 4.06.004 Permit and fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/221
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a request for a permit on forms provided
by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location
and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be
accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or
revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is
required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(b) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the proposed food establishment in accordance with the city retail food establishment inspection report
and section 4.06.007 to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not
comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit.
(c) The fee schedule in appendix A to this code applies to permits issued under this article.
(d) Mobile food vendors that utilize food truck court spaces will not be required to obtain a peddler permit
from the city, only a city health inspection.
Sec. 4.06.005 Permitted locations and distance regulations
(a) Subject to the provisions of this article, mobile food vendors shall be permitted to conduct business in the
following zoning districts: Commercial and industrial.
(b) Mobile food vendors shall comply with the following distance regulations:
(1) A mobile food vendor shall not conduct business within any residential or apartment zoning
district. A mobile food vendor shall not conduct business within two hundred (200) feet of the
boundary line of any residential or apartment zoning district.
(2) A mobile food vendor shall not conduct business within two hundred (200) feet of the primary
entrance of an open and operating permanent structure food service establishment. This buffer may
be reduced upon receiving written, notarized permission from the owner of said establishment.
(3) If a new permanent structure food service establishment opens within the two hundred (200)
foot buffer of a mobile food vendor as set forth in subsection (2) above, the mobile food vendor must
receive written, notarized permission from the new establishment's owner to continue operating at
that location.
(4) A mobile food vendor shall not locate closer than fifteen (15) feet to any front property line
(adjacent to any street) or any rear property line (adjacent to any alley). The mobile food vendor shall
not locate a mobile unit in such a manner or location that obstructs or causes to be obstructed the
passage of any sidewalk, street or alley or any other public place, by causing people to congregate at
or near the mobile unit.
(5) A mobile food vendor shall not locate on any private property without written permission to do
so and must comply and leave the property if asked to leave by the property owner. A copy of the
owner's written and notarized permission to operate in a specific location signed by the owner shall
be kept within the mobile unit at all times.
Sec. 4.06.006 Hours of operation
No mobile food vendor shall operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
Sec. 4.06.007 Mobile food vendor requirements
The following regulations shall apply to mobile food vendors:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/221
(1) Each mobile unit shall be equipped with a portable trash receptacle and the mobile food vendor
shall be responsible for proper disposal of solid waste and wastewater in compliance with this code.
(2) No noise which is loud or noxious shall project from the mobile unit.
(3) A mobile unit shall not block any fire lane or drive aisle.
(4) No mobile unit may park on a lot without a primary structure, unless the mobile unit is
conducting business in the central business district. Any parking lot in the central business district
occupied by a mobile unit shall comply with the section 4.06.005(b) above.
(5) No mobile food vendor shall conduct business in the public right-of-way and shall not block
access to any parcel or alley.
(6) No mobile unit shall locate in such a manner as to cause any obstruction within a visibility
triangle. Intersection visibility triangle shall mean a triangle sight area, at all intersections, which
shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within a triangle formed by a
diagonal line extending through points on the two (2) property lines twenty-five (25) feet from the
street corner intersection of the property lines (or that point of intersection of the property lines
extended) and intersecting the curblines.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a mobile food vendor without complying with
the Texas Food Establishment Rules as amended from time to time.
(8) A mobile unit shall be inspected by the city's code enforcement officer prior to the issuance of a
mobile food vending permit in accordance with section 4.06.004(b) above. The inspection shall also
include the following:
(A) A valid driver's license and current Texas Department of Public Safety license plates and
state inspection sticker, except for a concession cart which is not required to have license plates
or an inspection sticker. The mobile unit must be in good working order.
(B) A mobile unit must have a 2A:10B:C sized extinguisher with an annual inspection tag
from a state licensed inspection company or a receipt indicating purchase within the past year.
If frying media (grease) is used, a class K extinguisher shall be required in the mobile unit. Any
mobile unit equipped with an automatic extinguishing system shall have a current (bi-annual)
inspection tag from a state licensed inspection company. All mobile units shall maintain ten
(10) feet of clearance for access.
(C) All cooking appliances in the mobile unit shall be of an approved type, listed and labeled,
for the use intended. Appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. Coleman, camp stoves or the equivalent shall be prohibited. All cooking
appliances shall have an approved, labeled and listed on-off valve.
(D) All propane and natural gas appliances shall be pressure tested annually and have only
approved listed parts and no rubber hoses shall be allowed. All piping shall be in accordance
with Natural Fire Protection Association 58 and be protected from physical damage. Mounting
and placement of containers shall comply with Natural Fire Protection Association 58 and
Texas Department of Transportation regulations. The capacity limit of propane and natural gas
containers or cylinders shall be determined by the fire marshal's office after consideration of
features that secure and protect the container.
(E) Cooking surfaces in the mobile unit shall be kept clean of grease build-up. Trash
containers and debris shall be emptied regularly. Extension cords shall not be utilized for
appliances. Appliances shall be plugged directly into electrical outlets.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/221
Sec. 4.06.008 Suspension of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) below. When a permit is suspended,
food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in
writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of
the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is
sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
Sec. 4.06.009 Revocation of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in
the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or
the person in charge, in writing, or the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a
hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
Sec. 4.06.010 Administrative process
(a) A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final
findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of
the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
Sec. 4.06.011 Remedies
(a) Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise
operates a mobile food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any
responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than two hundred ($200.00)
dollars.
(b) The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules.
(Ordinance 15-09-15-1 adopted 9/15/15)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/221
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Reward for information leading to arrest for arson
(a) The city hereby offers a reward of $250.00 to anyone who furnishes information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person or persons found guilty of arson committed within the corporate limits of the city. This
reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city.
(b) Placards are to be prominently displayed in at least six public buildings in the city. Placards will indicate
that a reward is offered and the amount of the reward. Placards must be at least eight inches by 12 inches.
(1997 Code, sec. 91.02)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 Fireworks
(a) Prohibited; definition.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, expose for sale, or cause to be
sold, wholesale or retail, or use or cause to be used, or explode or cause to be exploded, any type or
description of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) The term “fireworks,” as used in this section, shall mean and include any combustible or
explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, or toy guns in which
explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers, or
other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive substance, except
that the term “fireworks” shall not include paper caps containing less than an average of twenty-five
hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other
devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction of such
violation, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be fined as allowed by law.
(Ordinance 060117-1, secs. 1, 2, adopted 1/17/06)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate the use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.003;
fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2154; authority of city to prohibit or further regulate fireworks,
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2154.004.
Sec. 5.01.003 Mobile service units
Mobile service units, as defined by Senate Bill 612, Acts 1971, 62nd Legislature, Regular Session, are hereby
prohibited from operating within the city limits. (1997 Code, sec. 111.06)
State law reference–Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 753.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE PREVENTION CODE*
Sec. 5.02.001 Adoption
The Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1991 edition, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter
as if set forth fully herein. (1997 Code, sec. 91.01)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/221
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 RUBBISH, WEEDS AND OTHER OBJECTIONABLE MATTER†
Sec. 6.02.001 Grass and weeds
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
Lot. The net lot area of the lot, including portions of public rights-of-way, that is, street and alley.
(b) Maximum height. It shall be unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel
of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the
city, to suffer or permit grass, weeds, or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a height greater than 24 inches
upon said premises. With respect to lots, tracts, or parcels of land of one or more acres under single ownership,
the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the area in excess of 300 feet from any open public street
or alley or to the area in excess of 300 feet from any adjacent property under different ownership on which
habitable dwellings are located. Lots, tracts, or parcels of land under one acre must be maintained in accordance
with this section in its entirety.
(1997 Code, sec. 92.01)
(c) Obstructing view and/or flow of traffic.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land
or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of
the city, to suffer or permit grass, weeds, trees, or any plant, cultivated or not cultivated, to grow in,
upon, or across the sidewalk or street adjacent to the lot or property in such a manner as to create a
hazard to pedestrians or motorist to:
(A) See approaching traffic, or that obscures traffic-control signs or signals for a distance of
100 feet.
(B) Use the street or sidewalk in a free flowing and unobstructed manner.
(2) The following are declared to be hazards:
(A) Any bush, tree or other vegetation within the parkway which exceeds a height of two and
one-half (2-1/2) feet above the gutter elevation of the adjacent street or which overhangs a
sidewalk, except single trunk trees which are pruned to eliminate all leaves and branches as
follows:
(i) Below seven (7) feet in height above the ground beneath the tree;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/221
(ii) Below eight (8) feet in height above a sidewalk beneath the tree; or
(iii) Which would tend to obstruct the view of a traffic-control device.
(B) Any bush, tree or vegetation which hangs over any street or alley which is not pruned as
follows:
(i) To eliminate all leaves and branches below a height of thirteen and one-half (13-1/2)
feet above the street or alley; or
(ii) To eliminate all leaves or branches which would tend to obstruct the view of a
traffic-control device.
(Ordinance 12-08-07-1 adopted 8/7/12)
(d) Responsibility for compliance. Supervision and control shall be determined as follows:
(1) The present occupant of the premises shall give rise to prima facie presumption of supervision
and control.
(2) If the property is unoccupied, then supervision and control shall be presumed to be in the
owner as determined by the current tax roll.
(1997 Code, sec. 92.01)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.004 et seq.;
authority of type A general-law municipality to require removal of weeds, unclean matter or trash from street, sidewalk or gutter,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.003.
Sec. 6.02.002 Removal required
It shall be the duty of any person having supervision or control of any net lot, tract or parcel of land or portion
thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city, to cut, or
cause to be cut, and remove or cause to be removed, if necessary to comply with this article, all such grass,
weeds, plants, rubbish, brush and any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever
nature as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. (1997 Code, sec. 92.03)
Sec. 6.02.003 Failure to comply; abatement by city
(a) If any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied
or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall
be the duty of the city secretary to give a minimum of seven days' written notice to such person violating the
terms of this article.
(b) The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this article by:
(1) Delivering it to him in person;
(2) Letter or written notice addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the
appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by
United States Certified Mail, return receipt requested. If the letter or written notice is returned by the
United States Postal Service as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained, by:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/221
(A) Publication at least once in the city's official newspaper;
(B) Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(C) Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property
to which the violation relates.
(c) In a notice provided under this article, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and by posting on the
property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or
nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the
notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense
against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and
the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may
take any action permitted and assess expenses as provided by this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.004 Dangerous weeds
(a) The city manager may go upon property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain
compliance with this article without notice when:
(1) Weeds have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) No later than the tenth day after the date the town causes the work to be done under this section, the city
shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 6.03.005.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of this section that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds;
(4) An itemized statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done
as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this section; and
(5) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the
city's abatement of the weeds.
(d) The municipal court judge shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of the weeds under
this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files
with the city manager a written request for a hearing.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after
the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information
relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(f) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens as
provided in section 6.03.006.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/221
(g) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city manager, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with or hinder the building official and his duly appointed representatives in the exercise of
their duties under this section.
(h) Penalties.
(1) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this section
who continues to violate or fails to comply with such after seven days after notice is given and
received as set forth herein, shall also be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, any violation of any provision
of this section which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose.
(3) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the town may enforce
the provisions of this section pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 54 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(4) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense
defined by this section.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Abolition of municipal court of record and reversion to municipal court without record
It is the desire of the city council to have a municipal court without record in accordance with Texas
Government Code 29, Municipal Courts. Ordinance 070102-01 is hereby rescinded and replaced with Ordinance
85-0514 and 070220-1 respectively. (Ordinance 070220-1 adopted 2/20/07)
Sec. 7.01.002 Appointment of judge
(a) The office of the judge of the municipal court of the city shall be filled by appointment, with term of office
to run concurrent with the term of office of the mayor. Such appointment shall be made by the mayor, to be
confirmed by the city council. The first judge to be appointed under this section shall hold office for the
remainder of the unexpired term of the incumbent mayor; and thereafter a judge shall be appointed for a term of
two (2) years. All judges so appointed and confirmed shall serve for the term for which appointed and until their
successor shall have duly qualified. Any vacancy in the office of judge of the municipal court shall be filled in
the same manner as above provided, to serve for the remainder of the term of such judge and until his successor
shall have duly qualified.
(b) The mayor may also appoint an alternate judge to serve when the regular judge of the municipal court is
on vacation, is sick, is disqualified to sit in a particular case, or is temporarily unable to act for any reason.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/221
(Ordinance 85-0514 adopted 5/14/85; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 7.02 FINES, FEES AND COSTS
Sec. 7.02.001 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to
article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a
municipal court building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a
misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate
assessment of the fee.
(c) A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
(1) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(d) The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after this section is adopted.
(e) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the
treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
(f) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchases of security devices and/or services
for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. “Security devices and/or services” shall
include any and all items described in article 102.017(d-1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(g) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 161018-02 adopted 10/18/16)
Sec. 7.02.002 Technology fund
(a) Establishment.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the
“fund,” pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the
general revenue account.
(b) Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
(C) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/221
(3) The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after this division is
adopted.
(4) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city secretary of the city, who
shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Designated use of the fund and administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain
technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city. “Technological enhancements” shall
include any and all items described in article 102.0172(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 161018-01 adopted 10/18/16)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply with any requirement set
forth in this chapter, for which no specific penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty of section 1.01.009
of this Code of Ordinances. (1997 Code, sec. 130.99(A))
Sec. 8.01.002 Discharge of firearms
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any gun or air-gun within the city limits. (1997 Code,
sec. 130.02)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 217.003;
authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001; disorderly conduct,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01; weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, ch. 46.
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew†
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/221
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
(2) 11:59 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
(3) 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. when school is in session.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conduction of
any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of any association or partnership and the officers
of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of
a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways and the common area of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, offices buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 8.02.032 Offenses; defenses; enforcement
(a) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/221
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by sufficient
control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours, or fails to acknowledge or return a citation issued to any minor child of
the parent(s) as set out in subsection (c)(1) below.
(3) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew.
(b) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:
(A) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
(B) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or
stop.
(C) In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel.
(D) Not required to attend school at the time of a violation occurring during the curfew hours
of 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. while school was in session.
(E) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop.
(F) Involved in an emergency.
(G) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence.
(H) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.
(I) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
(J) Married or had been married or had disabilities removed in accordance with V.T.C.A.,
Family Code ch. 31.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(3) that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(c) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a law enforcement officer shall ask
the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place during restricted curfew hours. The officer
shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, or no defense as set out in
subsection (b) of this section.
(1) First violation. A first violation under this section will result in the apparent offender being sent
home with a written warning of the offense. Said warning will be acknowledged by a parent or legal
guardian of the apparent violator and returned to the municipal court, in person. Failure to return the
warning to municipal court within ten (10) days of issuance will be regarded as a second violation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/221
(2) Second violation. A second violation under this section shall result in the issuance of a citation
to the apparent violator. The apparent violator will be required to appear in municipal court
accompanied by his/her parent(s) or guardian(s). Upon conviction, the municipal court may impose a
fine up to $500.00 and/or community service. The court may also place both the violator and the
parent(s) or guardian(s) on a deferred adjudication program for a specified period of time requiring
certain conditions be met before the charge(s) are vacated. Failure to comply with the terms set forth
in the deferred adjudication agreement or community service requirements shall result in a third
violation.
(3) Third violation. A third violation under this section shall result in a citation being issued to the
parent(s) or guardian(s) of the apparent offender. The parent(s) or guardian(s) of the apparent
offender shall appear in municipal court to answer the charges issued against them under this
division.
(4) A second or subsequent violation shall be one which occurs within one year of the occurrence
of any previous violation.
(5) An offense under this division is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00.
(6) This division shall become effective as of the date of publication.
Sec. 8.02.033 Jurisdiction of court
When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code section 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original
jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.02.032(a)(1) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(Ordinance 180206-1 adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE 8.03 LITTERING*
Sec. 8.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Handbill. Any printed or written material, sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, poster or similar item,
which offers for sale or lease, for the purpose of gain or profit, any product or service of value, or which
promises the candidacy of any person or party seeking political office.
Litter. Refuse of all types discarded indiscriminately in or on any public place, not in a dumpster or refuse
container, whether or not such dumpster or refuse container is conveniently located.
Occupant. The person who is head of a household in a residential unit, or the operating officer of a business,
commercial or governmental entity, whether owned or leased, or whether public or private.
Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property.
Person. A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership,
or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Premises. A tract of land with the buildings thereon, or a building or part of a building with its grounds or other
appurtenances.
Public place. Any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, or other public ways or easements, and any and
all parks, squares, spaces, grounds, parking lots, and buildings and property visible therefrom.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/221
Street. Any public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for the passage of vehicle and
pedestrian traffic.
(1997 Code, sec. 130.10)
Sec. 8.03.002 Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum
not less than $10.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the $2,000.00 maximum fine
hereunder shall only apply if the violation is a violation of a provision governing fire safety, zoning, or public
health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse; if the provision does not govern fire safety, zoning, or public
health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, the maximum permissible fine shall be $500.00 rather than
$2,000.00; provided further, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a
similar offense under the laws of this state. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day any
violation occurs or continues. (1997 Code, sec. 130.99(B))
Sec. 8.03.003 Prohibited acts
(a) Scattering handbills. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public thoroughfares
any handbills, posters, advertisements, or papers. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any person to
obstruct the public thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere with or
prevent the posting of notices required by law to be posted.
(b) Posting advertising matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack, or otherwise attach any
notice or other advertising matter to any fence, wall, or building or other property until first obtaining the
consent of the owner of such property. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack, or otherwise attach
any notices or advertising matter to any utility, telephone, electric, or other such poles until first obtaining the
consent of the owner.
(c) Depositing litter on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or deposit dirt, trash, or
other litter into any street or onto any sidewalk within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter
papers or other material detrimental to the order of the city in public parks, streets, or on any sidewalk.
(d) Depositing litter on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any litter on any private
lot or premises, whether such lot is owned by said person or another. All trash or litter shall be placed in
approved receptacles.
(1997 Code, sec. 130.11)
Sec. 8.03.004 Removal required
The person in control of residential or commercial property commits an offense if he fails to remove litter from
sidewalks, parkways, parking lots, driveways, yards, and one-half of the alleyway abutting his property within a
reasonable period of time from accumulation. (1997 Code, sec. 130.12)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in a
sum of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed when any
violation occurs or continues. (Ordinance 080617-1, sec. 130.99, adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 8.04.002 Defenses
Any of the following shall be an affirmative defense to this article:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/221
(1) The noise is emitted from a business establishment engaged in pursuit of its customary business
and the noise is temporary;
(2) The noise is emitted from an organized gathering such as a dance, concert, athletic event,
church gathering, or similar event, and does not continue past 1:00 a.m.
(Ordinance 080617-1, sec. 130.39, adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 8.04.003 Unreasonable noise prohibited
(a) Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes distress, discomfort, or injury to
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is declared to be a nuisance and is hereby
prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration, which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes of persons of ordinary sensibilities, is declared to be a nuisance and is
hereby prohibited.
(c) Citations will be issued without public complaint for violations of this article after 10:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday, and by complaint after 11:59 p.m. Friday, and 1:00 a.m. on Sunday.
(d) Definition.
Unreasonably loud noises.
(1) Noises which interfere with comfortable enjoyment and prohibited noises when used in this
article are defined as:
(A) Noise which exceeds 50 decibels from 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(B) Noise which exceeds 65 decibels from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(2) When such noise is measured at the property line where the noise is emanating or when such
noise is measured at least 15 feet from the outside of a vehicle from which the noise is emanating.
(Ordinance 160621-1 adopted 6/21/16)
Sec. 8.04.004 Operation of jake brake
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle equipped with a jake brake to operate the jake brake
within the city limits. (Ordinance 080617-1, sec. 130.31, adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 8.04.005 Noise near school or medical facility
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a loudspeaker, amplifier, or musical
instrument, not enclosed in a building, located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a hospital, nursing home,
school that is in session or facility that provides medical services to the public. (Ordinance 080617-1, sec.
130.32, adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 8.04.006 Noisy vehicles; horns or other signaling devices on vehicles
(a) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn, loudspeaker, amplifier, or signaling device on any
automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal, [or] the creation by
means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes distress,
discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof, is declared to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/221
(b) The operation of any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as
to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibrations which cause distress,
discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is declared to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited.
(Ordinance 080617-1, sec. 130.33, adopted 6/17/08)
ARTICLE 8.05 CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Parking area. A privately owned or publicly owned accessway or parking area commonly used by the general
public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, or patrons of one or more business
establishments or public offices.
(1997 Code, sec. 72.15)
Sec. 8.05.002 Operation of vehicles
No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may:
(1) Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to
disturb the person or persons present or to draw attention;
(2) Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no
necessity for the protection of a person or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the person
or persons present or to draw attention; or
(3) Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles, without the written
consent of the parking area owner or his authorized representative.
(1997 Code, sec. 72.16)
Sec. 8.05.003 Prohibited conduct
No person in a parking area shall:
(1) Fight with another person;
(2) Use loud, obscene, vulgar, or indecent language, swear, curse, yell, or shriek in such a manner
calculated to disturb the person or persons present, or to draw attention;
(3) Throw any object capable of causing bodily harm or property damage at another person or
property;
(4) Congregate with another person or persons or loiter after entering the premises, and willfully
refuse to leave after having been notified to leave by the owner, or a police officer, or the person in
possession and control of the premises, or his agent; or
(5) Possess or consume an alcoholic beverage without the written consent of the owner or person
in possession or control of the premises or his agent.
(1997 Code, sec. 72.17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/221
State law reference–Disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01.
Sec. 8.05.004 Littering
No person shall throw or deposit any trash, litter, or other waste on a parking area. (1997 Code, sec. 72.18)
ARTICLE 8.06 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Demolisher. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal, or
otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles.
(1997 Code, sec. 93.01)
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; and
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or discarded; or
(3) Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.06.002 Immediate removal of vehicles obstructing traffic
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property
which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. (1997 Code, sec. 93.02)
Sec. 8.06.003 Authority to enforce
The police authority in the city and/or the employees thereof, or their agent, may enter upon private property for
the purposes specified in this article to examine vehicles or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity
of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant
hereto. The court of jurisdiction in the city shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this
article. (1997 Code, sec. 93.03)
Sec. 8.06.004 Declaration of nuisance; exceptions
(a) Declaration of nuisance. The location or presence of any junked vehicle or junked vehicles on any lot,
tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city shall be
deemed a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public
nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his or their vehicle or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/221
vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit, or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained, or
exist upon his or their own real property.
(b) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner or
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard;
(3) Unlicensed operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on
his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner
that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(1997 Code, sec. 93.04)
Sec. 8.06.005 Abatement order
(a) Whenever a public nuisance under this article exists in the city in violation hereof, the police authority in
the city and/or the employees thereof who shall administer this article shall give not less than ten days' notice to
the owner of the real property or the occupant, if any, of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists to
abate or remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be
removed and abated within ten days and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration
of said ten-day period by the aggrieved person, such notice to be mailed by certified mail with a five-day return
receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the private premises upon which such public nuisance exists.
If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall
be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
(b) Whenever such public nuisance exists in the city in violation hereof, the police authority in the city, and/or
the employees thereof, shall provide not less than a ten-day notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on
the public property or on a public right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated within ten days and
further that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of said ten-day period, such notice to be
mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the public
premises or to the owner or the occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way upon which such
public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to
abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
(1997 Code, sec. 93.05)
Sec. 8.06.006 Public hearing prior to removal
A public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance is to be held before the
city council, or official of the city as designated by the city council, when such a hearing is requested by the
owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the
public right-of-way on which said vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance.
Any resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the
vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (1997
Code, sec. 93.06)
Sec. 8.06.007 Notice to state department of transportation
Notice by the city is to be given to the state department of transportation within five days after the date of
removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/221
to the vehicle pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code section 501.001 et seq. (1997 Code, sec. 93.07)
Sec. 8.06.008 Police to administer removal
The police authority in the city, and/or the employees thereof, shall administer the removal of vehicles or parts
thereof from property. (1997 Code, sec. 93.08)
Sec. 8.06.009 Vehicle not to be made operable after removal
After a vehicle has been removed it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. (1997 Code, sec. 93.09)
Sec. 8.06.010 Removal with permission of owner or occupant
If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the police authority in the city and/or the employees thereof, or
their duly authorized agent, to abate the nuisance, as provided in this article, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall give his written permission to the police authority in the city and/or the employees thereof, or his
duly authorized agent, for removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission
shall be considered compliance with the provisions of section 8.06.005. (1997 Code, sec. 93.10)
Sec. 8.06.011 Abatement by city; disposal to demolisher
If a public nuisance under this article is not abated by an owner or occupant after notice is given in accordance
herewith, official action shall be taken by the city to abate such nuisance. Junked vehicles or parts thereof may
be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as
scrap or salvage, which removal or process shall be considered compliance with section 8.06.009. A junked
vehicle disposed of to a demolisher in accordance with this article must be transferred to such demolisher by a
form acceptable to the state department of transportation (Form #MVD 71-4). The transfer receipt must be listed
on the demolisher's inventory list and surrendered to the state department of transportation in lieu of the
certificate of title under the provisions of the Texas Transportation Code. (1997 Code, sec. 93.11; Ordinance
adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.07 PARKING VEHICLES ON UNIMPROVED SURFACES
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
Fence or wall, privacy. A fence or wall made of wood, masonry or metal, permanently constructed of products
commercially sold as fence materials, and which provides a solidly opaque barrier.
Improved surface. Asphalt, concrete, paving brick or an acceptable all-weather surface of compacted gravel,
caliche or crushed rock, as follows:
(1) Hot-mix asphaltic concrete having minimum thickness 1-1/4 inches, over a 4-inch stabilized
base consisting of compacted crushed stone, cement-treated base, or soil cement base;
(2) Two-course penetration surface composed of two layers of crushed stone and asphalt;
(3) Reinforced concrete having a minimum thickness of 3.5 inches;
(4) Interlocking concrete paving stones at least two inches thick on a base consisting of a layer of
bedding sand over a minimum 4 inches of compacted crushed stone, cement-treated base, or soil
cement base; or
(5) Compacted gravel, caliche or crushed rock having a minimum depth of 4 inches.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/221
Lot. A tract or parcel of land potentially suitable for building purposes and legally transferable as a single unit of
land. For the purposes of this article, a lot may or may not coincide with a lot shown on a recorded subdivision
plat.
Residential district. A residential zoning district according to the zoning ordinance of the city.
Vehicle. Includes but not be limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, semitrailers, recreational vehicles, travel
trailers, boats or other watercraft, and motorcycles (not including bicycles and tricycles that are not motorpropelled).
Yard. An open, unoccupied space on the surface of a lot or tract of land, that is unobstructed from the ground to
the sky.
Yard, front. All that space on the surface of a lot, located between the street right-of-way line and the apparent
front line of the principal building on that lot, extending across the full width of the lot. The depth of such yard
shall include the entire area between said street right-of-way line and the most remote point on an exterior wall
of the apparent front face of that principal building.
Yard, rear. All that space on the surface of a lot, located between the rear line (opposite the apparent front line)
of the principal building on that lot and the most proximate and nearly parallel property boundary (that being the
rear boundary) on that same lot, extending across the full width of the lot. The depth of such yard shall include
the entire area between said rear boundary and the most remote point on an exterior wall of the rear face of that
principal building.
Yard, side. All that space on the surface of a lot, adjoining the sides of the principal building on that lot and
located between the front and side yards.
Sec. 8.07.002 Parking prohibited
(a) The act or failure to act described in the following subsection (b) shall constitute a nuisance and is
therefore prohibited and unlawful.
(b) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot (other than
a municipal park or recreation area) in a residential district, except as allowed specifically below:
(1) On an improved surface; or
(2) In an area screened from public view, by a solidly opaque privacy fence or wall at least 6 feet
in height and which otherwise conforms to height limitations proscribed by the zoning ordinance of
the city.
Sec. 8.07.003 Additional exceptions
The prohibitions of this article shall also not apply to:
(1) Parking of trailers and semitrailers used for recreational or homeowner utility purposes and
recreational vehicles, exceptions;
(2) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the rear yard of any
lot in a residential district, so long as the rear boundary of said lot is not adjacent to a street right-ofway;
(3) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot
in a residential district, so long as said lot has access only to street(s) having an improved surface
thirty-six feet (36') or less in width;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/221
(4) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot
in a residential district, so long as such vehicle has a valid handicapped license plate or mirror
hanger;
(5) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot
in a residential district without a driveway so long as the vehicle is placed perpendicular to the street
and within the boundaries created by the extension of the edges of the existing curb cut, leading to
the garage and/or carport structure;
(6) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot
in a residential district without a garage or carport so long as the vehicle is placed perpendicular to
the street and within the boundaries created by the extension of the edges of the existing curb cut; and
(7) Parking, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain any vehicle in the yard of any lot
in a residential district without a curb cut, so long as the vehicle is placed perpendicular to the street
and on either side of the residence.
(8) Parking on holidays.
Sec. 8.07.004 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.07.002 that the vehicle unlawfully parked, placed, deposited, left or
permitted to remain is registered to a person residing on the lot where the offense occurs, but such real property
is rented or leased from another person, firm or corporation, in which case only the registered vehicle owner(s)
shall be subject to prosecution, not the real property owner.
Sec. 8.07.005 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 13-03-19-1 adopted 3/19/13)
ARTICLE 8.08 ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIALS
Sec. 8.08.001 Definitions
Illegal smoking material.
(1) Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes
whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the
following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
(A) Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically
as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of
such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts;
(B) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,
497) and homologues;
(C) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetra-
hydrobenzo [c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(D) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/221
(E) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(F) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
(2) Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the
following commercial names: “K-2,” “K-2 SUMMIT,” “K-2 SEX,” “GENIE,” “DASCENTS,”
“ZOHAI,” “SAGE,” “SPICE,” “KO KNOCK-OUT 2,” “SPICE GOLD,” “SPICE DIAMOND,”
“YUCATAN FIRE,” “SOLAR FLARE,” “PEP SPICE,” “FIRE N' ICE,” “BLAZE,” “RED X
DAWN,” AND “SALVIA DIVINORUM.”
(3) Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the
provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names.
Illegal smoking material paraphernalia. Any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be
used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include, but is not limited to:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Person. An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, wholesaler,
association or other legal entity, or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Sec. 8.08.002 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the purchase, sale, offer for sale, delivery, or gift of illegal smoking
materials as defined herein within the city limits, and to prohibit the possession or use of illegal smoking
materials and illegal smoking material paraphernalia within the city limits. Any form of delivery, including,
without limitation, a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article.
Sec. 8.08.003 Purchase, sale, delivery, offer, or gift
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, offer for sale, deliver or to give any illegal smoking material
to any person.
Sec. 8.08.004 Possession or use of illegal smoking materials
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/221
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body illegal smoking materials within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 8.08.005 Possession or use of illegal smoking material paraphernalia
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any illegal smoking material paraphernalia with
the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume or introduce into the human body illegal smoking
material. It is a violation of this section, if a person is found in possession of illegal smoking material
paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of illegal smoking
material present on the paraphernalia.
Sec. 8.08.006 Affirmative defenses to prosecution
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the illegal
smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized
to prescribe controlled substances within the state.
(b) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under the terms of this article if an individual charged
with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a
portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing
historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the state.
Sec. 8.08.007 Penalty
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b) Every act in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, an allegation and/or evidence of culpable mental state is not
required for the proof of an offense of this article.
(d) The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation of this article. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and
federal law.
Sec. 8.08.008 Seizure and disposition of substances
(a) Any peace officer with legal criminal jurisdiction within the city shall be authorized to seize any substance
identified as a prohibited substance in accordance with this article.
(b) Officers shall hold and safe-keep such seized substances as evidence until such a time as the substance is
no longer needed for prosecution of a violation of this article.
(c) The seizing officer or designated authority shall be authorized to dispose/destroy substances seized in
accordance with this code after they are no longer needed as evidence of a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 14-01-07-1 adopted 1/7/14)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/221
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.02.001 Election to participate; legislation adopted by reference
(a) Election to participate in TMRS. On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and
elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments, except the fire department, participate in the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter “TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov't Code section 851.001 et seq.,
as amended, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted.
(b) Election to participate in supplemental death benefits fund. The city council elects to have the employees
of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code section 851.001 et seq., and all the benefits
and obligations of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(c) Ordinances and laws adopted by reference. Ordinances affecting the plan for participation in the TMRS,
employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other
applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this Code of Ordinances as if fully set
forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary, available for public inspection.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.01)
ARTICLE 9.03 SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY
Sec. 9.03.001 General policy
(a) Controlled substances prohibited.
(1) The manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, sale, purchase, or use of an illegal drug,
an illegal inhalant, drug paraphernalia, or any controlled substances on city property, city premises,
or city work sites, or while conducting city business, or while operating or occupying any city vehicle
or equipment at any time, is prohibited. The city, at its sole discretion, may take into custody any
illegal, unauthorized, or prohibited items and may turn them over to the proper law enforcement
agencies.
(2) The presence of a detectable level of any illegal drug, illegal inhalant, alcohol, or unauthorized
controlled substance or any metabolite of any such substance in the body at any time is prohibited.
(3) Being under the influence of alcohol, illegal drugs, illegal inhalants, or an unauthorized
controlled substance on city property, city premises, or city work sites is prohibited. The
unauthorized use or possession of prescription drugs or over-the-counter drugs on city property, city
premises, or city work sites is prohibited.
(4) The unauthorized storage in any locker, desk, city vehicle, or other repository on city property,
premises, or work sites of any illegal drugs, illegal inhalants, drug paraphernalia, unauthorized
controlled substances, or alcohol is prohibited.
(b) Inspections. In order to accomplish the purpose of the policy of this section, the city reserves the right to
carry out reasonable searches of city property and city vehicles and/or equipment. Searches by the city may be
initiated without prior notice and conducted at times and locations as deemed appropriate by the city. The refusal
to consent to inspection of any desk, locker, or other city property under an employee's control when requested
by a supervisor is prohibited.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/221
(c) Refusal to submit to testing. City employees have a right to refuse to submit to a drug/alcohol test;
however, that refusal to submit a specimen for testing when required under this policy may result in disciplinary
action.
(d) Tampering with samples. The tampering or adulterating of any urine sample submitted for testing is
prohibited.
(e) Report of conviction for drug or alcohol related crimes. The conviction or failure to report a conviction by
any employee for any drug or alcohol related crimes is a violation of this policy.
(f) Failure to pass test. Employment with the city will be dependent on passing any and all drug/alcohol tests
administered under this policy. Failing a drug/alcohol test will be grounds for disciplinary action.
(g) Violations subject to disciplinary action. Employees who violate this policy are subject to appropriate
disciplinary action, including termination.
(h) Distribution of policy. Supervisors will receive training regarding the drug and alcohol abuse policy and
the use of the employee assistance program. All employees will receive copies of the drug and alcohol abuse
policy and information about the employee assistance program.
(i) Applicability of policy; exceptions.
(1) This policy shall apply to all employees of the city regardless of rank or position and includes
temporary, part-time, and full-time employees. It equally applies to all elected and appointed
officials.
(2) All temporary, part-time employees and members of various committees, whether appointed by
the mayor, the city council, or the city secretary, will not be subject to random drug and/or alcohol
testing or pre-employment drug and/or alcohol testing except when it is required under such
guidelines and stipulations of the United States government and/or its agencies or the state and/or its
agencies. They are subject to all other provisions of the city's substance abuse policy.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.10)
Sec. 9.03.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
City premises or work sites. Includes all city property, buildings, lockers, structures, job sites (where an
employee is working), parking lots, and all means of transportation owned, leased, or otherwise used for city
business, including motor vehicles, equipment, or machinery.
City property. All city-owned or leased property used by employees, such as vehicles, lockers, desks, closets,
and the like.
Controlled substance. Any substance listed in schedules I–V of section 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21
U.S.C. section 812), as amended. Copies are maintained for employee review by the personnel department.
Controlled substances include but are not limited to amphetamines, barbiturates, codeine, methadone,
benzodiazepines, methaqualone, and morphine. A controlled substance is “unauthorized” if the employee does
not have a valid prescription for that substance at the time of its use or possession.
Detectable level. A quantity of a drug, drug metabolite, or alcohol equal to or greater than the detection limit for
the substance as established by the testing laboratory, with the city council's approval.
Drug. Any chemical substance that produces physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral change in the user.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/221
Drug paraphernalia. Equipment, product, or material that is used or intended for use in concealing an illegal
drug or for use in injection, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body an illegal drug or
controlled substance.
Drug screen. A urine specimen and/or blood specimen submitted for the purpose of analysis to determine the
presence of an illegal drug, illegal inhalant, alcohol, or unauthorized controlled substance in the body.
Failing a drug test. A confirmation of an initial test result which shows a detectable level of an illegal drug,
unauthorized controlled substance, drug metabolite, or alcohol in the body.
Fitness for duty. To work in a manner suitable for the job. To determine fitness, a medical evaluation may
include drug and/or alcohol testing.
Illegal drug. An illegal drug is any drug or derivative thereof which the use, possession, sale, transfer, attempted
sale or transfer, manufacture, or storage of is illegal or regulated under any federal, state, or local law or
regulation, and any other drug, including but not limited to a prescription drug, used for any reason other than a
legitimate medical reason, and inhalants used illegally. Illegal drug includes but is not limited to marijuana or
cannabis in all forms, heroin, cocaine, crack cocaine, PCP (phencyclidine), methamphetamine (speed, ice), and
any other controlled substance not validly prescribed by a physician.
Reasonable cause and/or reasonable suspicion. Supported by evidence strong enough to establish that a policy
violation has occurred.
Under the influence. A state of having a blood alcohol concentration of 0.10 or more, where “alcohol
concentration” has the meaning assigned to it in Tex. Transp. Code section 724.001; or the state of not having
the normal use of mental or physical faculties resulting from the voluntary introduction into the body of an
alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.11)
Sec. 9.03.003 Violations
(a) Any of the following actions constitutes a violation of the policy and may subject an employee to
disciplinary action up to and including immediate termination:
(1) Using, selling, purchasing, transferring, possessing, manufacturing, or storing an illegal drug or
drug paraphernalia, or attempting or assisting another to do so, while in the course of employment or
engaged in a city-sponsored activity, on premises, in owned, leased, or rented vehicles, or on city
business.
(2) Working or reporting to work, conducting city business or being on premises or in a cityowned,
leased or rented vehicle while under the influence of an illegal drug or alcohol, or in an
impaired condition.
(3) Failing a drug/alcohol test.
(4) The refusal to consent to a lawfully permitted drug/alcohol test and/or submit a specimen for
testing when required under this policy.
(b) Any employee who violates any other provisions of this policy may be disciplined up to and including
termination.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.12)
Sec. 9.03.004 Prescribed drugs; work-related accidents
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/221
(a) Employees taking drugs prescribed by an attending physician must advise their direct supervisor in writing
of the possible effects of such medication regarding their job performance and physical and/or mental
capabilities. This written information must be kept confidential and communicated to the direct supervisor prior
to the employee commencing work. All medical information will be kept confidential and the employer, without
exception, will punish any breach of privacy and confidentiality in this regard. All prescription drugs must be
kept in their original container.
(b) Any employee involved in a work-related accident where alcohol or drugs are believed to be a contributing
factor will be subject to disciplinary action in addition to any other accident investigation activities.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.13)
Sec. 9.03.005 Appeals process
(a) Any individual who has been subject to disciplinary action as a result of this policy may appear before the
city council in executive session to appeal such disciplinary action. A written request to appear before the city
council for a review of the decision should be submitted to the office of the city secretary within 15 days of the
disciplinary action. Such review by the city council will take place in executive session, or in open session at the
employee's request, at their next regularly scheduled meeting.
(b) If a disciplined employee wishes to have his or her sample retested, such test will be conducted from the
original sample collected and will be at the expense of the city. The laboratory used by the employee must meet
the same criteria as the laboratory used by the city (the laboratory is to be certified under appropriate federal
and/or state regulations and should follow the guidelines adopted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services for workplace urinalysis).
(1997 Code, sec. 30.14)
Sec. 9.03.006 Drug testing
(a) General procedure.
(1) Drug tests will be conducted by a qualified laboratory approved by the city council. Chain-ofcustody
procedures will be followed to account for the integrity of each urine sample by tracking its
handling and storage from point of specimen collection to final disposition of the specimen.
(2) The initial test (also known as a screening test) shall be an enzyme immunoassay screen
(EMIT) to eliminate “negative” urine specimens from further consideration.
(3) If the initial test indicates a positive result, a second screening test known as fluorescence
polarization immunoassay (FPIA) will be performed.
(4) If the second screening test still indicates a positive result, a confirmation test by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) will be used to confirm the presence of a specific drug
or metabolite. The confirmation test shall be independent of the initial tests and uses a different
technique and chemical principle from that of the initial tests in order to ensure reliability and
accuracy.
(5) Only those specimens confirmed positive by GC/MS will be reported as positive specimens.
Those results will only be reported to the city secretary or his designee by the laboratory. The results
will then be reported to who may need to know the results. Results will be kept confidential and
secured at all times.
(6) Applicants and employees subject to testing will have the opportunity, prior to testing, to list all
prescription and nonprescription drugs they have used in the last 30 days and to explain the
circumstances surrounding the use of such drugs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/221
(b) Pre-employment test. All applicants for employment who the city intends to hire will submit to a drug test
as a condition of employment. Applicants will sign a pre-employment drug and alcohol abuse consent form and
attach it to the application for employment. An applicant with a positive drug test will not be hired.
(c) Random testing. All employees of the city will be subject to random testing without prior notice at times
and locations as deemed appropriate by the city.
(d) Post-accident testing. Any employee involved in an accident involving bodily injury or property damage
of $700.00 or more and/or one-half of the value of the property will submit to a drug test (this includes single
vehicle/equipment accidents). Other employees in the immediate vicinity of the accident or incident may also be
required to submit to a drug test if a supervisor believes that the employee may have caused or contributed to the
accident or incident. The decision to order such testing shall be made by the highest ranking supervisor present
at the scene of the accident or incident. The test shall be performed as soon as possible at the order of the
supervisor.
(e) Reasonable suspicion. Employees suspected of using illegal drugs, illegal inhalants or alcohol, or abusing
controlled substances, will be requested to submit to a drug test. Reasonable suspicion shall include, but not be
limited to, excessive absences, excessive tardiness, lack of productivity, personality changes, difficulties in
performance of duties, or any other reason deemed sufficient to lead to a conclusion that such employee may be
using illegal drugs or may be abusing controlled substances.
(f) Fit for duty testing. Employees may be required to submit to an unannounced drug/alcohol test for the
purpose of determining that the individual may be deemed fit to safely and competently perform his or her duty.
(g) Drugs screened and detection levels.
Drug or its Metabolite Screening Cut-Off Confirmation Cut-Off
Alcohol 0.02 grams 0.02 grams
Amphetamines 1000 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
Barbiturates 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
Benzodiazepines 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
Cannabinoids 50 ng/ml 15 ng/ml
Cocaine 300 ng/ml 150 ng/ml
Methadone 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
Methaqualone 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/221
Opiates 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
Phencyclidine 25 ng/ml 25 ng/ml
Propoxyphene 300 ng/ml 300 ng/ml
(1997 Code, sec. 30.15)
Sec. 9.03.007 Employee assistance program
The city will provide employees and their families with confidential referral for assistance in resolving or
accessing treatment for addiction to, dependence on, or problems with alcohol or drugs, or other personal
problems adversely affecting their job performance. The cost of treatment, counseling, or rehabilitation resulting
from the EAP referral not covered by health benefits provided by the city will be the responsibility of the
employee. (1997 Code, sec. 30.16)
Sec. 9.03.008 Coordination with law enforcement
The sale, use, purchase, transfer, or possession of an illegal drug or drug paraphernalia is a violation of the law.
The city will report information concerning possession, distribution, or use of any illegal drugs to law
enforcement officials and will turn over to the custody of law enforcement officials any such substances found
during a search of an individual or property. Searches will only be conducted of individuals based on reasonable
cause; and only of their vehicles, lockers, desks, or closets when based on reasonable suspicion. The city will
cooperate fully in the prosecution and/or conviction of any violation of the law. (1997 Code, sec. 30.17)
Sec. 9.03.009 Reservation of rights
(a) The city reserves the right to interpret, change, suspend, cancel, or dispute, with or without notice, all or
any part of this policy, or procedures or benefits discussed herein. Employees will be notified before
implementation of any change.
(b) Although adherence to this policy is considered a condition of continued employment, nothing in this
policy alters an employee's status and shall not constitute nor be deemed a contract or promise of employment.
Employees remain free to resign their employment at any time for any or no reason, without notice, and the city
retains the right to terminate any employee at any time, for any or no reason, without notice.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.18)
Sec. 9.03.010 Applicability of other laws; drug testing by other agencies
(a) The provisions of this policy shall apply in addition to, and shall be subordinated to, any requirements
imposed by applicable federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or judicial decisions.
(b) Any and all anti-drug programs and/or drug testing that may be required by the United States Department
of Transportation (DOT), the state railroad commission (TRRC), or any other federal and/or state agencies will
be administered and conducted according to the stipulations and guidelines that may be established by those
agencies.
(1997 Code, sec. 30.19)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/221
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Penalty
Any person or persons, firm, corporation, or association violating any part of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $2,000.00; and each
day such is continued in violation hereof will be deemed a separate offense. The city, its officers, agents, or
employees are hereby specifically authorized to enforce this article by all legal and equitable remedies, including
but not limited to the remedy of injunction by a court of competent jurisdiction. (1997 Code, sec. 154.99)
Secs. 10.02.002–10.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Procedure for Subdivision Approval
Sec. 10.02.031 Council approval required
From and after passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or person, firm, corporation, or
association to subdivide or resubdivide any tract or tracts of land within the corporate limits of the city or to file
or record any map or plat of said subdivision or resubdivision, without first and previously thereto having
obtained approval of the city council. (1997 Code, sec. 154.01)
Sec. 10.02.032 Preliminary plat
A preliminary plat of said subdivision shall include, but not be limited to, the following information, drawn to
scale:
(1) Location within the city;
(2) Location and dimensions of each lot within said subdivision;
(3) Location and width of each street and alley;
(4) Location and sizes of all utility lines including water, sewer, gas and electric, and locations and
sizes of all valves, fittings, valve boxes and manholes; and
(5) Such other information as may be hereafter required by the city council.
(1997 Code, sec. 154.02)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/221
Sec. 10.02.033 Replats
In the event a replat is required because of interruption of normal traffic patterns, resizing of utility mains,
failure to conform to the general plan of the city, or for any other reason, such replat shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider. (1997 Code, sec. 154.03)
State law references–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014; additional
requirements for certain replats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.015.
Sec. 10.02.034 Plat requirements
The city council shall not approve any map or plat of any subdivision until said map or plat has been filed with
the city secretary, in readable form, prepared by a registered professional engineer, for inspection for a minimum
of ten working days, to allow determination that streets and alleys are so arranged to correspond reasonably with
existing streets and alleys to which they will connect or intersect, and that all other factors are in compliance
with city specifications, and that the following minimum requirements have been complied with:
(1) No residential lot shall be less than 50 feet in width nor contain less than 5,000 square feet,
exclusive of alleys;
(2) Each block in every subdivision shall have alleys of a minimum width of 20 feet, with a 15-
foot cut-off at all acute corners as is necessary for the extension of utility lines and for garbage
collection, and every lot shall have access by said alley;
(3) All streets shall have a minimum width of 50 feet;
(4) “The City of Big Lake Standard Specifications for Street Repair and Construction, and Water,
Sanitary Sewer and Gas Utility Installation,” April 1985 edition, or as revised by action of the city
council, is hereby adopted by reference [as] though it were fully copied herein.
(1997 Code, sec. 154.04)
Sec. 10.02.035 Inspection and certification
The city reserves the right to require inspection of, and certification to, required standards by an engineer of
competence in the employ of the city. Inspection shall be accomplished at reasonable times in the company of
the subdivider or his agent, and certification by the engineer that minimum standards are met shall be made to
the city. (1997 Code, sec. 154.05)
Sec. 10.02.036 Expense of improvements covered by subdivider
The total expense of material and installation of all streets, including curb and gutter; all water, sewer and gas
utility mains including valves, fittings, valve boxes, manholes and services to each lot, in conformity to
standards of the city, the department of health, the state commission on environmental quality, the state railroad
commission, and the state department of transportation, shall be the sole responsibility of the subdivider. All
such improvements herein named shall become the property and responsibility of the city at such time as the city
is issued a certificate of compliance and provides initial service to and through such lines. (1997 Code, sec.
154.06)
Sec. 10.02.037 Bond required prior to final plat approval
Bond in the total amount of proposed improvements, exclusive of buildings, shall be provided to the city by the
subdivider prior to approval of the final plat by the city council. Following approval of the final plat, said plat
shall be recorded by the subdivider with the county clerk, along with, and in addition to, all documents of
dedication of streets and alleys to the city. (1997 Code, sec. 154.07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/221
Sec. 10.02.038 Legal expenses responsibility of subdivider
Legal expenses incurred in the dedication of streets and alleys and rights-of-way to the city shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider, and such dedications shall be accomplished at the time of approval by the city
council of the final plat of said subdivision. (1997 Code, sec. 154.08)
Sec. 10.02.039 Fee schedule
The fee schedule for provision of various city utility services, including extension of mains, is hereby adopted by
reference as though it were fully copied herein, and is filed in the office of the city secretary. Monetary amounts,
and definitions, of said fee schedule are subject to change from time to time by action of the city council. (1997
Code, sec. 154.09)
Secs. 10.02.040–10.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction*
Sec. 10.02.071 Extension to extraterritorial jurisdiction
This article is hereby extended in its application to include all of the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city. The provisions of sections 10.02.031 through 10.02.039 shall have the same force and effect within
said area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in sections
10.02.072 and 10.02.073. (1997 Code, sec. 154.20)
Sec. 10.02.072 Violation not to constitute misdemeanor
No violation of any provision of sections 10.02.031 through 10.02.039 outside the corporate limits of the city but
within such city's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction shall constitute a misdemeanor, nor shall any fine provided
for in section 10.02.001 be applicable to a violation within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. (1997 Code,
sec. 154.21)
Sec. 10.02.073 Injunction of violation
In the event any provision of sections 10.02.031 through 10.02.039 is violated within the area of extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of such provisions. (1997 Code, sec. 154.22)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 AD VALOREM (PROPERTY) TAX*
Sec. 11.02.001 Levy
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/221
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected for the use and support of the municipal government of the
city, and to provide an interest and sinking fund for each fiscal year, upon all property, real, personal, and mixed,
within the corporate limits of the city, subject to taxation, a tax on such property, levied and apportioned in such
amounts as may be set by the city council from time to time. (1997 Code, sec. 32.20)
Sec. 11.02.002 Delinquency date
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance of the city council, the taxes levied under this article shall be due
January 31 of each year, and if not paid on or before February 1 shall immediately become delinquent. (1997
Code, sec. 32.21)
State law reference–Delinquency date for payment of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.02.
Sec. 11.02.003 Lien for unpaid taxes; interest
All taxes shall become a lien on the property against which assessed, and the city secretary and collector for the
city are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the collection of such taxes according to the constitution
and laws of the state, and city ordinances. The city secretary or collector for the city shall, by virtue of the tax
rolls, fix and establish a lien by levying upon such property, whether real or personal, for the payment of such
taxes, which shall be apportioned to the general fund of the city. All delinquent taxes shall bear interest from the
date of delinquency at a rate as prescribed by law. (1997 Code, sec. 32.22)
State law reference–Tax liens, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32.
ARTICLE 11.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly indicates
another meaning, are respectively defined as follows:
City secretary. The city secretary of the City of Big Lake.
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall
not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, roominghouses or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for
sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than
thirty (30) days.
Occupant. Anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/221
Quarterly period. Regular quarterly period corresponding to that period which tax reports are filed with the state
comptroller.
Sec. 11.03.002 Levy of tax; rate; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any hotel where the cost of occupancy is at the
rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent (7%) of the consideration paid
by the occupant of such room to such hotel, exclusive of the occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental
agencies.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder on a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.
Sec. 11.03.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed for the city.
Sec. 11.03.004 Reports
On the last day of the month following each quarter, every person required to collect the tax imposed herein
shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all room or sleeping place
accommodations in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other
information as the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies
at the time of filing the report. There shall also be furnished to the city secretary at the time of payment of said
tax, a copy of the quarterly report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy
tax. The city secretary shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records kept by any person
required to collect the tax imposed herein which may be necessary to enable the secretary to determine the
correctness of any repost filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 11.03.005 Use of proceeds
The proceeds of the hotel occupancy tax levied by this article shall be used by the city council only for the
purpose of advertising and encouraging the growth of tourist activity, promotion of the arts and historical
preservation in the city, including financial support of such organizations and projects which promote this
objective; provided, however, that the city shall deposit in the general fund of the city 1/2 the amount collected
under this article.
Sec. 11.03.006 Penalties
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax herein imposed, or make reports as
required herein, and pay to the city secretary the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such
report, or pay such tax, or if such person shall file a false report, or any such person shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished
as prescribed in section 1.01.009 and shall pay to the city secretary the tax due together with a penalty of 5% of
the tax due for each 30 days that the same is not timely filed.
Sec. 11.03.007 Reimbursement
Any person required by this article to collect hotel occupancy taxes may deduct and withhold from that person's
payment to the city, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, an amount not to exceed one percent
(1%) of the amount of the tax collected and required to be reported to the city; provided, however, any person
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/221
required to pay said tax and file said reports shall forfeit all rights to reimbursement for failure to pay the tax or
file the reports required by the city on the dates such payments and reports are due.
(Ordinance 13-03-05-1 adopted 3/5/13)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed
or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or
guiding traffic.
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
Traffic-control signs or devices. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter
placed or erected by authority of the city council for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.01)
Sec. 12.01.002 Penalty
(a) Whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, the violation shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the
penalty provided for the same or a similar offense by the laws of the state.
(b) Each day a violation of this chapter or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.99)
State law reference–General penalty for violation of rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.401.
Sec. 12.01.003 Payment of fines
(a) Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this chapter may,
within the time specified in the notice, appear at the traffic violations bureau and answer the charge set forth in
such notice by paying a prescribed fine and in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court
and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in
court.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/221
(b) Any person who has been guilty of three or more traffic violations, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, within the preceding 12 months shall not be permitted to pay a fine at the traffic violations bureau, and
he must make statutory bail for appearance in court.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.02)
Sec. 12.01.004 Failure to obey notice or summons
(a) Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic
violation, is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally
arrested.
(b) Any driver of a motor vehicle who unlawfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a written
notice affixed to such motor vehicle by a police officer as provided by any ordinance of this city is guilty of a
misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which said notice was originally given.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.03)
Sec. 12.01.005 Power of council to make and enforce regulations
The city council is empowered by resolution to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective
provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergency or special
conditions. (1997 Code, sec. 70.04)
Sec. 12.01.006 Authority to direct traffic
All law enforcement officers of the county sheriff's office and all state and federal law enforcement agencies are
authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signals, in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, providing that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, members of the county volunteer fire department may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this section. (1997 Code, sec. 70.05)
Sec. 12.01.007 Obedience to officers directing traffic
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any law enforcement
officer or firefighter invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. (1997 Code, sec. 70.06)
State law reference–Obedience to lawful order or direction of police officer or school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 542.501.
Sec. 12.01.008 Applicability to drivers of government vehicles
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways and streets shall apply to
the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district, or
any other political subdivision of this state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter
with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. (1997 Code, sec. 70.07)
State law reference–Applicability of traffic laws to drivers of government vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.002.
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformity with state manual and specifications
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications
adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/221
All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the town must conform to the manual and specifications
adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those
erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section
shall be official traffic-control devices. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Installation
(a) The city council shall by ordinance direct that the manager of utilities shall have the duty of erecting or
installing, upon, over, along, or beside any highway, street, or alley, signs and markings, or causing the same to
be erected, installed, or placed, in accordance with this article and consistent with the manual. Said trafficcontrol
devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific device can be procured.
(b) Whenever the manager of utilities has erected and installed any official traffic-control device at any
location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this article and the
manual, he shall file a report with the city secretary in writing, signed officially by the superintendent, stating the
type of traffic-control device and when and where the same was erected and installed. The city secretary shall
file and maintain such report among the official papers of the office of the city secretary.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.21)
Sec. 12.02.003 Obedience; presumption of legality
(a) The driver of any vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this article.
(b) It being unlawful for any person other than the manager of utilities, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the
city, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign, or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the
activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this
article or any other traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control device was actually in place on any street
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the manager of utilities pursuant to the
authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.22)
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 12.02.004 Exemptions for drivers of authorized emergency vehicles
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/221
(c) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of Tex. Transp. Code section 547.702, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red
light visible from in front of the vehicle. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law
enforcement purposes may operate without using the emergency warning devices required by this subsection
only when the driver is responding to an emergency call or when he or she is in pursuit of a suspected violator of
the law and he or she has probable cause to believe that:
(1) Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the subject to destroy or lose evidence of a
suspected felony;
(2) Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to cease a suspected continuing felony
before the driver has acquired sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest;
(3) Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to evade apprehension or identification
of the suspect or his or her vehicle; or
(4) Traffic conditions on a multi-laned roadway are such that movements of motorists in response
to the emergency warning devices may increase the potential for a collision or may unreasonably
extend the duration of the pursuit.
(d) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law enforcement purposes may not operate
without using the emergency warning devices as provided above unless he or she has first notified a designated
office of his or her intention to operate without such devices. The designated office to which such notification is
made shall keep an accurate record of the exact time notification is received.
(e) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.23)
State law reference–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546.
Sec. 12.02.005 Unauthorized devices
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street, or alley any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street, or alley
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways,
streets, or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of
police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1997 Code, sec. 70.24)
State law reference–Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.006.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/221
Sec. 12.02.006 Altering, injuring or removing
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof. (1997 Code, sec. 70.25)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
Sec. 12.02.007 Stop signs
There may be installed, at such points on streets and avenues in the city as may be directed by the city council,
appropriate signs notifying drivers of vehicles to come to a full stop. Such signs, devices, or marks are to bear
the word “stop” and shall have the specifications required by the state Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. Whenever any such sign has been erected, it shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle
to fail to stop in obedience thereto. The operator of any vehicle who has come to a full stop as required above
shall be subject to the right-of-way prescribed by law. (1997 Code, sec. 70.26)
State law reference–Authority to designate through highways and stop and yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs.
542.202, 544.003.
ARTICLE 12.03 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Sec. 12.03.001 Mufflers required; prevention of fumes and smoke
(a) Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass, or similar
device upon a motor vehicle on a highway.
(b) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent
the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.
(1997 Code, sec. 71.01)
State law references–Muffler required, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 547.604; emission systems required, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 547.605.
Sec. 12.03.002 Riding on motorcycle
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such
operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular
seat if designated for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. (1997
Code, sec. 71.02)
State law reference–Riding on motorcycle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.416.
Sec. 12.03.003 Clinging to vehicle
No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or
himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1997 Code, sec. 71.03)
State law reference–Clinging to streetcar or vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 551.102(d).
Sec. 12.03.004 Cutting across property
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/221
No person driving a vehicle shall cross a sidewalk or drive through a driveway, parking lot, or business or
residential entrance without bringing the vehicle to a complete stop. No person driving a vehicle shall cross or
drive in or on such sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, or entrances at an intersection for the purpose of making
either a right or left turn from one street or highway to another street or highway. (1997 Code, sec. 71.04)
State law reference–Crossing property, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.423.
Sec. 12.03.005 Truck routes
(a) Use required. All vehicles registered to have a gross vehicle weight in excess of 35,000 pounds and all
vehicles registered as a truck tractor, which are commonly used to pull a trailer, shall be driven only on certain
public streets, also known as the “truck route,” as described in schedule II of this chapter (section 12.05.002).
(Ordinance 171017-01 adopted 11/7/17)
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles which are:
(1) Owned, leased, used or in service to the city, the county, the state or the United States.
(2) School buses and public buses.
(3) Emergency vehicles en route to and returning from an emergency.
(4) Making home deliveries or home pickups of goods or services.
(5) Mobile homes which are being installed within or removed from the boundaries of the city.
(6) Travel trailers and recreational vehicles.
(7) Owned or used or in the service of public utilities when in the performance of their duties.
(8) Picking up or delivering material to or from a warehouse or construction site.
(1997 Code, sec. 71.05)
Sec. 12.03.006 Funeral processions and other processions
(a) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
(b) Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as
practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(c) A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside
of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the traffic division.
(1997 Code, sec. 71.06)
Sec. 12.03.007 Following fire apparatus or ambulance
(a) The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire
apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/221
(b) No driver of a vehicle, except a driver on official business, may follow closer than 500 feet behind an
ambulance when the flashing red lights of the ambulance are operating. No driver of a vehicle may drive or park
his vehicle at a place where an ambulance has been summoned for an emergency call in a manner calculated to
interfere with the arrival or departure of the ambulance.
(1997 Code, sec. 71.07)
State law reference–Following fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 12.03.008 Driving over fire hose
No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street
or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in
command. (1997 Code, sec. 71.08)
State law reference–Crossing fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.408.
Sec. 12.03.009 Use of certain wireless communication devices while driving prohibited
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
Electronic message. A self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be
transmitted to or from a wireless communication device. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a
text-based communication, such as electronic mail, a text message, or an instant message, or a command or
request to access an internet site, or other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communication
protocol.
Wireless communication device. A device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C.
section 332.
(b) Offense. A person commits an offense if the person drives or operates a motor vehicle in the city while
using a wireless communication device to view, send or compose an electronic message.
(c) Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of conduct prohibited by subsection (b) if:
(1) The person is using the wireless communication device strictly to engage in a telephone
conversation, including dialing or deactivating a phone call;
(2) The person is in an authorized government vehicle and is using the wireless communication
device to respond to an emergency while acting in an official capacity;
(3) The person is using the wireless communication device while stopped or standing at a position
parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of a roadway where parking,
standing or stopping in a nonemergency situation is not otherwise prohibited; or
(4) The person is using the wireless communication device to:
(A) Operate only a global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to the vehicle;
(B) Obtain emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, serious
traffic hazard, fire or other hazardous response service;
(C) Prevent a crime about to be committed;
(D) Communicate with the reasonable belief that a person's life, safety, or property is in
immediate danger; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/221
(E) Operate only a device that is permanently installed inside the vehicle or that is solely in a
voice-activated or other hands-free mode.
(d) Conflicting regulations. To the extent that any clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this section
conflicts with Texas Transportation Code section 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communication devices
while operating a motor vehicle by minors; or Texas Transportation Code section 545.425, regarding the use of
wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, this section does not apply.
(Ordinance 11-02-15-1 adopted 2/17/11)
ARTICLE 12.04 PARKING, STOPPING OR STANDING*
Sec. 12.04.001 Prohibited in certain places
(a) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
(1) Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
(A) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(B) On a sidewalk.
(C) Within an intersection.
(D) On a crosswalk.
(E) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city council indicates a different
length by signs or markings.
(F) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic.
(G) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
(H) On any railroad track.
(I) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a
passenger or passengers:
(A) In front of a public or private driveway.
(B) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(C) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(D) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or trafficcontrol
signal located at the side of a roadway.
(E) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance (when properly
signposted).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/221
(F) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
(A) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(B) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from
a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
(1997 Code, sec. 72.01)
State law references–Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.302; moving
parked vehicle, V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, sec. 545.402.
Sec. 12.04.002 Unattended vehicles
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition and effectively setting the brake thereon and,
when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (1997 Code, sec.
72.02)
State law reference–Unattended vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.404.
Sec. 12.04.003 Parallel parking
When designated on schedule II of this chapter (section 12.05.032), it shall be unlawful for any person to park
any automobile, truck, or other vehicle unless said automobile, truck, or other vehicle is parked parallel with the
curb on said street and within 12 inches of the curb. (1997 Code, sec. 72.03)
State law reference–Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303.
Sec. 12.04.004 Angle parking
Parking at an angle to the curb shall be unlawful, except on Main Street in the downtown business area and
where designated by markings. (1997 Code, sec. 72.04)
State law reference–Authority to permit angle parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303(c).
Sec. 12.04.005 Trucks and commercial vehicles
(a) Any owner of commercial vehicles of more than 10,500 pounds shall not park in the city limits on property
that is not owned or leased by the owner of said vehicles, unless specific written permission has been issued by
the landowner.
(b) Maintenance, cleaning and/or fluid changes on trucks over 10,500 pounds shall not be performed on any
property in the city limits not owned or leased by the owner of said vehicles or properly equipped for truck
maintenance, and/or fluid changes. Such property must contain drains/catchments for fluids and shall be
constructed to prevent contamination of property.
(c) No trucks over 10,500 pounds not owned by the city shall be parked on municipal property, unless
authorized by the city.
(Ordinance 12-03-06-1 adopted 3/6/12)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/221
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place a truck tractor or semi-trailer in any residential area.
(Ordinance 171017-02 adopted 11/7/17)
ARTICLE 12.05 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.05.001 Schedule I: Speed limits
(a) State speed laws applicable. The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon
all streets within the city, except as this section, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon
the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified
streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a
speed in excess of any so declared in this section when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(b) It is hereby declared that the prima facie speed on US Hwy. 67 within the limits of the city shall be shown
on the attached plan to Ordinance 14-07-15-1which is hereby approved and made a part of the section and which
shall apply at all times when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(1) US Hwy. 67: 35 to 45 mph within the city limits as regulated by TXDOT state map.
(2) Speed limits on streets within city limit (unless otherwise specified by signs): 30 mph.
(3) School zones: 20 mph.
(Ordinance 14-07-15-1 adopted 7/15/14)
(4) Florida Avenue from First Street to Twelfth Street: 25 mph.
(5) Twelfth Street from Florida Avenue to Hwy 137: 25 mph.
Sec. 12.05.002 Schedule II: Truck routes
(a) East/west.
1st Street from Texas Hwy. 137 to Florida Street
2nd Street (Texas Hwy. 67) from City Limit Signs
12th Street from Texas Hwy. 137 to Louisiana Street
3rd Street from Louisiana Street to Josh Mitchell
Front Access Road from Louisiana Street to Josh Mitchell
South Railroad Street from Texas Hwy. 137 to dead end
South Russek Street from Texas Hwy. 137 to S. Mississippi Street (1 block)
South Sengleman Street from Texas Hwy. 137 to S. Mississippi Street (1 block)
(b) North/south.
Florida Street from 1st Street to 12th Street
Plaza Street from 2nd Street (Texas Hwy. 67) to South Russek Street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/221
Alaska Street in Industrial Park
Hawaii Street in Industrial Park
(c) The truck route can be violated from the direction of a peace officer for commercial vehicle enforcement
purposes.
(Ordinance 180320-02 adopted 4/3/18)
Sec. 12.05.003 Schedule III: Stop intersections
Be it ordained by the city council, that stop signs shall be erected at the intersection of the following streets to
ensure the safety of the citizens of the city, and in compliance with the state Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices:
Street Name Intersecting Street
Alaska Street Third Street
Alaska Street U.S. Hwy. 67
Alaska Street Frontage Road (2)
Hawaii Street Third Street
Hawaii Street U.S. Hwy. 67
Hawaii Street Frontage Road (2)
Colorado Street Third Street
Colorado Street U.S. Hwy. 67
Colorado Street Frontage Road
Josh Mitchell U.S. Hwy. 67
Vermont Avenue U.S. Hwy. 67
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/221
Connecticut Avenue U.S. Hwy. 67
New York Avenue U.S. Hwy. 67
Vermont Avenue Connecticut Avenue
New York Avenue Connecticut Avenue
Louisiana Street U.S. Hwy. 67
Sixth Street Louisiana Street
Ninth Street Louisiana Street (4)
Tenth Street Louisiana Street
Eleventh Street Louisiana Street
Twelfth Street Louisiana Street
Ninth Street Florida Avenue (2)
Tenth Street Florida Avenue
Eleventh Street Florida Avenue
South Plaza Avenue Wolters Street
Louisiana Street Access Road
Main Street Twelfth Street
Twelfth Street Main Street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/221
(Ordinance 15-05-05-1 adopted 5/5/15; Ordinance 160517-1 adopted 5/17/16; Ordinance 160906-01 adopted
9/6/16; Ordinance 161115-01 adopted 11/15/16)
Sec. 12.05.004 Schedule IV: One-way streets
(a) Texas Street, from 5th through 7th, shall be southbound traffic only, twenty-four hours (24) a day, seven
(7) days a week, three hundred sixty-five (365) days a year.
(b) California Street, from 5th through 7th, shall be northbound traffic only, twenty-four (24) hours a day,
seven (7) days a week, three hundred sixty-five (365) days a year.
(Ordinance 070417-1 adopted 8/1/07)
Secs. 12.05.005–12.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parking Schedules
Sec. 12.05.031 Schedule I: No parking zones
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any automobile, truck, or any other vehicle on the
following streets within the limits of the city:
Street Location Times
2nd Street All of 2nd Street All
(1997 Code, ch. 74, sch. I)
Sec. 12.05.032 Schedule II: Parallel parking
Automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles shall be parked parallel to and no more than 12 inches from the curb on
the following streets:
Street Location
1st Street Where parking is permitted on 1st Street
Texas Street Where parking is permitted on Texas Street
(1997 Code, ch. 74, sch. II)
ARTICLE 12.06 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/221
Sec. 12.06.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Driver. The person driving and having physical control over the golf cart.
Golf cart. As defined in Transportation Code section 502.001. A motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer
primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. Said vehicles usually have a minimum of three wheels and
an attainable top speed not greater than 30 miles per hour on a paved level surface. Specifically excluded from
this definition are those motorized vehicles commonly referred to as ATV's and four-wheelers which usually
exceed 30 miles per hour. Unless this type of vehicle is operated by/or on behalf of a government entity.
Owner. The person holding title to the golf cart and the person required to register the golf cart with the city.
Parking area. Those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for
temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots.
Street. The public roadways within the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route,
boulevard, etc.) that:
(1) Has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less; and
(2) Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system.
Sec. 12.06.002 Registration requirements
(a) All golf carts operated on streets and parking areas of the city must be registered with the city on an annual
basis in January of each year. The registration fee is $12.00 per year and a registration form will be available at
city hall for residents to complete and provide the basic information requested.
(b) The registration form will require the following specifics:
(1) Name and address of owner.
(2) Brand, model number and golf cart identification number (VIN #).
(3) Type of golf cart (gasoline or electric), including proof in the owner's manual that the golf cart
does not exceed 30 mph.
(4) Insurance policy number.
(5) Signature of owner that golf cart meets equipment requirements.
(c) Residents will have 90 days to register and bring their golf carts into compliance upon the ratification date
of this article and corresponding public notices.
Sec. 12.06.003 Transfer
Upon transfer of ownership of the golf cart to a person who intends to operate it over authorized streets and
parking areas, the new owner must register the golf cart as outlined in section 12.06.002 within 10 days.
Sec. 12.06.004 Electric and gasoline golf cart required equipment
Every golf cart operating on a city street must be equipped as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/221
(1) Operational headlamps.
(2) Operational tail lamps.
(3) Reflectors.
(4) Operational parking brake.
(5) Rearview mirrors.
(6) Slow-moving vehicle emblem.
Sec. 12.06.005 Operation regulations
(a) Golf carts may only be operated 30 minutes after sunrise until 30 minutes before sunset. Unless the golf
cart is participating in a parade.
(b) Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks (unless designated as cart paths also).
(c) All golf carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and
no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any golf cart of the full use of a lane.
(d) No driver shall operate a golf cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles.
(e) Rider capacity: To comply with public transportation safety standards the driver of the golf cart is
responsible for ensuring the safety of all passengers. The driver should adhere to the passenger load
requirements as specified by the golf cart manufacturer owner's manual and the stated seating capacity. All
occupants are to be properly seated in properly designed passenger seats while the cart is in motion. No sitting or
standing on the rear of a golf cart is allowed unless said golf cart is outfitted with the proper seats to
accommodate rear passengers.
(f) All drivers must meet state law driver's license requirements and age limit to operate a golf cart.
Sec. 12.06.006 Liability
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons, pets
or property which may result from the operation of a golf cart by a registered owner or authorized driver.
Registered owners are fully liable and accountable for the actions of any individual that they provide permission
to operate and drive said golf cart, both on personal and/or city and public properties. This described liability
responsibility especially applies to personal injuries or property damage resulting from golf cart drivers who are
minors under the age of 21 with or without a valid state driver's license.
Sec. 12.06.007 Enforcement and penalties
Enforcement of this article and any traffic violations committed by the driver of a golf cart may be enforced by
the county sheriff office and by any authorized city code enforcement official.
(Ordinance 161220-01 adopted 12/20/16)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/221
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Fees and charges; theft of service
(a) The city provides various services through the operations of the various departments of the city; said
departments include, but are not limited to, the gas department, water department, sewer department, and
sanitation department. As the governing body, the city council shall set those fees to be assessed for those
services provided by these departments and all other departments of the city.
(b) Fees and charges assessed for services provided by the city and the procedures relating to their collection
shall be as established by the city council from time to time by ordinance.
(c) The unauthorized use or theft of any service provided by the city or nonpayment for services provided
shall be prosecuted under the laws of the United States and the state, and the ordinances of the city.
(1997 Code, sec. 50.01)
Sec. 13.01.002 Removal of water or gas meter for delinquent accounts
Authorization is given the city secretary to call for removal of meters of the water and/or gas departments of the
city in such circumstances as seem necessary to secure payment of utility billing. Such service will be resumed
by the reinstallation of the meters involved upon payment of the then-delinquent account and payment of a fee
of as provided for in the fee schedule by the customer for this action. (1997 Code, sec. 50.02)
Sec. 13.01.003 Water rates
Rates for water service within the city shall be as specified in the fee schedule. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.01.004 Connection to public sewer required
Every business house or building occupied or intended for human habitation or occupancy which abuts on a
public street or alley in which there is a public sewer shall connect or have connected the sanitary facilities with
the public sewer system, either by the owner or his agent. Such connection shall be made in the most direct
manner possible and with a separate connection for each business and building. For the purposes of this section,
the words “sanitary facilities” shall mean facilities for the disposal of human excreta or other human wastes.
(1997 Code, sec. 50.04)
Sec. 13.01.005 Tampering with meters or other equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the duly authorized officers and agents of the city, to tamper with or
interfere with, damage, injure, or destroy any meter, regulator, pipeline, regulator station, distributing station, or
any other property belonging to or under the control of the city. (1997 Code, sec. 50.05)
State law reference–Criminal mischief by tampering with public communications, public water, gas, or power supply, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 28.03.
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/221
Alley. Any public way, generally of less width than a street, used for public utility purposes and right-of-way and
as an alternate secondary or emergency route for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, generally situated at the rear or
alongside a tier of lots.
Apartment. As defined by the Standard Building Code as adopted by section 3.02.051.
Brush. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of tree, shrub, and hedge clippings, providing that trunks and limbs
shall not exceed three inches in diameter and shall be cut in lengths not to exceed five feet.
Building code. The building code of the city. (See section 3.02.051.)
City sanitation crew. Those employees of the sanitation service of the city.
Commercial establishment. A structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business
enterprise.
Container. A receptacle for the deposit of solid waste.
Duplex. A structure intended for use and occupancy as a two-family dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit. As defined by the Standard Building Code.
Food establishment. A cafe, restaurant, or other similar establishment serving food or food products, including
quick service drive-ins where food is prepared and served.
Garbage. Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage
facilities, and handling and sale of produce and other food products.
Illegally dumped solid waste. Any solid waste placed on properties with or without the consent of the owner or
person in control where such waste constitutes a nuisance detrimental to the public health and welfare.
Institution or institutional. Any church, church building, or structure housing any charitable, philanthropic, or
eleemosynary undertaking, or any school.
Manager. The person in charge of real estate used for apartment, institutional, or commercial purposes.
Manual collection. The service rendered in collecting municipal solid waste from containers, which containers
can be handled in part by individuals picking up the containers as distinguished from picking up containers by
mechanical means and which containers are too large for handling by manual means.
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, trade, business and
recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish (or trash), ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and all other
solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
Occupant. The person residing in a dwelling unit, specifically the head of such household.
Owner. The record title holder of real property.
Parkway. The area ordinarily intervening between the curbline of a street and the inside property line.
Property line. A peripheral boundary of real estate.
Public utility easement. A right-of-way used or dedicated to be used by any public utility, including, but not
limited to, services such as electricity, telephone, gas, solid waste collection, water, sewer and drainage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/221
Public way. Any street, alley, easement or other right-of-way.
Residence. A structure intended for use and occupancy as a one-family dwelling unit.
Rubbish or trash. Nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste
materials; combustible rubbish (or trash) includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber,
plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish (or trash) includes glass,
crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures 1,600° Fahrenheit to 1,800° Fahrenheit.
Sanitary landfill. A method of disposing of municipal solid waste on land without creating a nuisance or hazard
to public health or safety, by utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the smallest
practical area, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume and to cover it with a layer of earth at appropriate
periodic intervals.
Street. Any public thoroughfare for the passage of vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
Superintendent of utilities. The manager of utilities of the city or any person authorized to act for him.
Vehicle. Any wheeled conveyance.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.01)
Sec. 13.02.002 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article for which no other penalty is provided
shall be subject to the penalty of section 1.01.009 of this Code of Ordinances.
(b) The failure by either the owner or his agent, as the case may be, to comply with the notice set out in
section 13.02.005(a) shall render such person guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of
$2,000.00, as set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which the violation is continued or permitted.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.99)
Sec. 13.02.003 Scope
The provisions of this article shall apply to all territory within the city. (1997 Code, sec. 51.02)
Sec. 13.02.004 Containers
(a) Containers required. Every person occupying a residence or duplex and every owner of an apartment shall
provide such premises with a sufficient number of solid waste containers or receptacles to provide for the output
of municipal solid wastes from those premises, as is provided in this section.
(b) Garbage containers. Garbage containers or receptacles shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and
durable grade of metal, plastic, or paper material.
(1) In the case of those containers which are manually emptied by the sanitation service employees
of the city, the combined weight of the waste and metal container shall not exceed 100 pounds and
the combined weight of the waste in a plastic or paper container shall not exceed 50 pounds.
(2) Underground garbage containers are prohibited for use in the city.
(3) All containers (except plastic or paper bags or other sack-type containers) shall be provided
with suitable lifting handles on the outside and a close-fitting or other approved cover equipped with
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/221
a handle.
(4) Plastic or paper refuse bags or sack-type containers shall be constructed of a material and in a
manner conforming to the city's standard specifications therefor as approved by the superintendent of
utilities. All bag or sack-type containers shall be secured at the top to prevent spillage.
(5) The container shall not contain any inside structures, such as bands or reinforcing angles, or
anything within the container to prevent the free discharge of the contents. Containers that have
deteriorated or that have become damaged to the extent that the covers therefor will not fit securely
or that they have jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to sanitation service employees or
other persons whose duty it is to handle such containers shall be condemned by the city, and if not
replaced after notice to the owner or user they will be removed along with the contents thereof.
(6) The lid shall be close-fitting and shall remain in place covering the container or receptacle at all
times when there is any material in the container. The lid may be attached by an appropriate means to
the rack upon which the containers are placed or to an adjacent fence or other appropriate fixed
object in order to prevent lids from getting into the pathway of vehicles; provided, however, that no
lid shall be attached to the container itself. Containers which have the lids directly attached to them
constitute a hazard to sanitation service employees engaged in the collection of solid waste and shall
be condemned by the city. If such attachments are not removed after notice to the owner or user, such
containers will be removed along with the contents thereof.
(c) Rubbish or trash receptacles. Rubbish or trash containers or receptacles shall be constructed of a suitable
durable material.
(1) In the case of those containers which are manually emptied by the sanitation service employees
of the city, no such container shall exceed 100 pounds combined weight of the waste and metal
container, and the combined weight of the waste in a plastic or paper container shall not exceed 50
pounds.
(2) Underground rubbish or trash containers are prohibited for use in the city.
(3) Containers for small, loose rubbish or trash items shall either conform to the requirements for
garbage containers or shall consist of a basket, cardboard box, or burlap bag, provided that the
container is durable enough to hold the contents during the collection process and provided the
capacity of the container shall not exceed 50 pounds, and that the combined weight of the small,
loose items of rubbish and trash and the container shall not exceed 50 pounds, and further provided
that the container not be overloaded to the point where spillage occurs from overflow, wind, or
handling.
(4) Plastic, paper, or other bag or sack-type containers for small, loose items of rubbish or trash
shall be secured at the top to prevent spillage.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.03)
Sec. 13.02.005 Removal of illegally dumped materials on private property
(a) Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of utilities to notify the owner or agent for
management purposes of any private premises within the city upon which any solid waste material has been
illegally placed or disposed to remove such solid waste materials within ten days. This notice shall be in writing
and may be served on the owner or such agent by handing it to him in person or by registered mail addressed to
such owner or agent at his post office address as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or, where such address is
not shown, then by notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city as many as two times
within ten consecutive days, provided that such notice is not necessary when such waste material is determined
by the superintendent of utilities to be an immediate health hazard.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/221
(b) Removal by city. Upon the failure of any such owner or agent to comply with the notice, as set out in this
section, or upon the written request and authorization of such owner or agent so notified, or in the event that the
superintendent of utilities determines that such conditions constitute an immediate health hazard, it shall become
the responsibility of the superintendent of utilities to have such solid waste materials collected and removed
from any property within the city.
(c) Charge for removal. A charge for each collection and removal of solid waste materials shall be levied,
assessed, and collected against such property each time such collection and removal of solid waste materials
shall be performed, provided that an additional charge can be levied, assessed, and collected against such
premises for the actual additional cost for said collection and removal. The charge shall consist of the wages
paid and equipment cost for the removal. The charges provided for herein shall be levied, assessed, and collected
by the city secretary, and if any person shall fail to pay such charges so assessed within 30 days after proper
notice, the city secretary will file with the county clerk a statement by the superintendent of utilities, setting out
the expenses that the city has incurred pursuant to the provisions of this section, and the city shall thereby
perfect a privileged lien on the property involved, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to
secure the expense to the city, together with 10% interest from the date such payment is due.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.04)
Secs. 13.02.006–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Collection and Disposal
Sec. 13.02.041 Residential collection
(a) It shall be the duty of every occupant of any residence or duplex to provide a sufficient number of solid
waste containers, at the place designated by the superintendent of utilities for collection of municipal solid waste
from the particular premises, to provide adequate capacity for the solid waste placed out for collection without
overloading the capacity of the containers provided therefor.
(b) All containers shall conform to the requirements of section 13.02.004.
(c) All collection of solid waste materials from residences or duplexes shall be by city sanitation service crews
or authorized contractors of the city.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.15)
Sec. 13.02.042 Placement of waste for collection
(a) Placement of containers alongside alley or easement. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
container within any alley within the city, and in all cases where the garbage is to be collected from the alley
outlet, containers shall be placed entirely within the lot line and adjacent to, but not in, the alley or other public
utility easement or public way utilized for this purpose. Suitable racks and containers shall be provided by the
occupant of any premises where containers are deemed by the superintendent of utilities as necessary to prevent
overturn or spillage by the actions of animals, wind, or other similar causes.
(1) In the event a fence without a gate separates the alley from the lot where the container is
located, a platform rack for the container or containers shall be constructed so that the top of the
container shall not be lower than level with the top of the fence nor higher than five feet above the
bottom of the fence or the ground at the fence.
(2) In the event a fence is constructed with an inset space for the placement of solid waste
containers outside the fence, but inside the lot line, containers placed therein shall be protected from
overturn or spillage by a rack as specified herein.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/221
(b) Placement of containers alongside street. Where a residence or duplex is not served by an alley, public
utility easement, or other public way in the rear or alongside thereof, all containers shall be placed just behind
the curbline of the street abutting such property, but shall not be placed in the street or on the sidewalk, or in any
manner placed where the containers will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Where special conditions
exist which subject containers so placed to overturn and spill, the superintendent of utilities may, at his
discretion, require such containers subject to overturn and spill to be placed in a portable or movable rack.
(c) Pack-out collection service. Garbage containers shall be placed at locations and under such conditions
approved by the superintendent of utilities for pack-out collection service by the sanitation service of the city.
(d) Rubbish, trash or brush. Rubbish, trash, or brush as defined in this article shall normally be collected from
the alley.
(1) Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of tree, shrub, and hedge clippings shall be collected,
providing that trunks and limbs shall not exceed three inches in diameter and shall be cut in lengths
not to exceed five feet.
(2) Rubbish, trash, or brush to be collected from the alley, public utility easement, or public way,
and not from the street, shall be placed at the property line, but shall not be placed inside the alley,
easement, or public way in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
(3) Where rubbish, trash, or brush is not collected from the alley, public utility easement, or other
public way, but is collected from the street, it shall be placed just behind the curbline of the street
abutting the premises, but shall not be placed in the street or on the sidewalk in such a manner as to
obstruct or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(4) Where the quantity of brush set out for collection is excessive, the superintendent of utilities
shall determine the amount of brush to be collected at any one time, the day of its collection, and any
other matters pertaining to brush collection in order not to disrupt normal service to other premises.
(5) Rubbish or trash consisting of small, loose items shall be placed in an approved container as
specified in section 13.02.004.
(6) Rubbish or trash consisting of large bulky items, such as furniture or appliances, shall be placed
out for collection in an alley, whether paved or unpaved, as specified by the superintendent of
utilities.
(7) All boxes and cartons must be broken down and bundled and no bundle shall exceed 50 pounds
in weight for collection by sanitation service crews of the city.
(8) Rubbish or trash collection service shall not be rendered as a pack-out collection service.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.16)
Sec. 13.02.043 Collection from apartments, institutions and commercial establishments
(a) The manual collection and removal of solid waste materials from apartments, institutions, and commercial
establishments, as defined in this article, shall be performed by sanitation service crews of the city only where
the containers conform to the requirements for containers for residential or duplex collection service, as
specified in section 13.02.004, or as approved by the superintendent of utilities.
(b) The placement of containers for collection from apartment houses, institutions, and commercial
establishments by city sanitation service crews shall be approved by the superintendent of utilities. Rubbish or
trash collection shall not be rendered as a pack-out collection service.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/221
(1997 Code, sec. 51.17)
Sec. 13.02.044 Collection in downtown area
(a) Where collection service is furnished by the sanitation service of the city to these premises, all rules and
regulations applicable to residences and duplexes, as provided in this article, shall apply.
(b) At any of the establishments in the downtown area where there is insufficient space between any structure
and the alley property line, or the easement property line, to permit the placing of waste containers as required
by the provisions of this article relating to residences and duplexes, the containers may be placed in such public
way at the very boundary thereof so as to permit the passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, subject to the
approval of the superintendent of utilities. In those special locations, the owner or occupant of the premises shall
remove all containers immediately after the solid waste material has been collected to a place within the
structure situated on the premises until the next regular scheduled time for collection.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.18)
Sec. 13.02.045 Dead animals
The bodies of dead animals shall not be placed in solid waste containers or in any street, alley, easement, or
public way. The collection and removal of dead animal bodies shall be a service of the city and shall be
furnished upon request or notification by any interested person. (1997 Code, sec. 51.19)
Sec. 13.02.046 Materials not handled by city
(a) The scope of the service rendered by the sanitation service of the city in the collection and removal of solid
waste materials is intended, in general, to serve the needs of dwelling units and their directly related activities,
operating businesses, and commercial establishments, except as exempted from the provisions of this article. It
is considered to be beyond the scope of such service to collect or remove solid waste materials generated by
clearing, construction, or demolition, and other such solid waste materials resulting from an activity beyond the
scope described above.
(b) Solid waste materials which will not be collected and removed by the sanitation service of the city as a
regular service are as follows:
(1) Rock, scrap building materials or other trash resulting from construction, remodeling, or
destruction by fire, the elements, acts of God, or other causes resulting from a general cleanup of
vacant or improved property, or trees, brush and/or debris cleared from property in preparation for
construction or occupancy, shall not be collected and removed by the city as a regular service, but
these materials must be removed at the expense of the owner or developer.
(2) Industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing or processing operations, including waste from
food and vegetable produce houses, poultry dressing establishments, and meat processing and meat
packing plants, must be disposed of by the owner or occupant of the building, business, or premises
where such wastes originate in the manner prescribed by state law and any applicable ordinance. The
superintendent of utilities shall determine what wastes fall within the above industrial classification.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.20)
Sec. 13.02.047 Disposal sites
(a) Authority of superintendent of utilities; assumption of risk by users.
(1) All garbage and rubbish or trash or other solid waste materials must be processed and/or
disposed of at a location and in a manner approved by the superintendent of utilities. All landfill
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/221
operations, including disposal procedures and determination of acceptable users, are the
responsibility of the superintendent of utilities or his authorized representative.
(2) Use of disposal sites, transfer stations, or other disposal facilities operated by the city is
restricted to the city sanitation service. Individuals bringing garbage, trash, or rubbish to city disposal
sites must present a valid driver's license as proof of residency.
(3) Any person entering upon a city-operated disposal site for any purpose shall be conclusively
presumed to know and appreciate the hazards and the extent of the damage which accompanies the
accumulation of scrap wood, glass, nails, trash, brush, waste and garbage of every description, and
the use of trucks, vehicles, and heavy machinery to move, remove, bury, and dispose of same. Every
person entering upon any such site shall be conclusively presumed to have assumed the risk of injury
connected with or resulting from such hazards and danger, and by his or her actions in entering upon
such site, and for and in consideration of the permission granted by the city to enter upon such site,
every person shall covenant and be deemed to have covenanted not to sue and to indemnify, save
harmless and defend the city, its agents, officers, and employees from and against any and all claims
of any nature whatsoever for injury or damage to person or property, whether real or asserted, arising
out of or resulting from the entry by such person upon any city-operated disposal site.
(b) Use of city facilities; scavenging.
(1) The superintendent of utilities shall have the authority to designate which processing and/or
disposal sites are to be opened to the public and which are to be restricted to municipal vehicles only,
provided that no processing or disposal facility within the city will be opened to solid waste material
originating outside the city limits without prior written permission and approval of the superintendent
of utilities.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to take, remove, or carry away from any processing or
disposal facility operated by the city any garbage, rubbish, trash, or other solid waste material, article,
thing, or object situated thereon, whether or not same has monetary value, without prior written
permission and approval of the superintendent of utilities. In prosecutions for this offense, it shall not
be necessary to describe the thing or things taken, removed, or carried away other than as generally
described herein or as article, thing, or item and it shall not be necessary to allege that the same had
value.
(c) Approval of private disposal operations. Processing and disposal of solid waste materials by private
persons shall be permitted only after proper application has been made to the superintendent of utilities as
complying with all applicable city, county, and state regulations pertaining to solid waste processing and
disposal operations.
(d) Operating hours of dump ground. The hours that the dump ground will be opened shall be determined by
the city council.
(e) Suspension or curtailment of private disposal operations. The superintendent of utilities shall have the
authority to curtail, temporarily suspend or permanently halt any solid waste processing or disposal operation
being conducted by any private person which does not conform to the requirements of city, county, or state
regulations pertaining thereto or shall in any manner jeopardize the public health, safety, and welfare and to
maintain that restriction until, in his judgment, adequate measures have been taken to assure that removal of the
curtailment or suspension restrictions will not jeopardize the public health, safety, or welfare.
(f) Authority to reject materials. The superintendent of utilities shall have the authority to cause to be rejected
for processing or disposal any material which, in his judgment, would create a nuisance by reason of emission of
disagreeable odors, or would operate to make the processing or disposal facilities unwholesome or adversely
affect the public health, safety, and welfare.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/221
(1997 Code, sec. 51.22)
Sec. 13.02.048 Billing; schedule of charges
(a) Method of billing; delinquency.
(1) All solid waste collection and disposal charges and fees shall be billed through the city in a
manner which will show each customer's fees and charges separately from the water bill. The charges
and fees herein established and authorized shall be billed to the person in whose name the water
service connection is taken where the premises are served with water and/or sewer and shall be billed
to the person in control of the premises. The person who is so billed and to whom the services are
made available shall be obligated to make payment therefor as herein provided. The bill will become
delinquent ten days after it is rendered.
(2) In addition to all other legal remedies available for the collection of a debt, the following
actions and remedies are authorized for delinquent payment of the charges herein authorized:
(A) The sanitation service may refuse to pick up and dispose of the garbage at the delinquent
location.
(B) The water and/or sewer service, if any, serving the delinquent premises in question may
be shut off and terminated in accordance with the termination procedures set forth in section
13.02.049.
(C) All present water utilities guaranty deposits, upon termination of sanitary service and/or
water service, may be applied to any amounts due either for sanitation service charges or fees of
water utilities bills.
(b) General regulations.
(1) Establishment of service charges will be based upon the current use of the property, not the
zoning district.
(2) There shall be a proration of service charges for a portion of a billing period. The initial billing
shall be made concurrent with the initial water billing.
(3) Except as set forth herein, collection service shall be provided by the sanitation service of the
city for all collection, and such service shall not be contracted through any other person.
(c) Schedule of service charges. The service charges under this article for collection of waste, use of disposal
sites and any other service shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.21)
Sec. 13.02.049 Payment of bills; disputes regarding bills
(a) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility or waste collection service to customers by reason of
nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form
for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and
telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect
that:
(1) All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill;
(2) If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff
notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/221
discontinued for nonpayment; and
(3) Any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing, at which time
he may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present
orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This
official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
(b) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct
billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure
provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been
due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(1997 Code, sec. 51.23)
ARTICLE 13.03 IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION
Sec. 13.03.001 Program adoption
The city developed this identity theft prevention program (program) pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's
red flags rule (rule), which implements section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, 16
C.F.R. section 681.2. This program was developed for the utility department of the city (utility) with oversight
and approval of the city council. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and
account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the city council determined that this program
was appropriate for the city's utility, and therefore approved this program on January 19, 2010. (Ordinance 10-
01-19-1, ex. A, sec. I, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.002 Purpose and definitions
(a) Establish an identity theft prevention program. To establish an identity theft prevention program designed
to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing
covered account and to provide for continued administration of the program in compliance with part 681 of title
16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003.
(b) Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the red flags rule.
(1) The red flags rule defines identity theft as “fraud committed using the identifying information
of another person” and a red flag as “a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible
existence of identity theft.”
(2) Under the rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an “identity theft
prevention program” tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The program
must contain reasonable policies and procedures to:
(A) Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those
red flags into the program;
(B) Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
(C) Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity
theft; and
(D) Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to
the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/221
(c) Red flags rule definitions used in this program.
Covered account. Under the rule, a covered account is:
(1) Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household
purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and
(2) Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk
to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft.
Creditors. The rule defines creditors “to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers,
utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government entities defer payment
for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors.”
Identifying information. Is defined under the rule as “any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,” including: name, address, telephone
number, Social Security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien
registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique
electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routing code.
Program. The identity theft prevention program for the city.
Program administrator. The city secretary is the program administrator for the program.
Utility. The utility is the utilities department for the city.
(Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. II, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.003 Identification of red flags
In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the
methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous
experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories:
(1) Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies.
(A) Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report;
(B) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or
applicant;
(C) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant;
and
(D) Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's
usual pattern or activity, including but not limited to:
(i) Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries.
(ii) Unusual number of recent credit applications.
(iii) A material change in use of credit.
(iv) Accounts closed for cause or abuse.
(2) Suspicious documents.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/221
(A) Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic;
(B) Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is
not consistent with the person presenting the document;
(C) Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer
information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and
(D) Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
(3) Suspicious personal identifying information.
(A) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the
customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social
Security number range and date of birth);
(B) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information
(for instance, Social Security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report);
(C) Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other
applications that were found to be fraudulent;
(D) Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an
invalid phone number or fictitious billing address);
(E) Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer;
(F) An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person;
(G) A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application
when reminded to do so (however, by law Social Security numbers must not be required) or an
applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a
purse or wallet; and
(H) A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for
the customer.
(4) Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account.
(A) Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's
name;
(B) Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
(C) Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity);
(D) Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
(E) Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility;
(F) Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity;
(G) Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
(H) Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/221
(5) Alerts from others. Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection
service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for
a person engaged in identity theft.
(Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. III, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.004 Detecting red flags
(a) New accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new
account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the
account:
(1) Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business
address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification;
(2) Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification
card);
(3) Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity;
(4) Request additional documentation to establish identity; and
(5) Independently contact the customer or business.
(b) Existing accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility
personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account:
(1) Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via
facsimile, via email);
(2) Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and
(3) Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes.
(Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. IV, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.005 Preventing and mitigating identity theft
In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the
following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag:
(1) Prevent and mitigate.
(A) Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
(B) Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods;
(C) Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts;
(D) Not open a new account;
(E) Close an existing account;
(F) Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities;
(G) Reopen an account with a new number;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/221
(H) Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take;
(I) Notify law enforcement; or
(J) Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances.
(2) Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity
theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to
its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information:
(A) Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure;
(B) Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents
and computer files containing customer information;
(C) Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after
a set period of time;
(D) Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis;
(E) Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured;
(F) Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
(G) Request only the last 4 digits of Social Security numbers (if any);
(H) Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and
(I) Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility
purposes.
(Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. V, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.006 Program updates
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the
soundness of the utility from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will consider the utility's
experiences with identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection
and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business
arrangements with other entities, consult with law enforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel.
After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program,
including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program
or present the city council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a determination
of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. (Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. VI,
adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 13.03.007 Program administration
(a) Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity
theft committee for the utility. The committee is headed by a program administrator who may be the head of the
utility or his or her appointee. Two or more other individuals appointed by the head of the utility or the program
administrator comprise the remainder of the committee membership. The program administrator will be
responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for
reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating
identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances
and considering periodic changes to the program.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/221
(b) Staff training and reports.
(1) Initially, all utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program
administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is
detected. Thereafter, all utility staff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally,
all new utility employees shall undergo training.
(2) All utility staff shall submit reports monthly concerning the utility's compliance with the
program, the training that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in
addressing the risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While
incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the program administrator, the monthly
reports shall contain a recap of the incident and include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the
incident.
(c) Service provider arrangements. In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in
connection with one or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the utility will
take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable
policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft:
(1) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place; and
(2) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program
and report any red flags to the program administrator.
(d) Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs,
the red flag rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity
theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices
are to be limited to the identity theft committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of
preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it
would be counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag
detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document.
(Ordinance 10-01-19-1, ex. A, sec. VII, adopted 1/19/10)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE*
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The comprehensive zoning ordinance, Ordinance 050517-1, adopted by the city on May 17, 2005, as amended,
is included at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance and the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/221
technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only
nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and
denoted by a history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material
is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other
material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF BIG LAKE ORDINANCE
ZONING ORDINANCE 050517-1
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BIG LAKE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE ZONING ORDINANCE,
ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING FOR ZONING REGULATIONS; CREATING USE DISTRICTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, WHICH TOGETHER WITH THE ZONING MAP;
REGULATING WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS THE SIZE AND USE OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS THAT MAY
BE OCCUPIED; ESTABLISHES PARKING REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS; REGULATES HOME OCCUPATIONS; REQUIRING OFF-STREET PARKING
AND LOADING; PROVIDES FOR SCREENING; REGULATES SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES;
PROVIDES FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES; REGULATES
NONCONFORMING USES; PROVIDES FOR AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE;
PROVIDES FOR THE CREATION, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT;
PROVIDES ZONING DEFINITIONS; PROVIDES FOR THE INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTS;
PRESERVES RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER EXISTING
ORDINANCES; REPEALS CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; PROVIDES FOR SEVERABILITY OF EACH
SECTION, PARAGRAPH, SENTENCES, CLAUSES AND PHRASES OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE;
PROVIDES FOR A GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS NOT TO EXCEED TWO HUNDRED
DOLLARS ($200.00) FOR EACH OFFENSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
Whereas, the City of Big Lake is empowered by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code to establish a
zoning ordinance;
Whereas, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Big Lake has given appropriate and reasonable
consideration to the zoning regulations and districts most appropriate for the City and made such
recommendations to the Big Lake City Council.
Whereas, both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council of the City of Big Lake have duly
held public hearings and given proper notice pertaining to the adoption of this zoning ordinance;
Whereas, the Big Lake City Council finds that the zoning ordinance represents the best interest of all citizens of
Big Lake and promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the people; NOW,
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BIG LAKE, TEXAS:
SECTION 1. TITLE
This ordinance, together with all subsequent amendments thereto, shall hereby be referred to as the “Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Big Lake, Texas”.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This ordinance is prepared under the authority of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Chapter 211, to promote
health, safety, morals, and for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical and cultural
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/221
importance and significance, and the general welfare of the community. These zoning regulations are made in
accordance with the spirit of the city comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the general welfare of the community; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of
the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
SECTION 3. ZONING ADMINISTRATION
A. ADMINISTRATION
The City Administrator is hereby designated by the City Council as the Zoning Administrator to supervise the
administration and enforcement of these regulations. The City administrator may appoint an assistant to help
him or her with the general administration and enforcement duties required for the implementation of this zoning
ordinance.
It is the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include:
1. Review all zoning requests for amendments, appeals, specific uses, and variances.
2. See that property owners within two hundred feet (200') of any property are notified by mail
where a change is requested in zoning regulations, or district boundaries. Such notice shall be given,
not less than ten (10) days before the day set for hearing on the change.
3. Prepare copies of zoning material for public hearings to the Planning and Zoning Commission,
Zoning Board of Adjustment, and City Council and serve as their support staff in zoning matters.
4. Present zoning application and specific use permit request to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council during public hearings.
5. Keep the Zoning District Map updated as district boundaries and specific uses and overlay zones
are approved by the City Council.
6. Notify in writing action taken by the City Council to the appropriate property owner or owners
to their zoning request.
7. If the Zoning Administrator or his or her designated administrative official finds that any of the
provisions of this ordinance are being violated, the Zoning Administrator or his or her designated
administrative official shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Administrator
or his or her designated administrative official shall order the discontinuance of any illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, the removal of any illegal buildings or structures or of any illegal
additions, alterations or structural changes, the discontinuance of any illegal work being performed;
or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent
violation of these provisions.
B. INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the
Zoning Administrator or his or her designated representative, and that such questions shall be presented to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as
provided by law.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/221
C. CITY COUNCIL DUTIES
The City Council shall consider and adopt or reject proposed amendments to this ordinance or of its repeal. In
addition, the City Council shall establish a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Subsection D here below.
D. FEES
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish a schedule of fees and charges for the permits,
certificates of occupancy, zoning change requests, zoning board of adjustment appeals and other matters
pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees and charges may be altered or amended only by action of the
city council. Until all applicable fees and charges have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any zoning
application or appeal.
E. BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
1 Zoning Conformance Required Prior to Issuance of Building Permits
No building permit shall be issued by the City of Big Lake for any structure unless the
structure conforms with the provisions of this ordinance.
A building permit shall be required from the Building Inspector for the erection,
alteration, or enlargement of any building or a moved building onto a lot within the City.
The applicant must file with the Building Inspector's Office a plan, drawn to scale, and in
such form as prescribed by the said Building Inspector, correctly showing the location and
actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the
building to be erected, altered, enlarged or moved in, together with a true statement in
writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building is arranged,
intended or designed, and furnishing such other information as the Building Inspector may
require in the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, and any failure to comply
with the provisions of the Ordinance shall be good cause for the revocation of any such
building permit by the Building Inspector. A record of such applications and plans shall be
kept in the office of the Building Inspector.
All outstanding permits shall be valid for a maximum period of ninety (90) days after
adoption of this Ordinance. All building permits issued after the adoption of this
Ordinance shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days.
2 Certificate of Occupancy Required for New, Altered, or Changed Use
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any building which is hereafter erected,
changed, converted or altered in its use or structure. The certificate of occupancy shall not
be issued unless the building or land conforms to all applicable codes and the
requirements of this ordinance. Application for this certificate of occupancy shall be made
at the same time as the application for a required building permit. The certificate of
occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structured [structural]
alterations of such buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions
of these regulations.
Use or occupancy, or allowing the use or occupancy, of such a building without having
obtained a certificate of occupancy as required herein shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance and that be punishable by fine.
3 Certificate of Occupancy Required to Change, Alter, Enlarge, or Modify a Nonconforming
Building or Use
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/221
Should the owner or occupant of a nonconforming building or use desire to change, alter,
enlarge, or otherwise modify the nonconforming building or use, he or she shall be
required to: (1) file an affidavit with the city stating that such building or land occupied by
the nonconforming building or use was, to the best of the owner or occupant's knowledge,
in lawful use and lawfully existing as of the date of adoption of this ordinance. Said
affidavit shall include a statement providing the basis for the person's knowledge of the
statement made; and (2) submit an application to the city for a new certificate of
occupancy. Upon proper application and satisfaction that the nonconforming building or
use was in existence as of the date of adoption of this ordinance, the city may issue a
certificate of occupancy for the lawful nonconforming building or use in accordance with
the rules and requirements for such issuance. Any person denied a certificate of
occupancy under these provisions shall have the right to appeal the decision to the board
of adjustment.
Use or occupancy or allowing the use or occupancy of such a building without having
obtained a certificate of occupancy as required herein shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance and shall be punishable by fine.
4 Temporary Certificates of Occupancy
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city for a period not exceeding
three (3) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion, provided that said temporary certificate may include such conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
5 City to Maintain Record of Certificates of Occupancy
The City shall maintain a public record of all certificates of occupancy.
6 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits and Certificates of
Occupancy
Building permits and/or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the City of Big Lake authorize only that specific use, structural
arrangement, or construction as set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any
other use, arrangement, or construction shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
shall be punishable by fine.
7 Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy Issued in Error Are Avoidable [Voidable]
Whenever a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted in error by an
administrative official of the City of Big Lake, the permit or certificate may be voided by
the city council. Prior to such action by the city council, the affected party shall be given
an opportunity in a hearing before the city council to show why such permit or certificate
should not be voided. Notice of such hearing shall be served upon the affected party at
least ten (10) days prior to such hearing by personal service or by mailing such notice by
certified mail, prepaid, return receipt requested, to his or her address as it appeared in the
application filed for the building permit or certificate of occupancy. The city council shall
give due consideration to the arguments of the affected party in determining whether to
void the building permit or certificate of occupancy and shall render its decision after
hearing and considering all such arguments.
SECTION 4. ZONING DISTRICT MAP
A. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/221
The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this zoning ordinance. This map shall
be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection during regular office
hours. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the zoning
administrator, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: “This is the official zoning map as
adopted by part of Ordinance No. _____ on_____________, 2005 by the City Council of the City of Big Lake,
Texas.”
When changes are made in any zoning district boundaries, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning
map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. No zoning change shall become
effective until after its approval by the city council.
B. ZONING MAP REPLACEMENT
The city council may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map should the original official zoning map be
damaged, destroyed, lost or become ambiguous because of the nature or number of changes and additions. The
new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall also be identified by the signature of the
mayor attested by the zoning administrator, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
“This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map
adopted on ___________ as a part of the zoning ordinance of the City of Big Lake, Texas.”
C. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the
following shall apply:
1 When the district boundaries are roads or streets, unless otherwise shown, and where the
designation of the district map indicates that the various districts are bounded by a road or street line,
the centerline of such road or street shall be construed to be the district boundary line;
2 Where the district boundaries indicated follow platted lot or tract lines, the district boundaries
shall be construed to follow such lot or tract lines.
3 Where the district boundaries indicated appear to follow city limit boundaries, the district
boundaries shall be construed to follow the city limit boundaries.
4 Where district boundaries [are] indicated as dividing a lot or tract, the district boundaries shall be
construed as being located as shown on the Zoning District Map. Distances not specifically indicated
on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
5 Where district boundaries are disputed or not otherwise clearly designated, or where the physical
or structural features are at variance with the official zoning map or in other circumstances not
covered in this section, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
SECTION 5. ZONING DISTRICTS
A. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Big Lake, Texas is hereby divided into eight (8) zoning districts as
follows:
SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS
1. “R-1”- Single-Family Residential District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/221
2. “R-2”- Single-Family Residential District
3 “R-3”- Two-Family Residential District
4. “R-4”- Multiple-Family Residential District
5. “MH”- Manufactured Home District
6. “LR”- Local Retail District
7. “C”- Commercial District
8. “I”- Industrial District
B. NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY
1 Annexed Territory to be Temporarily Zoned R-1
All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily zoned as “R-1” singlefamily
residential district, until permanent zoning is established by the city council, except
as provided in paragraph (3) below. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on
newly annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the
adoption of the original zoning regulations. However, nothing herein shall prevent the
granting of permanent zoning at the time of annexation and zoning such territory other
than an “R-1 District.”
2 Regulations for Temporary R-1 Districts
In an area temporarily classified as R-1:
(a) No person shall erect, construct or add to any building or structure or cause same to be
done in any newly annexed territory without first applying for and obtaining a building permit
or certificate of occupancy from the city as required herein.
(b) No building permit for the construction of a building or a certificate of occupancy shall be
issued other than for the construction of a building or a use permitted in R-1 District(s).
3 Concurrent Rezoning and Annexation
Application(s) for permanent zoning of a newly annexed area may be considered by the
city at the same time as the area is being considered for annexation, although annexation
procedures must be completed prior to any final zoning actions by the city council.
C. GENERAL COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The regulations established by this ordinance within each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall
apply uniformly to each class and kind of structure or land, and in accordance with the following:
1 Conformity with District Required
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally
altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zoning
district in which it is located.
2 Height and Lot Coverage to Conform with District Regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/221
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed the height or to occupy a greater percentage of the lot area
which is prescribed for the district in which it is located.
3 Height and Area Exceptions
The regulations contained herein relating to the height of buildings or structures and the
size of yards and other open spaces shall be subject to the following exceptions:
(a) Chimneys, noncommercial television receiving antennas, and satellite dishes as part of a
residential development or use are hereby exempted from the height regulations as established
herein.
(b) Church steeples or spires, belfries, cupolas, cooling towers, tanks, water towers,
microwave radio and television relay or broadcasting towers, mast or aerials and necessary
mechanical appurtenances are hereby excepted from the height regulations as established
herein; provided, a specific use permit or variance is granted when the maximum height
allowed in the zoning district is exceeded.
(c) When a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet, lot width or lot
depth as required for the district in which it is located, and was of record as such at the time of
the passage of this zoning ordinance, such lot may be continued to be occupied or used and
nothing herein shall prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. However; no building or
structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered on such nonconforming
lot unless a variance has been granted to do so.
(d) An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front, back or side
yard setback for a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, but shall not be interpreted to include
or permit fixed canopies.
4 Yards to Conform with District Regulations
No building or other structure shall have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards or other open spaces than herein required or in any other manner be contrary to the
provisions of these regulations unless existing at the time of passage of this ordinance, in
which case, they shall not be further reduced in size without a variance.
5 No Yard or Other Integral Component Required for Any Building Shall be Counted Twice
No part of a yard or other open space, off-street parking or loading space required in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these zoning regulations
shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building.
6 Visibility at Intersections Required
On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (2-1/2')
to ten feet (10') above ground level measured from thirty feet (30') from the corner
intersection.
7 Access to Structures
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or
with access to an approved private street; and all structures shall be so located on lots as to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/221
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street
parking.
8 Refuse Containers Prohibited in Front or Side Yard of Business
Refuse containers or dumpsters shall not be located in the front or side yard of any
business establishment or property zoned for commercial or industrial use. This restriction
shall not apply in cases where compliance would cause such containers to be inaccessible
to refuse collection vehicles. For the purposes of this restriction, the zoning administrator
shall determine after reasonable investigation whether the container is so accessible or
not.
9 Number of Dwellings Per Lot Restricted
No more than one dwelling shall be permitted on any lot of record which is zoned as an
“R-1” and “R-2”, District and on any lot in the “MH” District subdivided for a single
manufactured home.
D. SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED
The following table of district regulations is hereby adopted and shall be considered as part of each applicable
zoning district regulation as hereafter described in this ordinance:
SECTION 5.D - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Area Regulations R-1
Single-
Family
R-2
Single-
Family
R-3 Two-
Family
R-4
Multi-
Family
MH LR C I
Minimum Lot Area (Sq.
Ft.)
7,000 5,000 6,000 (b) (e) (f) 3,000 N/A N/A
Minimum Lot Width
(Feet)
60 50 60 60 40* 25 N/A N/A
60**
Minimum Lot Depth
(Feet)
110 100 100 100 80* 100 N/A N/A
100**
Minimum Front Yard
Setback (Feet)
25 (a) 25 (a) 25 (a) (a) (c) 25* (h) (h) (h)
25**
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/221
Minimum Front Yard
Setback - Major Street
(Feet)
35 35 35 35 25* (h) (h) (h)
35**
Minimum Side Yard
Setback (Feet)
5 5 5 10 6* (i) (i) (i)
6**
Area Regulations R-1
Single-
Family
R-2
Single-
Family
R-3 Two-
Family
R-4
Multi-
Family
MH LR C I
Minimum Side Yard
Setback - Corner Lot
15 15 15 15 25* (i) N/A N/A
25**
Minimum Side Yard
Setback - Corner Lot
Fronting at Front & Side
St.
25 25 25 25 25 N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Rear Yard
Setback (Feet)
20 (a) 20 (a) 20 (a) 15 (a) 20* (j) (j) (j)
25**
Maximum Hgt. (Stories) 2.5 2.5 2.5 3 1.5 3 8 8
Height of Structure (Ft.) 35 35 35 45 25 45 100 100
Maximum Lot Coverage 40% 40% 40% 40% 40% N/A N/A 30%
Minimum Living Area -
Excluding Garage
1,200 800 (d) (d) (g) N/A N/A N/A
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/221
* Pertains to manufactured home park. (Front yard setback shall be from a dedicated street right-of-way or from any private drive
designed or used for access, circulation or service within the park.)
** Pertains to individually owned manufactured home lots.
(a) R-1, R-2 and R-3 district - lots having a double street frontage at the front & back, the minimum front yard requirement shall be
provided at the front and back lot line.
(b) R-4 district - the minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet for a multiple-family unit and there shall not be less than twelve
hundred (1,200) square feet of lot area for each family unit.
(c) R-4 district - the minimum front yard shall be 25 feet on a non-major street, except where circular or similar entrance drives cross
the lot in front of the main building are used, in which event the minimum front yard depth shall be 35 feet and no parking space or
vehicle storage area shall be located closer to the front property line than 25 feet.
(d) R-4 district - the minimum living area per unit shall be five hundred (500) square feet for an efficiency, six hundred fifty (650)
square feet for one (1) bedroom, eight hundred (800) square feet for two (2) bedrooms, and nine hundred (900) square feet for three (3)
bedrooms. However, the average living area for all apartments in an apartment building must be a minimum of eight hundred (800)
square feet.
(e) For manufactured home lots which are individually owned, the minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet when
a public sewer system is available. When septic tanks are used the square feet of the lot area shall be the size specified by the state
agency that monitors Wastewater systems.
(f) For manufactured home parks, the minimum lot area shall be at least three times larger than the manufactured home to be placed
thereon and in no event less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet in area when a public sewer system serves the park.
Where no public sewer system is available and septic tanks are used for sewerage disposal, the minimum lot area shall be size specified
by the state agency that monitors Wastewater systems.
(g) The minimum living area for a manufactured home is four hundred fifty (450) square feet.
(h) A front yard or setback along U.S. Highway 67 and State Highway 137 of thirty-five (35) feet shall be required for all zoning
districts except in the designated Central Business District that is graphically shown on the Zoning District Map.
No front yard or setback is required for zoning districts in the designated Central Business District.
In other areas of the City, no front yard or setback is required for commercial or industrial structures except where a lot adjoins a
residential district or lot, in which the front yard in the commercial or industrial district shall be provided for a distance of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of said residential district or lot.
(i) No side yard shall be required for commercial or industrial structures except that a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width
shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district and on corner lots not in the Central Business District as shown on
the Zoning District Map.
(j) No rear yard is required for commercial or industrial structures except that a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth
shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting upon a residential district or lot.
SECTION 6. “R-1” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “R-1” Single-Family Residential District is established to allow for single-family dwellings.
B. PERMITTED USES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/221
The uses permitted in the “R-1” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14
hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless
otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 14 and
17 hereof. Parking for at least two motor vehicles shall be provided by an enclosed garage or carport for any
single-family dwelling constructed after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
1 Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with Big Lake's Code of Ordinances.
2 It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one
time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks &
Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is
owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to
display more than two, or combination thereof, of the following: motor vehicles; boats or other
similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper
shells per lot at any time.
SECTION 7. “R-2” SINGLE [FAMILY] RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “R-2” district permits a medium density development.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “R-2” District include those listed in “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14 hereof.
Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise
allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIAL USE PERMIT
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/221
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action for the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 14 and
17 hereof. Parking for at least two motor vehicles shall be provided by an enclosed garage or carport for each
dwelling unit constructed after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
1 Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with Big Lake's Code of Ordinances.
2 It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one
time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks &
Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is
owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to
display more than two, or combination thereof, of the following: motor vehicles; boats or other
similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper
shells per lot at any time.
SECTION 8. “R-3” TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
A. PURPOSE
The “R-3” Residential District is established to meet the needs for low and medium density residential
development.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses shall [be as] permitted in the “R-3” District in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14 hereof. Any
use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise
allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIAL USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/221
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 14 and
17 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required, however, carports and garages are
encouraged.
F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
1 Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with Big Lake's Code of Ordinances.
2 It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one
time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks &
Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is
owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or family shall be permitted to
display more than one of the following at any time: motor vehicles, boats or vessels subject to
registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31, or camper shells.
SECTION 9. “R-4” MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “R-4” Multifamily Residential District is established to meet the needs for medium to high density
residential development where such areas are suitable for higher impact development and higher volume traffic
while encouraging the provision of conveniently located rental accommodations.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses shall [be as] permitted in the “R-3” [R-4] District in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14 hereof.
Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise
allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIAL USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/221
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 14 and
17 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required, however, carports and garages are
encouraged.
F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
1 Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with Big Lake Code of Ordinances.
2 It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one
time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks &
Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is
owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or family shall be permitted to
display more than one of the following at any time: motor vehicles, boats or vessels subject to
registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31, or camper shells.
SECTION 10. “MH” MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “MH” Manufactured Home District is intended to provide for quality manufactured home park subdivision
development containing many of the characteristics and atmosphere of a conventional type single-family
residential subdivision. The minimum size of a manufactured home park shall be five (5) acres.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “MH” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14
hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless
otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/221
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 14 and
17 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is especially required, however, carports and garages are encouraged.
F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
1 Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with Big Lake's Code of Ordinances.
2 It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one
time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks &
Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is
owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to
display more than two of the following, or combination thereof, per lot at any time: motor vehicles,
boats or other similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter
31, or camper shells per lot at any time.
SECTION 11. “LR” LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “LR” Restricted Commercial District has been established to limit commercial uses and operations within
enclosed buildings and prohibiting the outside storage and display of goods, materials, vehicles and equipment.
This district is intended to accommodate the basic shopping and service needs of residents and to provide retail
and office space for merchants and financial, administrative, government and business services.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “LR” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 14
hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless
otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 14 and
17 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required.
F. ALL COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND SALES TO BE ENCLOSED; EXCEPTION
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/221
All commercial uses, operations, and sales, except for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings. However, the City Council may grant a permit to businesses
for sidewalk sales for a period up to thirty (30) days.
SECTION 12. “C” COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “C” Commercial District is established to accommodate most commercial activities that cannot generally be
accommodated in “LR” District. This district permits the storage of goods, materials, equipment, machinery and
vehicles outside of enclosed buildings.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “C” Commercial District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in
Section 14 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district,
unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 14 and
17 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required.
SECTION 13. “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. PURPOSE
The “I” Industrial District is established to accommodate most industrial and manufacturing uses, provided such
use is not noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, soot, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
B. PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the “I” Industrial District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section
14 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless
otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 20 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.
C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/221
In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally
permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled
circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of
action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may
authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section
15 [Section 14] of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any
adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use
of the land and buildings granted.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE
The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum
building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to
this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D
and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.
E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The minimum off-street parking space requirements for manufacturing and industrial uses shall be one (1) space
for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area of all buildings
used for the such manufacturing or industrial purposes, whichever is greater. Such off-street parking shall also be
in accordance with Sections 14 and 17 hereof.
(Ordinance 050517-1 adopted 5/17/05)
SECTION 14 SCHEDULE OF USES AND OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. SCHEDULE OF USES AND OFF-STREET PARKING ESTABLISHED
Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses
but no land shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be occupied, used, erected,
altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted which is arranged or designed to be used for other than those
uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following schedule of uses:
X Designates use permitted in district
Designates use prohibited in district
S Use permitted with specific use
permit
NOTE: Gross floor area is abbreviated as g.f.a. Also, any numbers in parentheses represent a footnote and all
footnotes are found at the end of this schedule of uses.
Residential Use: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Single-Family Dwelling X X X X X S S S 2/dwelling unit
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/221
Two-Family Dwelling
X X X S S S 2/dwelling unit
Three-Family Dwelling
X
X X S 2/dwelling unit
Four-Family Dwelling
X
X X S 2/dwelling unit
Apartment or Multifamily
Bldg.
X
X X S 2/dwelling unit
Manufactured Home
S
X
S 2/dwelling unit
Industrialized Housing
X S S X
S 2/dwelling unit
Manufactured Home Park
X
2/dwelling unit
Residential Use: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Townhouse
X
2/dwelling unit
Condominium
X
2/dwelling unit
Trailer Camp or Park
S
1/dwelling unit
Recreational Vehicle
S
X
S 1/dwelling unit
Boarding (Rooming) House
X
1/dwelling room
Child Day Care Home X X X X S S S
2/dwelling
Group Home S S S S
2/dwelling
Group Day Care Home S S S S
Specified by SUP
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/221
Halfway House S S S S S 1/2 per occupant
Guest House or Quarters X X X S S
1/dwelling unit
Accessory Building X X X X X
None
Tennis Court (private) X X X X X
None
Swimming Pool (private) X X X X X
None
Home Occupation (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
None
Agriculture/Ranch Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Farm X
2/dwelling unit
Farmer's Market
X
2/stall
Orchard X X
1/employee
Produce Stand
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Ranch X
2/dwelling unit
Rodeo Ground, Arena
S Specified by SUP
Stable, Private X X
None
Stable, Public
X 1/2 stalls
Utility/Solid Waste Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Cable TV Lines X X X X X X X X None
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/221
Electric Substations S S S S S S S S None
Gas Line (6" or larger) S S S S S S S X None
Gas Regulating/Gate Station S S S S S S S X None
Microwave Tower S S S S S S S X None
Radio and Television Tower S S S S S S S X None
Railroad Yard
X 1 per employee
Recycling Center
S X 1 per employee
Refuse Transfer Station
S 1 per employee
Sewer Lift Station X X X X X X X X None
Telephone Exchange S S S S S X X X None
Telephone Poles and Lines X X X X X X X X None
Utility Mains and Lines X X X X X X X X None
Wastewater Treatment Plant S S S S S S S X 2 minimum
Water Pump Station X X X X X X X X None
Water Storage Tank X X X X X X X X None
Water Treatment Plant S S S S S S S X 2 minimum
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/221
Water Well S S S S S S S S None
Gov't & Institutional
Uses:
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Athletic Field or Stadium S S S S S S X X 1/4 seats
Auditorium or
Amphitheater
S S S S S X X X 1/4 seats
Cemetery or Mausoleum S S S S S S S S None
Gov't & Institutional
Uses:
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Church or Rectory X X X X X X X X 1/4 seats
College or University S S S S S X X X 1/3 students
Community Center S S X X S X X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Convalescent Center
S X S 1/3 beds
Fire Station X X X X X X X X 2/bay
Hospital S S S S S S X X 1/bed
Library X X X X X X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Museum or Art Gallery S S S S S X X S 1/200 g.f.a.
Park or Playground X X X X X X X X 1/2000 site area
Police Station S S S S S X X X 2 visitor spaces
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/221
Post Office
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Prison or Penitentiary
S 1/6 cells
Sanitarium
S 1/6 beds
School (nursery or
kindergarten)
S S S S S X X S 1/10 children
School (trade or business)
X X X 1/3 students
School (elementary or
middle)
X X X X X X X S 1/15 students
School (high school) X X X X X X X S 1/3 students
Government Office
X X S 1/300 g.f.a.
Swimming Pool (public) S S S S S X X S 10 minimum
Tennis Court (public) S S S S S X X S 2/court
Religious Camp S S S S S X X X 1/3 beds
Commercial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Amusement Park (outside)
X X 1/500 site area
Animal Shelter
X X 1/500 g.f.a.
Antique Shop
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Apparel or Clothing Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/221
Appliance Repair Shop
X X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Appliance Store (retail)
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Arcade
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Art Supply Store
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Athletic or Fitness Club
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Auction
X X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Audio Store (retail)
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Auto Inspection Station
S X X 2/service bay
Auto Paint & Body Shop
X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Auto Rental
S X X 1.25/rental car
Auto Repair Garage
S X X 3/service bay
Auto Sales Lot
S X X 1/1000 site area
Bakery (retail)
X X S 1/200 g.f.a.
Bank or Financial Institution
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Bed & Breakfast
Accommodation
S S S S
S X
1/guest room
Barber or Beauty Shop S S S S S X X
1/chair
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/221
Bicycle Sales & Repair X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Boat Sales
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Boat Storage
X X 1/1000 site area
Book Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Bowling Alley
X X S 6/lane
Building Materials/Lumber
Yard
X X 1/500 g.f.a.
Bus Terminal
S X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Business Office
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Cabinet Shop
S S X 1/400 g.f.a.
Camera Store (retail)
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Carwash
S X X 1/wash bay
Carnival or Circus
S S S Specified by SUP
Carpet Store (retail)
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Cemetery Monument Sales
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Child Care Center or Facility
S X S 1/6 children
X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/221
Christmas Tree Sales 1/1000 site area
Computer Store
(retail/service)
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Contractor Yard (outside
storage)
S X X 1/2000 site area
Dental Clinic or Office
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Department Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Electrical Sales & Service
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Electronics Store (retail)
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Employment Agency
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Farm Implement Sales
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Feed Store
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Feed Store with animal sales
S S 1/400 g.f.a.
Firewood Sales
S X X 1/1000 site area
Florist Shop
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Flea Market (inside)
S S 1/200 g.f.a.
Flea Market (outside)
S X X 1/1000 site area
Fraternity/Sorority Lodge
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/221
Furrier X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Furniture Store (retail)
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Game Hall
S X X 1/100 g.f.a.
Gift or Novelty Shop
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Go-Cart Track
X X 1/go-cart
Golf Course S S
2/green
Golf Course, miniature
S X X 1.5/hole
Golf Driving Range S S
X 1/driving tee
Grocery Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Gun Shooting Range
(indoor)
X 1/500 g.f.a.
Gunsmith Shop
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Hardware Store
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Heating/AC Sales & Service
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Heavy Equipment Sales
X X 1/1000 site area
Hobby Shop
X X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Hotel or Motel
S X X 1/guest room
Insurance Sales Office
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/221
Jewelry Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Kennel
S X 1/400 g.f.a.
Laboratory, Medical or
Dental
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Laundry or Dry Cleaners
X X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Lawnmower Sales &
Service
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Leather Goods Shop (retail)
X X
1/400 g.f.a.
Lithographic Shop
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Locksmith Shop
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Meat Market
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Medical Clinic or Office
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Mini-warehouse
S S X X 1/500 g.f.a.
Manufactured Home Sales
Lot
X X 1/1000 site area
Massage Establishment
S S 1/200 g.f.a.
Mortuary or Funeral Home
S X X 1/3 sanctuary seats
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/221
Motorcycle Sales X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Movie Theater (drive-in)
X X 1/employee
Movie Theater (indoor)
X X
1/3 seats
Musical Instrument Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Newspaper Office
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Newsstand
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Nightclub or Dance Hall
X X 1/100 g.f.a.
Office Supply Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Optical Clinic or Office
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Optical Dispensary Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Paint Sales Store (retail)
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Pawnshop
S X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Pet Grooming Shop
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Pet Shop
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Pharmacy or Drugstore
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Photography Studio
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Picture Framing Shop
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/221
Plant Nursery
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Plumbing Sales & Service
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Pool or Billiard Hall
S X
1/100 g.f.a.
Print Shop
X X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Private Club (serving
alcohol)
S X X 1/100 g.f.a.
Professional Offices
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Racquetball Court
X X X 2/Courts
Real Estate or Leasing
Office
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) X X (2) 1/300 g.f.a.
Recording Studio
X X
1/300 g.f.a.
Recreational Vehicle
Storage
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Rental Store
X X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Restaurant or Cafe (inside)
X X X 1/3 seats
Restaurant (drive-in)
X X X 1/100 g.f.a.
Restaurant (kiosk)
X X X 1/100 g.f.a.
Secondhand Store
X X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Service Station
S X X 4 minimum
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/221
Sexually Oriented Business
S Specified by SUP
Shoe or Boot Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Shopping Center or Mall
X X X 1/200 g.f.a.
Sign Shop
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Skating Rink
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Snow Cone Stand
X X
2 minimum
Sporting Goods Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Tack Store
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Tailor or Seamstress Shop
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Tanning Salon
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Tattoo Shop
S X
1/200 g.f.a.
Taxidermist
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Tire Sales & Repair
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Title and Abstract Office
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Tool & Equipment Rental
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/221
Trailer Sales and Rental X X 1/1000 site area
Travel Agency
X X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Truck Rental
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Truck Repair
X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Truck Sales
X X 1/1000 site area
Truck Wash
S X X 2/wash bay
Upholstery Shop
S X X 1/400 g.f.a.
Veterinary Clinic
X X 1/300 g.f.a.
Veterinary Hospital
S S 1/300 g.f.a.
Video Store
X X
1/200 g.f.a.
Washateria (self-service)
X X
1/wash machine
Industrial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Airport
S S Specified by SUP
Ammonia Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Apparel Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Appliance Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Artificial Limb
X See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/221
Manufacturing
Asphalt Batching Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Bakery, Commercial
X X See Sec. 17-E
Bleach Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Bookbinding & Publishing
S X See Sec. 17-E
Bottling Plant
S X See Sec. 17-E
Box Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Brewery
X See Sec. 17-E
Brick or Tile Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Canning Operation
X See Sec. 17-E
Carpet Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Chemical Storage or Mfg.
S See Sec. 17-E
Chlorine Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Cold Storage Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Concrete Batching Plant
S X See Sec. 17-E
Concrete Product Casting
Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Contractor Yard (outside
S X See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/221
storage)
Creamery
X See Sec. 17-E
Creosote Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Distribution Center (small)
S X X See Sec. 17-E
Industrial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Distribution Center (large)
S X See Sec. 17-E
Distillation Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Dyeing Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Electrical Components Mfg.
X See Sec. 17-E
Electroplating
X See Sec. 17-E
Envelope Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Explosives Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Fertilizer Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Fiberglass Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Fireworks Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Food Processing
X See Sec. 17-E
Foundry
S See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/221
Freight Terminal, Motor
X See Sec. 17-E
Freight Terminal, Railroad
X See Sec. 17-E
Furniture Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Garment Manufacturing
S X See Sec. 17-E
Glass Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Glue Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Granary or Gin
X See Sec. 17-E
Gypsum Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Heliport or Helistop
S See Sec. 17-E
Ice Cream Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Ice Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Incinerator
S See Sec. 17-E
Insecticide Processing
S See Sec. 17-E
Junkyard
S See Sec. 17-E
Laundry Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
Light Fabrication Plant
X See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/221
Machine Shop X See Sec. 17-E
Marble Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Mattress Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Meat Processing Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Metal Fabrication
X See Sec. 17-E
Metal Stamping and
Extrusion
X See Sec. 17-E
Mining, Extraction
Operation
S See Sec. 17-E
Monument Works
X See Sec. 17-E
Packaging Operation
S X See Sec. 17-E
Paint Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Pallet Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Paper Mill
X See Sec. 17-E
Paper Products
Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Pesticide Processing
S See Sec. 17-E
Petroleum Products
(wholesale)
S See Sec. 17-E
Petroleum Refinery or
S See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/221
Storage
Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Planing Mill
X See Sec. 17-E
Plastic Product
Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Pottery Manufacturing
X See Sec. 17-E
Industrial Uses: R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH LR C I Parking
Poultry Processing Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Radio Transmitting Station
S X See Sec. 17-E
Rendering Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Rock Crushing Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Salvage Yard
S See Sec. 17-E
Smelter Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Tanning Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Television Transmitting
Station
S S X See Sec. 17-E
Temporary Construction
Office
S S S
S S S X See Sec. 17-E
Textile Manufacturing
S X See Sec. 17-E
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/221
Tire Manufacturing
S See Sec. 17-E
Tire Recapping Plant
S See Sec. 17-E
Vehicle Conversion Facility
X X See Sec. 17-E
Warehouse
S X See Sec. 17-E
Welding Shop
S X See Sec. 17-E
Notes to Schedule of Uses:
(1) Home occupations are permitted when in accordance with Section 16 hereof. Home occupations not specifically
permitted in Section 16 may be permitted only with a specific use permit.
(2) Allowed for a period of one year or until the development is sold out, whichever is longer.
(Ordinance 050517-1 adopted 5/17/05; Ordinance 100601-1 adopted 6/1/10)
SECTION 15 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
A. STANDARDS
No application for a specific use permit shall be granted by the City Council unless the Council finds all of the
following conditions are present:
1 That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not be materially detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;
2 That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already
permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the
establishment, maintenance or operation of the use;
3 That the establishment of the use will not significantly impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
4 That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been
or are being provided;
5 That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
6 That the use shall conform to all applicable area, yard, height, lot coverage, building size and
exterior requirements and parking space regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/221
Prior to the granting of any specific use permit, the City Council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified in Subsection A above. In all cases in which specific use permits
are granted, the City Council shall require such evidence and written guarantees as it may deem necessary as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
C. EFFECT OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION
No application for a specific use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall be
resubmitted for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of said denial.
SECTION 16. HOME OCCUPATIONS
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to permit the conduct of home occupations which are not incompatible with the
neighborhoods in which they are located.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in the residential districts and are subject to the
requirements of that district in which the use is located, in addition to the following:
1 Only the person or persons residing in the dwelling shall be engaged in the home occupation;
2 The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit,
garage, or accessory buildings. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of home occupation shall be visible outside any structure located on the
premises;
3 Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the living area of the principal building, up to a
maximum of four hundred (400) square feet, shall be devoted to the home occupation;
4 There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling or exterior
evidence of the home occupation other than one sign not over one (1) square foot advertising the
home occupation. Such sign shall be placed flat against a wall or door or displayed in a window;
5 No home occupation shall create smoke, fumes, glare, noise, dust, vibration, electrical
interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the
district;
6 No home occupation shall become a fire hazard;
7 The home occupation shall not create any significant increase in vehicular flow or parking and
shall not create greater pedestrian traffic than normal for the residential district;
8 No home occupation shall cause a significant increase in the use of any utilities, or generate trash
or refuse beyond the average of the residences in the neighborhood; and
9 No advertising sign may be placed on the premises other than the permitted sign in item (4)
above.
10 Occupations that may be considered for a home occupation approval include:
(a) Accountant,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/221
(b) Artist,
(c) Author,
(d) Business or management consultant,
(e) Child care of no more than six (6) children,
(f) Dressmaking,
(g) Handicraft,
(h) Home-based computer service business,
(i) Individual tutoring,
(j) Millinery,
(k) Music instruction,
(1) Preserving,
(m) Other occupations as approved by the city which meet the above General Provisions and
are compatible with the neighborhood in which it is located.
11 Standards used in permitting Specific Use Permits, Section 15, may be used by the city for
Home Occupation approval.
C. PROCESS FOR CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION AND TIME LIMIT
Home occupations are permitted to be conducted in a residential zone (“R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “R-4” and “MH”)
provided it is in accordance with other city ordinances or state and federal laws. A home occupation request
must be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing and then to the City Council. A
certificate for operation may be issued by the building inspector through the month of January following
approval by the City Council. Each approved home occupation that would like to continue operating after
January must have the home occupation certificate renewed in January of each year by the City Council,
following a public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The initial home occupation request and the annual renewal permit must follow the same precludes [procedures]
in advertising the public hearings with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as required in
Section 23 to amend the Zoning Ordinance.
A use considered not within the scope of these home occupation provisions shall be subject to the provisions of
the commercial or industrial zones of this ordinance or require a specific use permit.
SECTION 17. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
A. PURPOSE
To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of
land, minimum off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and
provisions.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/221
1 Off-street parking required by this zoning ordinance shall be on an all-weather surface and shall
be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to an approved public or private street or alley.
For new construction or development started after the effective date of this ordinance, an
all-weather surface shall be either asphalt or concrete pavement. For existing development
and new residential development located on one or more acres started after the effective
date of this ordinance, an all-weather surface shall be either asphalt or concrete pavement,
crushed rock, stone, gravel or other similar semi-permeable surface.
2 No parking space shall be less than eighteen feet (18') in length (22' for parallel parking) and
nine feet (9') in width. Exception: parking spaces may be reduced in length when a tire-stop curb is
installed sixteen feet (16') from the maneuvering lane and a clear space of two feet (2') is provided for
a vehicle overhang. The overhang is not permitted over public property or a setback in which parking
is not permitted.
3 Required off-street parking for residential uses shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by
the principal use. Required off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall be provided on the lot or
tract occupied by the principal use; however, the city may permit either required or additional offpremise
parking, as a special exception, under such regulations and conditions as the City Council
may deem advisable when the proposed parking facility is on a platted lot within three hundred feet
(300') of the principal use property. In the case of churches, off-site parking may be permitted by the
Council; provided, it is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the church building.
The city council shall approve the location of entrances and exits to these parking
facilities and may require screening devices along the parking facility boundaries.
4 In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the
nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings used for repair garages or carwashes shall
not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking.
5 The floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in
computing the floor area for off-street parking requirements.
6 Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses, the off-street parking requirements
shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no off-street parking space
provided for one type use or building shall be included in calculation of the off-street parking
requirements for any other use or building except as prescribed by this zoning ordinance.
7 Head-in parking spaces so situated that the maneuvering of a vehicle in entering or leaving such
spaces is done on a public street or within public right-of-way shall not be classified as off-street
parking in computing any parking requirements herein.
The construction of head-in parking as described above shall be prohibited hereafter. All
such head-in parking facilities in existence at the time of the enactment of this section are
hereby declared to be a nonconforming use of land subject to the provisions of Section 21
of this ordinance.
8 No off-street parking facility shall be located, either in whole or in part, in a public street or
sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way.
9 No off-street parking shall be located, either in whole or in part, within any fire lane required by
the city or within aisles, driveways or maneuvering areas necessary to provide reasonable access to
any parking space.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/221
10 Tandem parking is prohibited, unless specifically authorized by variance granted by the City
Council.
11 No required off-street parking facility shall be used for sales, non-vehicular storage, repair or
service activities.
12 Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from property zoned
or used for residential purposes.
13 For all multifamily and nonresidential uses, parking spaces shall be striped or otherwise clearly
designated on the parking facility surface, and shall not include any fire lane or other area necessary
for aisles or maneuvering of vehicles.
C. PARKING IN YARDS PROHIBITED
No person shall park any vehicle or trailer in any front or side yard in any residential district except on an allweather
parking surface which is provided to accommodate off-street parking.
D. HANDICAPPED PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The owner of private property open to the public for public purposes shall designate specific parking spaces for
the disabled in conformance with the rules promulgated by the State Purchasing and General Services
Commission. All such spaces shall be striped and designated by signs located where it will not be obscured.
E. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
All commercial and industrial uses shall be provided with off-street facilities for receiving and loading
merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. Such off-street loading space may be
adjacent to a public street or alley, private service drive, or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. No
loading docks shall be constructed facing on any public street or highway unless said loading dock is at least
seventy-five feet (75') inside the right-of-way line of the street or highway on which said loading dock fronts.
Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten by forty-five feet (10' x 45')
and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in
Structure
Minimum Required Spaces or Berths
0 to 5,000 0
5,000 to 25,000 1
25,000 to 45,000 2
45,000 to 65,000 3
65,000 to 100,000 4
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/221
Each additional 50,000 or portion thereof 1
The existence of a twenty-foot (20') alley adjacent to the property shall be construed as equivalent to one (1)
berth. All off-street loading spaces shall have an all-weather surface of asphalt or concrete construction and shall
be accessible by a street, driveway or alley.
F. COUNTING PARKING AND LOADING SPACE TWICE PROHIBITED
No part of any off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with these zoning regulations shall be included as a part of any off-street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building.
SECTION 18 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
A. SCREENING REQUIRED BETWEEN INCOMPATIBLE ZONING DISTRICTS
Insofar as practical, screening must be erected, placed, grown and maintained along the common boundary line
of incompatible zoning districts before any use is made of the property. This screening requirement shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the less restrictive district, with the single-family residential district (R-1, R-2, and
R-3, Districts) being the most restrictive and the industrial district being the least restrictive district. This is
illustrated by the following chart:
ZONING DISTRICTS RATED FROM
MOST RESTRICTIVE TO LEAST RESTRICTIVE
(Most Restrictive) “R-1” Single-Family Districts
“R-2” Single-Family District
“R-3” Two-Family District
“R-4” Multiple-Family District
“M-H” Manufactured Home Residential
District
“LR” Restricted Commercial District
“C” General Commercial Districts
(Least Restrictive) “I” Industrial District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/221
Such screening shall not be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height. However, no
fence, wall, or hedge on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at
intersections as prescribed in Section 5. C 6 of this ordinance.
B. PARKING LOTS, PLAYGROUNDS, BALLFIELDS, TENNIS COURTS AND SWIMMING POOLS TO
BE SCREENED
Any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court, or swimming pool when adjacent to any residential use or
district, shall be suitably screened from view with screening shrubs. Such screening shall be at least two feet (2')
in height.
C. GARBAGE, REFUSE AND TRASH COLLECTION/STORAGE AREAS TO BE SCREENED
Garbage, refuse, and trash collection/storage areas in any multifamily residential district, condominium or
townhouse project, or nonresidential district or use, shall be screened on at least three (3) sides to adequately
screen such area from view of the surrounding area.
D. MAINTENANCE OF SCREENING DEVICES
All screening devices shall be perpetually maintained by the owner of the property.
Any structurally unsound screening device may be deemed a public nuisance by the city council and ordered to
be repaired, replaced, or removed by the owner of the property in accordance with state law.
SECTION 19. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
B. LOCATION RESTRICTIONS
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of a church,
a public or private elementary or secondary school; any residentially zoned property; a public park; or another
sexually oriented business. For the purposes of measuring distances, the measurement shall be in a straight line
without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park or residential district. The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each sexually oriented business is located.
C. REGULATIONS
All sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the City's Sexually Oriented Business Regulations in
Ordinance Number ______ [article 4.05 of the Code of Ordinances].
SECTION 20. CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/221
It is recognized that new types of land uses will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate
in the city. In order to provide for such uses and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate
classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:
1 The applicant shall refer the question of any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning
commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use may be
placed. Such request shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and
whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount or nature
thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount
of noise, odor, fumes, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements
for public utilities and sanitation collection.
2 The planning and zoning commission shall then consider the nature and described performance
of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and after
public hearing, determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.
3 Following its decision, the planning and zoning commission shall submit its recommendation to
the city council for final approval.
4 The same procedures should be followed as outlined in Section 23 pertaining to amendments,
including the public notice and hearing requirements, when considering any zoning classification
request for a new or unlisted land use.
SECTION 21. NONCONFORMING USES
A. NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE DEFINED
When a use or structure does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the zoning district in which such use
or structure is located and was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the adoption of any previous zoning
ordinance and has been operating since without continuance, or when on the effective date of this ordinance, the
use or structure was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating in accordance with the
provisions of any previous zoning ordinance or which was a nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or
structure does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which the use or structure
is located, such use or structure shall be considered as a nonconforming use or structure.
B. BUILDING ON NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
In any district in which residential, commercial or industrial buildings are permitted, buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record or multiple lots, provided there is access to such buildings or houses from a street and
it is in the same ownership as recorded on the effective date of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even
though such lot or lots fail to meet the minimum requirements for area, width, or depth, for the district in which
located; however, all other requirements shall still apply. Any construction on nonconforming lots of record shall
be permitted only with approval of the board of adjustment.
C. EXPANSIONS OR ENLARGEMENTS PROHIBITED
Repairs and alterations may be made to a legal nonconforming building, provided that no structural alterations
shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use. No
nonconforming use or building may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract of land upon which such
nonconforming use or structure is located after the passage of this ordinance except to provide off-street loading
or off-street parking space facilities. However, the board of adjustment shall have the authority after a hearing to
grant extension of a nonconforming building not to exceed 25% of the existing building area in case of hardship.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction
or designated use of any building for which a building permit has been properly secured from the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/221
D. WHEN DISCONTINUED, CONFORMANCE REQUIRED
The lawful use of a building or land existing at the date of enactment of this ordinance, although such use does
not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued. However, if the nonconforming use of any land is
discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive calendar days, it shall not thereafter be resumed and any
future use of such land shall be in conformity with this zoning ordinance. Upon evidence of hardship, the board
of adjustment shall have the power to extend the time limits for the nonconforming use not to exceed six (6)
months. If a nonconforming building or structure is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive calendar
months, it shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of such land shall be in conformity with this zoning
ordinance.
E. CLASSIFICATION CHANGES
A nonconforming use or building changed to a conforming use or building may not thereafter be changed back
to a nonconforming use or building. Also, whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure is changed
to a use of a more restrictive classification, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted
classification. For the purpose of this regulation, uses permitted in “R-1” Districts shall be deemed to be those in
the most restrictive zoning classification while industrial districts shall be the least restrictive.
F. WHEN RESTORATION ALLOWED
A nonconforming building or structure destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, explosion or
other casualty, or by the public enemy, to the extent where the cost of restoration would amount to less than fifty
percent (50%) of its assessed value may be restored. If the damage is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its
value, application for restoration shall first be made to the board of adjustment to permit such restoration. The
board may grant or deny such restoration only after public hearing and taking into consideration the property
owner's circumstances and the effect on the surrounding property. Homeowners, as shown by the city tax records
on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be able to restore their property regardless of the extent of
destruction, without making application to the board of adjustment. However, said restoration shall comply with
all construction codes then in effect within the city and reconstruction must be started within six (6) months. The
failure to start restoration or reconstruction within six (6) months shall forfeit the owner's right to restore or
reconstruct the same unless as a conforming building or structure.
SECTION 22. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
A. MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT
There is hereby created in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, a City Planning
and Zoning Commission which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the City Council.
B. TERMS OF OFFICE
The terms of three (3) of the members shall expire on ____________ of each odd-numbered year and the terms
of two (2) members shall expire on ____________ of each even-numbered year. The members of the
Commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through five (5). The odd-numbered places shall expire
in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years. Commission
members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no member
shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first
regular Commission meeting after their appointment.
C. OFFICERS
A Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected annually from among the Commission's membership [and] at
such other times as these offices may become vacant. In the absence of both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman,
the Commission shall elect an Acting Chairman.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/221
A Secretary shall be appointed from the members of the Commission or from staff personnel assigned by the
City's Chief Executive Officer to serve the Commission.
D. DUTIES
1 The Commission shall advise the City Council on those matters falling within its charged
responsibilities in a manner reflecting concern for the overall development and environment of the
city as a setting for human activities.
2 The members of the Commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the
Commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties.
3 The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, shall preside at all meetings, [and] shall
decide all points of order or procedure. All letters of transmittal from the Commission to the City
Council shall be over the signature of the Chairman.
4 The Secretary shall be custodian of the minutes and other official records, shall attend to the
correspondence of the Commission, and shall cause to be given such notices as are required and in
the manner prescribed by law.
E. QUORUM
A quorum for the conduct of business shall be a majority of the members of the Commission.
F. MEETINGS
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at such times in the City Hall as may be designated by the
Chairman or Vice-Chairman in the absence of the Chairman, and at such regular intervals as may be necessary to
orderly and properly transact the business of the Commission.
G. DUTIES AND ZONING RESPONSIBILITIES
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be an advisory body to the City Council, and shall make
recommendations regarding changes of zoning and permanent zoning to be given to newly annexed areas, and
shall make recommendations regarding specific use permits and the approval of the plats of subdivisions as may
be submitted to it. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity on any planning
related item(s) in the City.
H. PROCEDURE ON ZONING HEARINGS
The procedure and process for zoning changes and/or amendments shall be in accordance with Section 23.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
211.007.
SECTION 23. AMENDMENTS
A. GENERAL
The zoning regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed. Such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repeal shall be deemed to
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the comprehensive plan of the city and shall become a part of such
comprehensive plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/221
An amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by a written request of the owner or his or her agent, the
zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council on its own motion when it finds
that the public may benefit from the consideration of such matter.
B. PROCEDURE
All requests for amendments to zoning district boundaries shall be submitted, together with required fees to the
zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official, whom shall cause notices to be sent and the
petition placed on the planning and zoning commission agenda. Requests for changes in zoning districts shall
include the proposed designation or designations for the area concerned. Alternative proposals may be made at
the time of filing the original request for amendment, however all hearings and deliberations shall be limited to
the request as submitted by the applicant at the time of original filing.
C. POSTING SIGN
The zoning administrator, or his or her designated administrative official, shall have at least one (1) sign erected
on the property to be rezoned which sign shall have a total area of at least four (4) square feet. This sign shall, if
possible, be located adjacent to a street and in a conspicuous place. The sign shall be erected on or before the
first date of the first notice to property owners and shall be removed immediately after final action by the city
council or when the applicant withdraws the request, whichever comes first. The sign shall state that a zoning
change has been requested on that particular property and the telephone number of the city offices from where
dates of public hearings and more information about the zoning request may be obtained. The erection or
continued maintenance of signs shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zoning change
or holding of any public hearing.
D. HEARINGS AND NOTICES
The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the
districts or the regulations herein established after receiving a report thereon from the planning and zoning
commission. A public hearing on such amendment, supplement, or change shall be held by both the planning
and zoning commission and the city council. Notice of hearings shall be given by publication one (1) time in the
official newspaper of the city, stating the time and place of such hearings, which time shall not be earlier than
fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. Publication of such change shall be accomplished by publishing a
descriptive caption of the proposed change.
Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to all owners of
property, or to the person rendering the same for city taxes, located within the area of application and within two
hundred feet (200') of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is
held. Such notices may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved city tax roll
and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
E. FAILURE TO APPEAR
Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission for more
than one hearing without an approved delay shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Planning and Zoning
Commission to terminate the application.
F. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION AND REPORT
The planning and zoning commission, after conducting a hearing on a zoning request, shall report its
recommendations on the zoning request to the city council for their consideration. The planning and zoning
commission may recommend favorable approval of the request or that the request be denied, with or without
prejudice. Every proposal which is recommended favorably or unfavorably by the planning and zoning
commission shall automatically be forwarded to the city council for public hearing and consideration. When the
planning and zoning commission determines that the proposal should be denied, it shall report the same to the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/221
city council and the applicant. A hearing before the city council shall be set on a application recommended for
denial only when an appeal is filed by the applicant with the zoning administrator or his or her designated
administrative official provided the appeal is requested within fifteen (15) days of the planning and zoning
commission's decision.
G. APPLICATION NOT TO BE CONSIDERED FOR ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY (180) DAYS AFTER
DENIAL OF REQUEST FOR REZONING
No application for rezoning shall be considered within one hundred and eighty (180) days of denial of a request
by city council for the same classification on the same property.
H. PROTEST AGAINST CHANGE
In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the land
included in such proposed change, or of the land within two hundred (200) feet thereof, such amendment shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-quarters (3/4ths) of all the members of the city
council present and qualified to vote.
I. ACTION ON APPLICATION
The proponent of any zoning change shall satisfy the city council that either the general welfare of all the city
affected by the area to be changed will be enhanced, or that the property is unusable for the purposes allowed
under existing zoning. If such is proved to the council's satisfaction, it may grant the requested zoning change; or
it may change the zone's designation of a portion of such property; or it may initiate a request to consider
changing all or a portion of such property to a district other than that requested and of a different character.
J. SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED; PETITION FOR ZONING DISTRICT
CHANGE OR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
When, in the opinion of the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official, the planning
and zoning commission, the city council, or the board of adjustment, greater information is required from the
applicant concerning the nature, extent and impact of his or her request than supplied with his or her application
for a change in zoning, variance, or specific use permit, in order to properly review and evaluate all relevant
factors thereof, the planning and zoning commission, city council, or the board of adjustment may require the
applicant to submit a site plan and/or supporting documents conforming with all or a portion of the requirements
set forth in this section, prior to rendering a decision thereon.
The applicant is encouraged to meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated official in an informal
work session to ascertain the exact extent of plans and documents required, if any, prior to the city initiating the
advertisement for public hearing on the petition.
The general type and extent of plans and supporting documents which may be required of the petitioner include,
but are not necessarily limited to:
1 Site Plan
Meeting all of the requirements of a “preliminary plat,” as described in the city's
subdivision regulations, except that topographic and drainage map information provisions
may be waived by the reviewing body when the inclusion of such data would not
materially contribute to the necessary evaluation of the project's petition. Additional site
plan drawing information which the reviewing body may require include:
(a) Existing and proposed zoning district;
(b) A tabular summary schedule indicating:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/221
(1) The gross acreage and percent of each type of zoning category proposed;
(2) The gross acreage and percent of each type of land use proposed, with streets and
open space categories listed separately, and residential uses further stratified as to type,
i.e., single-family, two-family, multifamily, townhouse, etc., including the total gross
project acreage;
(3) The gross residential density of each type of residential land use proposed,
expressed in dwelling units per acre; and based on net residential land use plus one-half
(1/2) of any abutting street only;
(4) The quantitative number of dwelling units proposed for each residential dwelling
type, i.e., single-family, two-family, etc.; and
(5) Proposed maximum lot coverage by building and land use types, i.e., “R-1”, “R-2”,
“R-3”, “R-4”, “MH”, “LR”, “C”, and “I” expressed in terms of percent or floor area ratio
of the lot or site;
(c) General outline of extensive tree cover areas;
(d) Drainageways and 100-year floodplain limits;
(e) Proposed treatment for screening the perimeter of the land embraced by the petition,
including screening of internal separations of land use, where required;
(f) Proposed internal non-vehicular circulation linkages, such as: pedestrian paths and hike
trails; bike trails; and equestrian bridle paths, where applicable, including their
interrelationships with vehicular circulation systems and proposed handling of points of
conflict; and
2 Architectural Drawings
Elevations, concept sketches, or renderings depicting building types and other significant
proposed improvements, including the treatment and use of open spaces, etc., where the
submission of such drawings would more clearly portray the nature and character of the
applicant's land use and development proposals; and
3 Written Documents
In narrative form on 8-1/2" x 11" sheets, including:
(a) Statement(s) on planning objectives to be achieved in use/development proposal,
including a narrative description of the character of the proposed development and rationale
behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant, including use and ownership of
open spaces, etc.;
(b) Legal description of the total site area proposed for rezoning, development, or conditional
use permit;
(c) A development schedule indicating the approximate date(s) when construction of the
proposed development, and subsequent stages or phases thereof, if any, can be expected to
begin and be completed, to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief;
(d) A statement as to the present and proposed ownership of the site or parcels thereof
embraced by the application;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/221
(e) Economic feasibility and/or market analysis studies, when deemed necessary by the
reviewing body to adequately assess the necessity for zoning certain parcels to the sizes
indicated by the applicant, or to evaluate the need for granting a conditional use permit;
(f) Environmental assessment statement, prepared pursuant to the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969, and any subsequent amendments thereto, when deemed necessary by the
reviewing body to properly assess the impact of the proposed development/land use on the
existing environment;
(g) Statement(s) as to how and when the applicant proposes to provide water and sewer to the
development; and
(h) Signature, title and date of the applicant, at the conclusion of the written documents
certifying the information presented in the plans and supporting documents reflecting a
reasonably accurate portrayal of the general nature and character of the proposals.
SECTION 24. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. ORGANIZATION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
1 There is hereby created a board of adjustment which shall consist of five (5) members who are
residents of the city, each to be appointed by the city council for a staggered term of two (2) years
and removable for cause by the city council. The city council shall designate one (1) member as
chairperson. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes
vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. Provided, however,
that the city council may appoint up to four (4) alternate members of the board who shall serve in the
absence of one (1) or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairperson of the
board, the zoning administrator or the mayor. All cases to be heard by the board will always be heard
by a minimum of four (4) members. Alternate members shall serve a term of two (2) years and any
vacancy shall be filled in the same manner. Alternate members are subject to removal the same as the
regular members.
2 The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not
inconsistent with this ordinance or state law. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine, and in accordance with the Texas
Open Meetings Law. The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the vice-chairperson or acting
chairperson, may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses.
3 The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations
and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city secretary
and shall be a public record.
B. APPEALS TO THE BOARD
1 Appeals to the board can be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning
administrator or his or her designated administrative officer, or by any officer or department of the
city. Such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by the
zoning administrator or administrative officer by filing with the city secretary and with the board of
adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer or
department from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers
constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken.
2 An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning
administrator or designated administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/221
board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reasons
of facts stated in the certification, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the board or a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
3 No appeal to the board for a variance on the same piece of property shall be allowed prior to the
expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days from a previous ruling of the board on any appeal to
such body unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the said one hundred eighty
(180) day period, been changed or acted on by the board or city council so as to alter the facts and
conditions on which the previous board action was based. Such change of circumstances shall permit
the rehearing of an appeal by the board, prior to the expiration of [said] one hundred eighty (180) day
period, but such conditions shall in no way have any force in law to compel the board, after a
hearing, to grant a subsequent appeal. Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its
merits and the peculiar and conditions [sic] related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
4 At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by his or
her agent or attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to
warrant favorable action of the board on any appeal or variance request. Any variance granted or
authorized by the board under the provisions of this ordinance shall authorize the issuance of a
building permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for a period of ninety (90) days from
the date of the favorable action of the board unless said board shall have in its action approved a
longer period of time and has so shown such specific longer period in the minutes of its action. If the
building permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within said ninety (90)
day period or such extended period as the board may have specifically granted, then the variance
shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination and
waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal and such subsequent appeal shall be subject
to the same regulation and requirement for hearing as herein specified for the original appeal.
C. ACTIONS OF THE BOARD
1 In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the
State of Texas, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination [of the zoning administrator or other administrative official and make such order,
requirement, decision or determination] as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the
zoning administrator or other administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The board shall
have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant.
2 The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official, or
to decide in favor of the application for a specific use permit on any appearance or any variance.
D. NOTICE OF HEARING BEFORE BOARD REQUIRED
The board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals requests, [and] variance requests made to it and written
notice of such public hearings shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property
lying within two hundred feet (200') of the property on which the appeal is made. Such notice shall be given no
less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property
for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the
same properly addressed and postage paid in the United States Post Office. Notice shall also be given by
publishing the same in the official publication of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing,
which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing.
Additionally, the zoning administrator should erect a sign on the property of which a variance has been
requested. The sign shall be erected adjacent to a street if possible and in a conspicuous place. The sign should
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/221
have an area of four (4) or more square feet. The sign should state that a request for a variance has been made on
that particular property and the telephone number of the city offices from where dates of public hearings and
more information about the zoning request may be obtained. The sign should be erected prior to the hearing as
early as possible and convenient. The erection and continued maintenance of this sign, however, shall not be
deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zoning variance, or the holding of any public hearing.
E. JURISDICTION OF BOARD
When, in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of
the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board may, in specific cases, after
public notice and public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following
variances to the regulations herein established and take action relative to the continuance and discontinuance of
a nonconforming use:
1 To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative official in the enforcement
of this ordinance;
2 Interpret the intent of the zoning district map where uncertainty exists because the physical
features on the ground vary from those on the zoning district map and none of the rules set forth in
Section 4. C apply;
3 Initiate on its motion or cause presented by interested property owner's action to bring about the
discontinuance of a nonconforming use;
4 Require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under any plan whereby full value of the
structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general
character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this
ordinance;
5 Permit the change of occupancy of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use in
accordance with the provisions of Section 21;
6 Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of Section 21;
7 Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied by
such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the board, prevent the return
of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming structure
beyond what is permitted by Section 21;
8 Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be
obsolete, dilapidated or substandard; and
9 Permit such variance such as the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage,
minimum setback standards, off-street parking, off-street loading regulations, lot area, maximum
height, or building, where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
an unnecessary hardship, or where such variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land
which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of such area, shape or slope that
it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels
of land in the same district.
F. APPEALS OF BOARD ACTION
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, any taxpayer or any officer,
department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of record (district court) a petition, duly verified,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/221
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the decision of the board and not thereafter.
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
SECTION 25. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, certain terms and words are defined and shall have the meanings
ascribed in this ordinance unless it is apparent from the context that different meanings are intended.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number,
and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word “building” includes the word “structure,”
except as otherwise specified. The term “use” means “used or intended to be used for, or arranged or designed
for use.” The word “shall” is mandatory not directory; the word “may” is permissive. The word “person”
includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation as well as an
individual. The word “including” means “including, but not limited to.”
Abut-Abutting - Having lot lines or boundary lines in common.
Accessory Building - A subordinate building which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot.
Accessory buildings in residential districts shall be limited to: attached or detached garages, carport, servant's
quarters, storage building, bath house, greenhouse, bomb or fall-out shelter.
Accessory Use - A subordinate use which is incidental to the main or primary use.
Adult Arcade - Any place which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, token-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting
or describing sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore - A commercial establishment which as one its principal business purposes offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Cabaret - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or give live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities.
Adult Motel - A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1 Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
2 Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
3 Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/221
Adult Movie Theater - A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, video reproductions, slides or other visual representations are regularly shown which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Video Store - A commercial establishment which as one its principal business purposes offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Alley - A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Amusement Park - Any building, lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or part for the operation and
maintenance of a circus, carnival, miniature golf course, golf driving range, batting cages, skating rinks, go-kart
racing tracks and/or minstrel shows.
Animal Hospital or Clinic - A facility operated by a veterinarian for the purpose of examining and treating
animals including outdoor facilities for caring for the animals and allowing the keeping of animals overnight.
Animal Shelter - A facility that keeps impounded stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.
Apartment - A room or suite of rooms in an apartment building intended, designed, or occupied as a home or
residence by a single family, individual, or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Apartment (Multifamily) Building - Any building which is intended, designed, or occupied as the home or
residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking
facilities.
Arcade - A public place of business where 50% or more of the gross sales are derived from amusement
machines. The term amusement machine shall mean every machine of any kind of character whatsoever, when
such a machine is capable of use or operations for amusement, other than for the purpose of vending
merchandise, music, or a service such as telephone service, laundry service, etc. Included in the description of
amusement machines are video games, pinball machines, miniature sports machines, and all other machines
which designed for challenge, entertainment, or pleasure.
Asphalt, Concrete Batching Plant - A facility, permanent or temporary, which mixes asphalt or cement with
various aggregates and water in large quantities for transport elsewhere.
Attached - Having one or more walls common with a main use building, or joined to main use building by a
covered porch or passageway, the roof of which is a part or extension of a main use building.
Automobile/Motor Vehicles - A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for
the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks (1-ton
G.V.W. or less), buses, motor scooters, motorcycles, and recreational vehicles.
Automobile Salvage or Wrecking Yard - An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled,
dismantled, junked or “wrecked,” or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor
vehicles are stored.
Automobile Service Station - Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline,
oil or other fuels, and automobile accessories, and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing,
cleaning, mechanical repair, and other normal servicing of automobiles. Painting is not considered within the
scope of “other normal servicing.”
Auto Repair Shop - A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including
factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junkyards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/221
Auto Sales Lot - An open area or lot used for the display or sale of automobiles, where no repair work is done
except minor reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of cars for
sale or keeping of used car parts or junk on the premises.
Bakery, Retail - An establishment which produces bakery goods and various confectionery items, such as rolls,
bread, etc. for direct sale to the consumer.
Basement - Means a story below the first story of a building.
Block - That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the nearest intersecting or intercepting
streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other barrier to or gap
in the continuity of development along such street.
Boarding (Rooming) House - A dwelling wherein lodging or meals for three (3) or more persons, not members
of the principal family therein, is provided for compensation, but not including a building in which ten (10) or
more guest rooms are provided.
Breezeway - A covered passage one story in height connecting a main structure and an accessory building.
Buffer Area - An area of land together with specified planting and/or structures thereon, which may be required
between land uses of different intensities to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such uses.
Building - Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable
property of any kind. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so
separated will be deemed a separate structure.
1. Main Use Building - A building in which the primary activity associated with the lot is
conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling will be a primary building.
2. Accessory Building - A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary building
located on the same lot.
3. Building Site - A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or
structure.
Building Area - Means the portion of the lot remaining after the required yards have been provided.
Building Coverage - The percent of the lot area covered by the building exclusive of all overhanging roofs.
Building Line - A line established, in general, parallel to the front street line. No building or structure may be
permitted in the area between the building line and the street right-of-way line.
Building Materials and Lumber Yard - A business which stocks building materials, such as fencing, wire, bricks,
cement, and lumber, for use in building construction and landscaping.
Business - Includes retail, commercial, personal services, excavation, manufacturing and industrial operations
and uses.
Business Office - A room or group of rooms where the general administration and affairs of a business, etc., are
carried on, but where no actual transactions are conducted.
Cabinet Shop - A building and/or premises used for the design and construction of cabinets, shelves and similar
structures for subsequent sales, installation and use in homes, businesses and offices.
Carport - A permanent roofed structure open on at least two sides, designed for the parking and shelter of private
passenger vehicles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/221
Carwash - A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles or other motor vehicles are automatically or
manually washed regularly as a business.
Cellar - A building story with more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Cemetery - Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead humans, including crematories[,]
mausoleums, and mortuaries.
Certificate of Appropriateness - An official certificate issued by the City which indicates conformance with or
approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes the city's approval of the Historic
request from the property owner.
Certificate of Occupancy - An official certificate issued by the City which indicates conformance with or
approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes the legal use of the premises for which
it is issued.
Child Care Center or Facility - A facility that provides care or supervision for children who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility for less than 24 hours a day for more than
twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14), whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges
for the services it offers.
Child Care Institutions Providing Basic Child Care - An institution providing basic child care is a child care
facility which provides care for more than 12 children for more than a 24-hour period. Basic child care does not
include a 24-hour-a-day specialized program such as that offered by an emergency shelter, therapeutic camp,
residential treatment center, halfway house, or institution serving mentally retarded children.
Child Day Care Home - A facility, sometimes referred to as a “Registered Family Home,” that regularly
provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14)
years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children. When more than six (6) children are kept in the home, it
shall be considered as either a “Group Day Care Home” or “Child Care Center.”
Church or Rectory - A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including the on-site
housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, and nuns.
City Council - The governing body of the City of Big Lake, Texas.
Clinic - A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, opticians or dentists to treat patients who do
not remain overnight.
Community Center - A building used primarily for the social or recreational activities serving the city,
neighborhood, or apartment complex.
Conditional Use - A use allowed in a zoning district only if a special use permit is granted by the City Council.
Condominium - See “Townhouse.”
Contractor Yard - A building and/or premises for the storage of materials, tools, products and vehicles used in
the conduct of a construction business related to heating and air conditioning service, building construction,
electrical service, landscaping service, plumbing service, utility service, etc.
Convalescent Center - Any building or structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from
illness or suffering from infirmities of age.
Country Club (Private) - An area of land containing either a golf course or tennis courts, or both, and a
clubhouse and which is available to members only. Country clubs may contain adjunct facilities such as private
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/221
club, dining room, swimming pool, and other similar recreational or service facilities.
Courtyard - An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and bounded on three (3) or more sides
by such building; or the open space provided for access to a dwelling group.
Detached - Fully separated from any other building, or joined to another building by structural members not
constituting an enclosed or covered space.
Display - The exhibition of vehicles, trailers, boats, goods, wares, or merchandise for sale, rental or lease.
Distribution Center, Large - A building or group of buildings with cumulative storage space of over 5,000 square
feet in area which is used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares which are intended to be distributed
to other retail or wholesale establishments.
Distribution Center, Small - A building or group of buildings with cumulative storage space not to exceed 5,000
square feet in area which is used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares which are intended to be
distributed to other retail or wholesale establishments.
District - A section or sections of the City of Big Lake, Texas, for which regulations governing the use of
buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
Double Frontage - A lot with double frontage is a lot having lot lines formed by the intersection of two streets,
whether public or private, and where the interior angle of such intersection is less than 135 degrees. A lot
fronting on a curved street shall also be considered a corner lot if the central angle of the curve is less than 135
degrees.
Drive-In Restaurant - Any establishment where food, and/or non-alcoholic beverage is sold to the consumer and where
motor vehicle parking space is provided and where patrons may be served in their respective vehicles or inside the
establishment.
Dry Cleaning or Laundry - Any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the
general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel,
cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance(s).
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit - A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be
occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Dwelling, Multifamily - A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units which is designed for or
occupied as a home or residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and
maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Dwelling, Single-Family - A detached building which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not
more than one (1) family.
Dwelling, Townhouse or Rowhouse - Three or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of
which has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be owned by one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family - A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, commonly referred to as a
duplex, and which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not more than two (2) families.
Easement - A right given by the owner of a parcel of land to another person, public agency or private
corporation for a specific and limited use of that parcel.
Electrical Sales & Service - An establishment selling electrical supplies and parts and/or providing the servicing
and installation of electrical equipment and fixtures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/221
Family - One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than five (5)
individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, but not including a group occupying a hotel, motel,
boarding house, club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
Farm - An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the growing of farm products such as vegetables and
grain as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, dairy cattle, sheep,
and swine.
Feed Store - A commercial establishment which sells animal feed; feeding troughs; animal cages, pens, and
gates; fencing materials; pesticides; seeds; and other gardening farming, and ranching supplies. The sale of baby
chicks, rabbits, guinea pigs, and other similar small or domesticated animals may be permitted only with a
specific use permit and in accordance with all ordinances.
Fence - See Screening (Device) hereafter.
Filling Station or Service Station - Refer to Automobile Service Station.
Fine Arts - Music, painting, sculpture, and including drawing, etchings, ceramics, inlays, needlework, knitting,
weaving, and craft work involving leather, wood, metal and glass.
Flea Market - A collection of two or more stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangements, used by individual
vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal property.
Floodplain - The area outside of the floodway which may be inundated with floodwater with an average
frequency of occurrence in the order of once in one hundred years, normally referred to as the intermediate
regional flood by the U.S. Corps of Engineers.
Floodway - The channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are required
to carry and discharge floodwaters.
Floor Area - The area of a building, including the walls thereof, but excluding all porches, open breezeways and
garages.
Foster Group Home - The foster group home is a child care facility which provides care for 7-12 children for 24
hours a day.
Freight Terminal, Motor - A property or building in which freight is brought by common carriers during and is
stored for interstate or intrastate shipment by motor truck, including the necessary warehouse space for storage
of transitory freight.
Frontage - All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating),
measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
Game Hall - A facility open to the public and used primarily for the playing of games of chance, skill, sport or
amusement. Such games include but are not limited to the following: dominoes, cards, bingo, billiards, darts,
and amusement machines.
Garage Apartment - A dwelling unit for one family attached to a private garage.
Garage, Auto Repair - A building or portion of a building used for the general repair and/or painting of motor
vehicles.
Garage, Parking - A building or portion of a building used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles, other
than a private garage or a auto repair garage, in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is only incidental
to the storage of the vehicles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/221
Garage, Private - An accessory building or portion of a main building on the same lot and intended to be used
for the parking and storage of private passenger motor vehicles, boats, or other vehicles.
Garage Sale - Shall mean occasional sales at retail by residential owners or occupants conducted in the garage,
patio, driveway or yard of the residential premises occupied by the person holding the sale, for the purpose of
disposing surplus personal property accumulated incidentally in the regular course of residential occupancy.
Government Office - Any building or facility either owned or leased for use by local, state or federal
governments and in which the affairs of the governmental body are carried on.
Grade - When used as a reference point in measuring height of building the “grade” shall be the average
elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building.
Gross Floor Area - The total area of all floors as measured to the outside walls, excluding open porches,
breezeways, balconies, and terraces. In computing the gross floor area of residential uses, garages and carports
shall be excluded.
Group Day Care Home - A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for seven (7) to
twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children.
Group Home - A residential facility licensed by the Texas Department of Human Resources to house up to six
(6) handicapped and/or mentally retarded persons and two (2) supervisors.
Halfway House - A residential facility providing shelter, supervision and residential rehabilitative services for
persons who have been inmates of any county, state or federal correctional institution and released and require a
group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.
Heating/Air Conditioning (AC) Sales & Service - An establishment selling heating and air conditioning units,
supplies and parts and/or providing the servicing and installation of heating and air conditioning equipment.
Heavy Equipment Sales - A business offering for sale, and including the servicing and repair of, equipment as
construction graders, earth movers, backhoes, cement mixer trucks, dirt moving trucks, etc.
Height (of Building) - The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or the highest ridge board, for gable, hip and gambrel roof.
Historic District - A geographically defined area which possesses significant concentration, linkage, or
continuity of buildings, structures, sites, areas, or land, which in turn are united by architectural, historical,
archaeological, or cultural importance or significance and which the City Council determines shall be protected,
enhanced and preserved.
Historic Landmark - Any building, structure, site, district, area, or land of architectural, historical,
archaeological, or cultural importance or significance, which the City Council determines shall be protected,
enhanced, and preserved.
Hobby - The engagement of a person in an activity such as music, painting, sculpturing, drawing, etching,
ceramics, needlework, knitting, weaving, craft work involving leather, wood, metal and glass, etc. in his or her
spare-time activity within his or her premises. No person shall be engaged in a hobby as a business. Such
activity shall be carried on within an enclosed or screened area and shall not involve any activity that requires
open storage. No activity which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, electrical interference, glare,
noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes shall be permitted.
Home Occupation - Any occupation or activity listed in Section 16, “Home Occupation,” of this ordinance
which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and which is carried on wholly
within a main building or accessory building by a member of a family residing on the premises and which does
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/221
not change the character thereof. However, such use will not be obnoxious or offensive due to vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, glare, noise or which increases traffic.
Hospital - An institution or place where sick or injured patients are kept overnight and given medical or surgical
care.
Hotel or Motel - A building or arrangement of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary abiding place
by transient guests who are lodged with or without meals for compensation.
House Trailer - Shall mean a vehicle without automotive power designed for human habitation and for carrying
persons and property upon its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Industrialized Building - A commercial or industrial structure that is constructed on one or more modules or
constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site, and that is
designed to be used as a commercial building when the modules or modular components are transported to the
permanent commercial or industrial site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include any
commercial structure that is in excess of two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height as measured from the
finished grade elevation at the building entrance.
Industrialized Housing - A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or more
families, that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built
at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a permanent residential
structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are
erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structure that is in excess of two
(2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building
entrance to the peak of the roof. The term shall not mean nor apply to (a) housing constructed of sectional or
panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (b) any ready-built home which is constructed so that
the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it
and moving it to another location.
Industrial Park - Shall mean a parcel of land which has been planned and/or coordinated for a variety of
industrial and related activities and business uses. This development may be on a one parcel or may be
subdivided. The project is either owned, controlled or managed by a single entity and has its own master plan
and/or covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
Junk - Means copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, rubber, tires, pipe, plastic, debris, trash,
rubbish, waste, metal, and ferrous or non-ferrous materials which are old, scrapped, discarded, secondhand, or
otherwise used.
Junkyard - Means any lot or tract of land upon which junk is kept, stored, bought, sold, recycled, or otherwise
placed.
Kennel - Any place or premise where four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals at least four (4)
months of age are raised, trained, boarded, or kept with or without charge, except for veterinary clinics, animal
hospitals, and animal shelters.
Kindergarten or Nursery School - Any facility, whether known or incorporated under such descriptive title or
name as “Child Play School,” “Child Development Center,” “Early Childhood Center,” and the like, where six
(6) or more children are left for care, training, or education during the day or portion of the day and a fee is
charged for this service.
Landscaping - Shall mean living plant material, including but not limited to grass, turf, trees, shrubs, natural land
forms, water forms, planters; and other landscape features, including walks and plaza areas consisting of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/221
enhanced paving, which are a function of the building and not the streetscape.
Laundry - A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried and pressed by the use
of washing, drying, and ironing machines for fee basis and shall include the term “cleaners,” and “dry cleaners.”
Leather Goods, Retail - A commercial establishment which sells leather materials and supplies or leather goods.
Living Area - Shall include that portion of the dwelling unit which is used or designed for occupancy but does
not include carports, garages, and open porches, breezeways, balconies, and terraces.
Loading Space - A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing,
loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by thirty-five (35) feet and
a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
Lodging House/Rooming House - A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped to
provide lodging regularly) by pre-arrangement for definite periods, for compensation, for three (3) or more
persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
Lot - A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building and its accessory buildings, or by
a group of buildings and their accessory buildings, and having frontage on a dedicated street.
Lot, Corner - A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets.
Lot Coverage - The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the first story or ground floor of all
buildings located on the lot.
Lot Depth - The average depth from the front line of the lot to the rear line of the lot.
Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk,
or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to passage of this ordinance.
Lot Width - The width measured at a distance back from the front line equal to the minimum depth required for a
front yard.
Main Building - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
Manufactured Home - A structure that was constructed or after June 15, 1976 and is transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet (8') or more in width or forty body feet (40') or more in
length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.
Manufactured Home Lot - That part of a parcel of land in a manufactured home park which has been reserved
for the placement of one (1) manufactured home unit.
Manufactured Home Park - A parcel of land which is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or
private association or corporation, and has been developed for rental of lots to tenants with mobile homes.
Masonry or Masonry Units - Shall mean that form of solid construction composed of stone, brick, concrete,
gypsum, hollow clay tile or other similar building units or materials or combination of these materials which
must be laid up unit by unit and set in mortar.
Massage Establishment - Any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital,
where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/221
licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or a doctor whether with or without the use of
mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include
duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops or a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients
recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction.
Mini-warehouse - A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers of varying sizes not to exceed five thousand (5,000)
square feet for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares.
Motel - See “Hotel.”
Motor Vehicle - Shall mean every kind of motor driven or propelled vehicle whether required or not required to
be registered or licensed under the laws of the State of Texas, including trailers, house trailers, and semi-trailers,
and shall also include motorcycles, dirt bikes, or other off-road/all-terrain vehicles.
Neighborhood Convenience Center - Centers which carry convenience goods, such as groceries, drugs, hardware
and some variety items, and also may include some service stores. The neighborhood convenience center may
contain one (1) or two (2) small apparel or shoe stores, but it is clearly dominated by convenience goods, which
are items of daily consumption and very frequent purchase, sometimes called “spot necessity” items. This
neighborhood serving store group is within convenient walking distance of families served (within convenient
driving range in low-density areas), with due consideration for pedestrian access and amenity of surrounding
areas.
Nightclub or Dance Hall - An establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the
following as a principal use of the establishment:
1 Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not limited to performances by
magicians, musicians or comedians;
2 Dancing;
3 Any combination of “1” and “2” above.
Nonconformance - A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to failure to conform to use, height,
area, coverage or off-street parking requirements.
Nonconforming Use - The use of a building or land that does not conform to these zoning regulations and which
lawfully existed at the time these zoning regulations became effective.
Nudity or a State of Nudity - Means less than completely and opaquely covered:
1 Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
2 Female breast or breast[s] below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
3 Human buttock; or
4 Any combination of the above.
Nursing Home - See “Convalescent Center.”
Orchard - An area of one (1) acre or more which is used for the growing of fruit trees.
Parking Lot - An unenclosed, all-weather surface area used exclusively for the temporary parking and/or storage
of motor vehicles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/221
Parking Space - An area measuring at least nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet in length, surfaced with an
all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the
parking space with a street or alley permitting satisfactory ingress and egress. For computing off-street parking
space requirements, parking spaces on public streets, alleys or rights-of-way shall not be used.
Park or Playground (Public) - An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the
city or the school district and available to the general public for neighborhood use.
Personal Services - Businesses which provide services customized for an individual generally involving the care
of the person or his or her apparel including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, shoe and boot repair,
dry-cleaning shops, laundries, reducing salons, and health clubs.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) - An area with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a
single entity according to a unified site design plan, containing one or more residential uses, office uses,
commercial uses, industrial uses, public and quasi-public uses, or any combination of the same.
Plant Nursery - An establishment which grows and sells plants, flowers, shrubs, grass and other items typically
used as and associated with outdoor landscaping or house plants.
Plumbing Sales & Service - An establishment selling plumbing supplies and parts and/or providing the repair
and installation of plumbing and fixtures.
Print Shop - An establishment utilizing letterpress, duplicating equipment, rotary presses or Linotype equipment
to produce in printed form orders for its clients or customers.
Private Club - Facilities where food, beverages (including alcoholic beverages), entertainment, or meeting space
are provided to members only.
Professional Office - A room or group of rooms occupied by a physician, optometrist, psychologist, chiropractor,
dentist, attorney, engineer, surveyor, architect, accountant, planner, management consultant, or any other similar
vocation. Veterinary clinics are specifically excluded from this definition.
Ranch - An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the keeping or raising [of] farm animals and
livestock including but limited to horses, mules, cows, cattle, and swine.
Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another
vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational
vehicle shall include, but not be limited to: travel trailers, pickup campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes,
converted trucks and buses, and boats and boat trailers.
Recreational Vehicle Park - Any development, site, parcel or tract, of land designed, maintained or intended to
be used for the purpose of providing short-term occupancy of camper vehicles, recreational vehicles, tents, or
trailers.
1 Residential - more than 50% of tenants on site for 2 weeks or more.
2 Recreational - more than 50% of tenants on site for 2 weeks or less.
Recycling Collection Facility - A facility designed to collect, sort, and package, by either manual or mechanical
processes, recyclable items for transport to a processing plant.
Rental Store - An establishment which offers and [an] array of items such as appliances, furniture, stereo
equipment, televisions, etc. at a stated [price] for a fixed interval of time under a lease or rental agreement.
Residential Density - The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located or residing within a residential area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/221
Gross Density - The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons, located within the total acreage
of a residential area.
Net Density - The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located within the total acreage of
residential area, exclusive of street rights-of-way, easements, nonresidential land use sites, and
acreage unsuitable for development.
Resort - Any tract of land used primarily to provide recreation and entertainment especially, but not exclusively,
to tourists or vacationers and generally but not necessarily provides overnight accommodations for their guests
in the form of hotels, motels, cabins, RV parks, RV rentals, etc.
Restaurant - Any eating or drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is the primary
business of such establishment including cafes, bistros, cafeterias, and other fast food and drive-in food
establishments.
Salvage - Shall mean and necessarily include:
1 Any discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked, dismantled, worn-out, or ruined motor vehicles
(including automobiles, trucks, tractor, trailers, and buses)[,] motor vehicle parts, boats, travel
trailers, trailers, cranes, machinery or equipment, machinery or equipment parts, and or recreational
vehicles; and/or
2 Any junk.
Salvage yard - Shall mean and necessarily includes a salvage yard, automotive wrecking yard, and automotive
graveyard [and] shall mean any lot or tract of land upon which three (3) or more discarded, abandoned, junked,
wrecked, dismantled, worn-out, or ruined motor vehicles (including autos, trucks, tractor-trailers, and buses),
motor vehicle parts, boats, travel trailers, trailers, and/or recreational vehicles are either:
1 Kept, stored, bought, sold, recycled, or otherwise placed; or
2 Disassembled, dismantled, stripped, scrapped, recycled, or cut up.
School - A place having a curriculum for the purpose of giving instruction, training or education in a service, art,
trade, or for general knowledge.
Screening (Device) - Shall mean any of the following:
1 Any solid fence or wall constructed of metal, brick, masonry or concrete; the vertical surface of
which shall be without gaps, except openings for access.
2 Any dense, screening shrubs providing a visual barrier, for which such material shall be
maintained in a healthy growing condition; or
3 Landscaped earth berms may, when appropriate in scale, be considered and used as a screening
element in lieu of a fence, wall, hedge, or other dense planting material.
Screening Shrubs, Large - Shall mean shrubs with an installed minimum height of three (3) feet as identified
below, or any other shrubs which, when mature, shall reach a minimum height of six (6) feet, provide a dense
visual barrier, be drought resistant, and possess compact root systems posing minimum danger to integrity of
public utilities. The large screening shrubs included on the following list are recommended to be planted to
screen incompatible land uses, parking facilities, and dumpsters by forming a visual barrier.
Common Name Botanical Name
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/221
Photina Photina Serrulata
Fraser's Photina Photina Fraseri
Burford Holly Ilex Cornuta Burfordi
Chinese Holly Ilex Cornuta Rotunda
Waxmyrtle Myrica Cerifera
Yaupon Holly Ilex Vomitoria
Nellie R. Stevens Holly Ilex Cornuta
Screening Shrubs, Small - Shall mean shrubs with an installed minimum height of two (2) feet as hereinafter
identified, or any other shrubs which, when mature, shall reach a minimum height of two (2) feet and provides a
dense visual barrier. The small screening shrubs included on the following list are recommended to be planted to
screen parking lots, playgrounds, ballfields, swimming pools, and tennis courts by forming a visual barrier.
Common Name Botanical Name
Compact Nandina Nandina Compacta
Dwarf Abelia Abelia Edward Goucher
Abelia Prostata
Dwarf Burford Holly Ilex Cornuta Burfordii Nana
Dwarf Yaupon Holly Ilex Vomitora Nana
Seat - As used in determining parking requirements for this ordinance, a seat shall mean such sitting space as
needed or which is designed to be used for one person to sit down and occupy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/221
Secondhand Store - An establishment specializing in the sale of previously used materials, goods, and
merchandise of less than twenty (20) years of age and of that material, goods and merchandise over twenty (20)
years of age which do not derive a value as a result of their age.
Servant or Caretaker's Quarters - A secondary dwelling unit located on a lot with a main residential structure and
used as living quarters for persons employed on the premises and not for rent or use as a separate domicile by
persons other than those employed on the premises or their immediate family.
Service Station - A business establishment where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and the servicing of vehicles occurs, but not including the
major overhaul of automobiles, body work, or repair of heavy trucks and equipment. A service station is
sometimes referred to as a “gas station, “filling station,” or “fuel service station.”
Setback - The required minimum distance between any structure and any property line of the lot on which it is
located. Setbacks shall be measured perpendicular to lot lines. The terms “setback” and “required yard” shall
mean the same and can be interchanged.
Sexually Oriented Business - Shall mean a love parlor, nude modeling studio, adult bookstore, adult movie
theater, adult video arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of
which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to
provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Shopping Center or Mall - A planned and coordinated grouping of retail business and service uses on a single
site or a combination of sites where special attention is given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, and
building design and orientation.
Sign - An outdoor device or structure which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, announcement,
direction or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered to the public.
Site Development Plan - A drawing showing the provisions for a proposed project, including such information
that enables the drawing to serve as a plat, together with information pertaining to all covenants relating to land
use, location and bulk of structures, intensity of use or density of development, private streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities, and all other reasonable information required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission as a part of the review process.
Small Animal Clinic - An office or group of offices for one or more veterinarians engaged in treating diseases or
injuries to small domestic animals. Structures are to be soundproof and no outside facilities are permitted.
Special Use Permit - A use that may be allowed if it meets certain specified requirements or conditions and
meets the approval of the City Council.
Specified Anatomical Areas - Means human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified Sexual Activities - Means and includes the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals; sexual
acts including intercourse, copulation, or sodomy, or masturbation; or excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any sexual act or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals.
Stable, Private - An accessory building used by the residents of the premises for sheltering and quartering of
horses owned by the occupants and for which no fee is charged for stabling the horses.
Stable, Public - A lot or tract of land used for the sheltering and quartering of horses for which a fee or charge is
made for the stabling of the horses.
Stone Screenings - Washed stone 1/2 inch or 1-1/2 inch in size.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/221
Story - That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of a floor and the surface
of a floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the portion of the building between the surface of a
floor and the ceiling or roof above it.
Story, Half - The topmost story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes shall be deemed a full story.
Street - A public or private thoroughfare or road which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property.
Structural Alteration - Any change, addition or modification in construction in the supporting members of a
building, such as exterior walls, bearing walls, beams, columns, foundations, girders, floor joists, roof joists,
rafters or trusses.
Structure - Anything constructed or erected having location on or under the ground or attached to something
having location on or under the ground.
Swimming Pool, Private - A recreational facility used for swimming which is used [by] the owners, employees,
or residents of the property and their guests.
Swimming Pool, Public - A recreational facility used for swimming which is open to the public for which a
membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.
Tack Store - A commercial establishment which sells horse equipment such as saddles, bridles, blankets, riding
accouterments, etc.
Television Satellite Dish - An earth-based station shaped like a dish which is used for the reception of satellite
signals for television programs.
Tennis Court, Private - A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the owners,
employees, or residents of the property and their guests.
Tennis Court, Public - A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the general public and
for which membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.
Tool and Equipment Rental - An establishment which offers and [an] array of tools and equipment and
machinery such as cranes, backhoes, trucks, tractors, etc. at a stated [price] for a fixed interval of time under a
lease or rental agreement.
Townhouse - A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are either
attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party or common walls or are located immediately adjacent
thereto with no visible separation between walls or roofs. This definition shall also include the term
“condominium.”
Trailer Camp or Park - An area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of one or more recreational
vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, motor coaches, pickup campers, and camping trailers which are occupied
or intended for occupancy as temporary living quarters by individuals or families.
Trucks - A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of
goods and people and having a G.V.W.R. in excess of one (1) ton.
Turfs - Shall mean the following list of turfs and any other turfs which can be demonstrated to the building
official to be drought resistant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/221
Common Name Botanical Name
Bermuda Grass Cynodon Dactylon
Bermuda Grass hybrids
St. Augustine Stenotaphrom Secondatum
Buffalo Grass Buchloe Dectyloides
Fescue & combinations Festuca Arundinacea
Underground Shelter - A concrete structure designed for the protection of humans from tornadoes or from
nuclear blast, heat, or fall-out, the main portion of which is underground.
Use - The purpose for which land or a building or structure thereon is designed, arranged, intended or
maintained or for which it is or may be used or occupied.
Use, Accessory - A subordinate use on the same lot with the principal use and incidental and accessory thereto.
Used Auto Sales Lot - A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the purchase, trade, display, and sale of
automobiles that are in condition to be driven on or off the lot, under its own power. Used car lots shall not be
used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, or the dismantling of automobiles, or the storage of automobile
parts.
Variance - An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning ordinance to a particular
parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is
necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the
same vicinity and zoning district.
Veterinary Clinic - An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for domestic household
animals, conducted completely within an enclosed structure. This term shall also include “animal clinic.”
Veterinary Hospital - An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for large animals and
household domestic animals and which animals may be boarded during treatment in outside pens, runs or
stables. This term shall also include “animal hospital.”
Warehouse - A building or group of buildings used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares.
Washateria - A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried on a self-service
basis by the use of washing, drying, and ironing machines and shall include the term “self-cleaning laundry.”
Yard - An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building and which is not obstructed from
ground level to the sky except for roof overhangs, fences, trees, and shrubs.
Yard, Front - A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance
between the front line of the lot and the nearest portion of the main building, including an enclosed or covered
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/221
porch, provided that the front yard depth shall be measured from the future street line for a street on which a lot
fronts, when such line is shown on the official map or is otherwise established.
Yard, Rear - A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance between the
rear line of the lot and the main building.
Yard, Side - A yard between the side line of the lot and the main building extending from the front yard to the
rear yard and having a width equal to the shortest distance between said side line and the main building.
SECTION 26 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
Any person violating any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be fined, upon conviction, not more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law and the power of
injunction as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Section 211.012 and as may be amended, may be
exercised in enforcing this ordinance whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
SECTION 27 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not
intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by
other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this ordinance
shall govern.
SECTION 28 PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER
EXISTING ORDINANCES
By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use
falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain
nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared
purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or
criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was hereby amended, shall be discharged or
affected by such amendment; but the prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures
may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance has not
been amended.
SECTION 29. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 30. SEVERABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the
incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.
SECTION 31. EFFECTIVE DATE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/221
This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication of the caption, as the law
in such cases provides.
(Ordinance 050517-1 adopted 5/17/05)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE A2.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. A2.001 Copies and faxes
(a) $0.25 cents per copy page.
(b) $1.00 per page fax sent or received.
Sec. A2.002 Cleaning of private property
Charges for city equipment and/or city employees to clean private property:
(1) Backhoe: $100.00 per hour.
(2) Brush hog-mower: $100.00 per hour.
(3) Brush truck: $50.00 per hour.
(4) Labor, per person: $50.00 per hour (minimum charge one hour).
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A3.000 ANIMAL CONTROL
Sec. A3.001 Disposal of large dead animals at city landfill
(a) A fee of $100.00 will be charged during the work week for cows, horses, or other large animals.
(b) A fee of $150.00 will be charged after 5:00 p.m., weekends, or holidays.
(Ordinance 070501-1 adopted 5/1/07)
Sec. A3.002 Registration of dogs and cats
(a) The license fee for unneutered dogs or cats shall be $5.00 per animal.
(b) The license fee for neutered dogs or cats shall be $2.50 per animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/221
(c) The license fee shall be waived for dogs serving the blind or government-owned dogs used for law
enforcement. All other licensing provisions shall apply.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.020)
Sec. A3.003 Keeping more than three dogs or cats
Permit fee: $20.00. (1997 Code, sec. 90.025)
Sec. A3.004 Registration of dangerous dogs
Registration fee: $50.00. (1997 Code, sec. 90.038)
Sec. A3.005 Impoundment fees
(a) Impoundment fee: $10.00 for each day the animal is impounded.
(b) If any pet owner wishes to retrieve a pet after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends, an extra fee of $25.00 will be
charged.
(c) If a pet owner wishes to give an animal to the city, there shall be a fee of $25.00 for care and adoption or
disposal.
(d) Adoption fees include city tags and proof of rabies vaccination.
(Ordinance 070501-1 adopted 5/1/07)
Sec. A3.006 Adoption of impounded animal
Adoption fee: $5.00 plus the cost of impoundment plus cost of vaccination. (1997 Code, sec. 90.056)
Sec. A3.007 Beekeeping permit
Permit fee: $5.00. (1997 Code, sec. 90.090)
Sec. A3.008 Keeping livestock
Permit fee: $10.00. (1997 Code, sec. 90.085)
Sec. A3.009 Animal establishment
(a) For each kennel authorized to house less than ten dogs or cats: $100.00.
(b) For each kennel authorized to house 11 but not more than 20 dogs or cats: $200.00.
(c) For each kennel authorized to house 21 or more dogs or cats: $500.00.
(d) For each pet shop: $500.00.
(e) For other animal establishments: $500.00.
(1997 Code, sec. 90.120)
ARTICLE A4.000 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Sec. A4.001 Building permit fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/221
Type of Permit Permit Fee ($)
(a) Estimated total building cost (new, remodel or repair):
$100.00 or less (minimum) 5.00
$101.00 to $5,000.00 10.00
$5,001.00 to $25,000.00 49.00
Type of Permit Permit Fee ($)
$25,001.00 to $75,000.00, per thousand 2.00
$75,001.00 to $150,000.00, per thousand 2.25
$150,000.00 and over, per thousand 337.50 + 1.00
(b) Plumbing, including gas (new or remodel):
(1) Minimum fee 10.00
(2) House sewer 5.00
(3) Each water heater 2.50
(4) Each plumbing fixture (tub, shower, commode, lavatory or
kitchen sink
2.50
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/221
(5) Each additional opening 1.00
(6) Central heating unit 5.00
(c) Electrical (new or remodel):
(1) Minimum fee 5.00
(2) Meter loop 2.50
(3) Air conditioner (condenser) 2.50
(4) Electric water heater, range, motors, signs, and the like,
each
2.00
(5) Multi-circuit panel, each 2.00
(6) Rough-in wiring (plugs, lights, switches)
First 20 openings, each 0.25
Next 20 openings, each 0.15
Each additional opening 0.10
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/221
(d) Mobile home 15.00
(e) Motor home, travel trailer or recreational vehicle 10.00
(1997 Code, sec. 150.02)
Sec. A4.002 Contractor registration
(a) Registered contractor fee: $50.00.
(b) Annual renewal fee: $50.00.
ARTICLE A5.000 BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS
Sec. A5.001 Itinerant merchants and vendors
Permit or license fee:
(1) $25.00 per day.
(2) $100.00 per week.
(3) $200.00 per year.
(Ordinance 171219-01 adopted 1/3/18)
Sec. A5.002 Exhibition, show or performance
Permit fee: $25.00 plus $1.00 per day in advance. (1997 Code, sec. 110.06)
Sec. A5.003 Sexually oriented business
(a) Application fee: $2,500.00. (1997 Code, sec. 113.07(D))
(b) Permit fee: $750.00 survey fee
(c) Per applicant fee: $25.00
(1997 Code, sec. 113.07(J))
Sec. A5.004 Food establishments, temporary food establishments, mobile food units and roadside food
vendors
The following fees apply to permits issued under article 4.06.
Daily permit $100.00
Weekly permit $300.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/221
Yearly permit $800.00
Food truck court owner permits:
2–10 spaces $2,500.00 per year
11–15 spaces $3,000.00 per year
More than 15 spaces $200.00 per year per space
(Ordinance 15-09-15-1 adopted 9/15/15)
ARTICLE A6.000 UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. A6.001 Rates
(a) Natural gas system. The following rates shall apply to customers of the natural gas system of the city:
(1) For customers inside the city limits, the minimum charge for gas service shall be:
(A) Each MCF: $15.00.
(B) 2 MCF minimum bill: $30.00.
(2) For customers outside the city limits:
(A) Each MCF: $22.50.
(B) 2 MCF minimum bill: $45.00.
(b) Water system. The following rates shall apply to customers of the water system of the city:
(1) For customers inside the city limits:
(A) 1st 4,000 gallons (minimum): $19.40.
(B) Over 4,000: $7.40 each thousand.
(2) For customers outside the city limits:
(A) 1st 4,000 gallons (minimum): $34.20.
(B) Over 4,000 gallons: $11.40 each thousand.
(c) Wastewater system. The following rates shall apply to customers of the wastewater system of the city:
(1) For customers inside the city limits:
(A) Residential: $25.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/221
(B) Commercial: $78.00 + $1.00 per gallon water usage (3 month average water
consumption Dec., Jan. and Feb.).
(2) For customers outside the city limits:
(A) Residential: $38.00.
(B) Commercial: $93.00 + $1.00 per gallon water usage (3 month average water
consumption Dec., Jan. and Feb.).
(3) The city shall require a wastewater fee to be charged to all existing and future RV and mobile
home parks. Each RV sewer connection shall be assessed a monthly fee of $10.00, and each mobile
home sewer connection shall be assessed a monthly fee of $16.50, in addition to the commercial rate
charged to the RV park. Any extra connection on residential property for RV/mobile home use shall
pay an additional 1/2 “residential rate” fee for sanitation and wastewater.
(d) Sanitation. The following rates shall be applied to sanitation accounts:
(1) Residential service.
(A) Inside city: $25.00 per residential customer.
(B) Outside city: $38.00 per residential customer.
(C) The above rate will be for residential customers only and such rate for service shall
include one (1) 3.0-yard container per 4 residential accounts. RV parks and mobile home parks
shall require one (1) 3.0-yard container per every four (4) RV's and every three (3) mobile
homes. Any customer that uses the city's sanitation service shall be charged the fees set out
herein to ensure the safety and cleanliness of the city.
(2) Commercial service.
Inside: Outside:
1x/week $45.00 $67.50
2x/week $90.00 $135.00
3x/week $135.00 $202.50
4x/week $180.00 $270.00
5x/week $225.00 $337.50
These rates will be subject to all appropriate state and local sales tax.
(e) Landfill.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/221
(1) On the first Saturday of each month, residents shall be allowed free dumping at the city landfill,
except for demolition. All other visits will be charged a $5.00 fee per load.
(2) Local demolition charges shall be $30.00 per ton.
(3) Outside city landfill fee shall be $50.00 per ton.
(f) Senior citizen discount. The city shall grant a senior citizen discount at the age of 65 to residents only if
paid by the 10th of the month: 15% of gas, water, wastewater and sanitation excluding taxes.
Sec. A6.002 Miscellaneous fees and charges
(a) The city shall require a utility deposit of $200.00 for gas service and $150.00 for water service from all
customers wishing to establish a utility account. All hotels, motels, apartment complexes, RV parks and
mancamps will require a utility deposit of $400.00 for gas service and $600.00 for water service. If a customer
has no utilities and requests a dumpster, they will be required to pay a garbage deposit of two (2) times the
current sanitation rate. All deposits shall be refundable to the customer when they close the utility account.
However, if there is an outstanding balance on the account, the deposit shall be applied to the outstanding
balance, with the remainder refunded to the customer. The deposit may be transferred if the customer transfers to
a different service location. All summer or winter disconnects shall be assessed a $50.00 fee, beginning October
1, 2014.
(b) In order to obtain new service or transfer existing service, each customer shall present the city with a U.S.
photo identification and complete a service agreement. Only the customer on the account can transfer or
disconnect service.
(c) All present and future water accounts will have an automatic sanitation fee and wastewater fee if available
inside or outside city limits.
(d) All new connections to the city's utility lines located outside of the city limits shall pay a one-time fee of
$2,500.00, plus tapping fees and deposits.
(e) The city shall require a nonrefundable tap fee for newly installed service. The payment of the fee shall not
make such service tap the property of the customer, as the service tap shall remain the property of the city after
the customer pays the fee. The city shall also access a street cut fee should the city be required to cut into an
existing street to install gas, water or sewer service to a customer. The street cut fee shall be in addition to any
gas tap fee, water tap fee or sewer tap fee and is set out below. Such fee shall be paid according to the size of the
water tap as set out below:
Size Tap Fee Inside the City Limits Fee Outside the City Limits
3/4" $250.00 $ 350.00
1" $300.00 $ 425.00
2" or larger Construction cost plus 1/2 cost of meter Construction cost plus 1/2 cost of meter
Cross street cut $300.00 $300.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/221
(f) It shall be the policy of the city to encourage the timely payment of utility bills. All utility bills shall be due
by 5:00 p.m. on the 15th day of the month, or the first business day after the 15th if it falls on a weekend or
holiday. Bills that are not paid by the 15th shall be assessed a $5.00 penalty. A $75.00 fee will be assessed for all
meters installed after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends.
(g) The city will compile a list of all outstanding bills as of the 20th day of the month at 5:00 p.m., or at the
same time on the next business day after the 20th if it falls on a weekend or holiday. The city manager shall then
call for each account with $25.00 or more in outstanding charges to be disconnected for nonpayment. Accounts
that are on the list at the time it leaves city hall shall be assessed a nonpayment fee of $50.00.
(h) Reread of meter.
(1) The city shall allow for customers to request a reread of their meter in the case they do not feel
the billing is accurate. In the event the city receives a request for reread, the city manager will send a
crew to manually read the meter and then compare the reading to the electronic reading on file. If
there is found to be an error, the city manager will cause a correction to be applied to the account.
(2) If the customer requests a reread and there is found to be no error, the customer shall be
required to pay a service charge of $25.00.
(Ordinance 170905-01 adopted 9/5/17)
(i) Removal of water or gas meter for delinquent accounts: $50.00. (1997 Code, sec. 50.02)