7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/376
City of Beaumont
Code of Ordinances
Including Web Update 23.2
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 19-045 adopted 7/9/19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
CHARTER OF THE CITY of BEAUMONT, TEXAS*
ADOPTED DECEMBER 6, 1947
As Revised January 25, 1972;
August 13, 1983;
April 5, 1986;
May 2, 1998; and
September 16, 2003.
PREFACE
This publication of the Charter of the City of Beaumont is made primarily for the purpose of incorporating significant amendments to the Charter voted upon by the
citizens of Beaumont September 13, 2003. In publishing this revised Charter, we would be remiss were we to fail to acknowledge, with gratitude, the Beaumont Charter
Commission of 1947 who, by a majority vote, recommended the submission of the Charter of the City of Beaumont to the citizenry. Those members are:
Chilton O'Brien Kirby McGown
T. N. Whitehurst George W. Morgan
B. N. Kiker W. D. Norwood
Bryan D. Beck, Jr. Mrs. Tom Rigsby
Ray Coale W. N. Scarborough
H. C. Galloway Ben F. Shipley
W. B. Johnson J. B. Terrell
Elmer Leach
The following constituted the Charter Amendment Review Committee who proposed amendments to this Charter for adoption January 25, 1972:
Anthony G. Brocato Chilton O'Brien
Co-Chairman
Co-Chairman
Dr. Richard Brassard, Jr. Mrs. Norma Parcel
Robert S. Burns Pike Powers, Jr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/376
Alvin Daniels Mark Steinhagen
Wm. C. Key Rev. James B. Thompson
Watt Langham Dr. Norman Weed
Marne H. Meynig Mrs. Ralph Wooster
Ed Moore
Grateful acknowledgment is made to the Home Rule Charter Committee who met to recommend the Charter amendments adopted April 5, 1986. Members of the
Committee were:
James M. Stokes Edward Moore
Chairman Mark Steinhagen
Gaylyn Cooper Boyd Wells
Vice-Chairman Gary White
Bill Cox Sid Hodges
Carol Flatten Ernest Browne, Jr.
Lou Ann Peacock George Hudspeth
Elmer Ashcraft Vernice Monroe
Steve Lawrence Dr. James Lewis
Finally, acknowledgment is made of the many citizens who appeared before the Committee to make suggestions as to content of the Charter, and to staff members who
assisted the committee in their work.
Article I
INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; TERRITORY.
Section 1 – CORPORATE NAME: The inhabitants of the City of Beaumont, with the boundaries as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided
in this Charter, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a body politic and corporate, and to be known by the name and style of “The City of Beaumont.”
Section 2 – FORM OF GOVERNMENT: The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager Government.” Pursuant to its
provisions subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and general laws of this State, and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an
elective Council hereinafter referred to as the “City Council” which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager and such
other officials as provided in this charter. The City Manager shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City as provided herein.
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
Section 3 – BOUNDARIES: The bounds and limits of the City of Beaumont are hereby established and described as follows:
“Beginning on the right bank of the water's edge of the Neches River where the center line of Carroll Avenue in the Neches River Park Addition to the
City of Beaumont strikes the river;
Thence south with the center line of Carroll Avenue to a point opposite the southwest corner of the C. C. Caswell 256.6 acre tract;
Thence east with the southern boundary line of said Caswell tract to the east side of the Texarkana and Fort Smith Railway Company's right of way;
Thence southward with the eastern boundary line of said Texarkana and Fort Smith Railway Company's right of way to its point of curve, continuing
southward to and across the Texarkana and Fort Smith Railway Company's spur track to the Beaumont Sawmill Company to a point in its southern
boundary line;
Thence in a westerly direction with the southern boundary line of said Texarkana and Fort Smith Railway Company's track to the eastern right of way
line of the Texarkana and Fort Smith Railway Company's right of way, known as the Kansas City Southern Railway Company's right of way from
Beaumont to Port Arthur;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/376
Thence southeastward along said east right of way line of the Texarkana and Port Smith Railway to its intersection with the center line of Spindletop
Avenue;
Thence southwestward along the center line of Spindletop Avenue to its intersection with the east property line of the fresh water canal to Port Arthur;
Thence northwestward along the northeast property line of the fresh water canal to Port Arthur, crossing Highland Avenue;
Thence continuing westward along the northern property line of said fresh water canal to Port Arthur, and still continuing along said property line and
following its curve to the north;
Thence continuing northward along the east property line of said fresh water canal to Port Arthur to its intersection with the south line of the James W.
Bullock Survey;
Thence westward along the south line of the James W. Bullock Survey to the east line of the Samuel Stivers League;
Thence continuing westward along the south line of the James W. Bullock Survey produced westward through the Samuel Stivers League to its
intersection with the center line of Hillebrandt Bayou;
Thence north along the center line of Hillebrandt Bayou to the center line of the Gulf and Interstate Railway Company's right of way;
Thence southwestward along said Gulf and Interstate Railway Company's right of way to its intersection with the center line of Walden Road;
Thence northwestward along the center line of Walden Road to its intersection with the south line of the Charles Williams League;
Thence east along the south line of the Charles Williams League to the southeast corner of the Thomas H. Langham Subdivision;
Thence north along the east line of the Thomas H. Langham Subdivision, it also being the east line of Lots 1, 8, 9, 16, 17, 24 and 25 of said subdivision;
Thence continuing northward along the dividing line between the west line of Caldwood Acres and the east line of the Langham Estate Subdivision to a
point on the north line of the Texas and New Orleans Railroad Company's right of way, said point also being in the south line of Caldwood;
Thence southwestward along the dividing line between Caldwood and the Texas and New Orleans Railroad Company's right of way to the southwest
corner of Caldwood;
Thence northward along the dividing line between Caldwood and Block “G” of the Langham Estate Subdivision to its intersection with the south line of
the Hezekiah Williams League, said line also being the north line of the Charles Williams League;
Thence westward along the south line of the Hezekiah Williams League, crossing the Calder Road to its intersection with the west line of Calder Road,
said point of intersection also being the northeast corner of Lot 1, Block “D” of the Langham Estate Subdivision;
Thence continuing westward along the north line of Lot 1, Block “D” said line also being the south line of Dowlen Road, and continuing to a point where
the center line of Dowlen Road turns northwestward;
Thence northwestward along the center line of Dowlen Road and crossing the Missouri Pacific right of way line;
Thence continuing northward along Dowlen Road, said road extending along the west line of Lots 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 of Block “C” of the Langham Estate
Subdivision, to a point in the center line of Dowlen Road where said Dowlen Road turns eastward along the north line of Lot 1, Block “C” of the
Langham Estate Subdivision;
Thence eastward along the center line of said Dowlen Road, which road extends along the north boundary of Lot 1, Block “C” of the Langham Estate
Subdivision to its intersection with the center line of Dowlen Road where it again turns northward;
Thence northward along center line of Dowlen Road, said road extending along the west line of Block “L” of the Langham Estate Subdivision, and
continuing northward along said center line to its intersection with the north line of the Hezekiah Williams League;
Thence eastward along the north line of the Hezekiah Williams League to its intersection with the west line of the Frederick Bigner Survey, said point
being the southwest corner of the Frederick Bigner Survey;
Thence northward along the west line of the Frederick Bigner Survey to the northwest corner of the Frederick Bigner Survey, said corner also being the
southwest corner of the Thomas Speer League;
Thence eastward along the dividing line between the Frederick Bigner Survey and the Thomas Speer League to the southeast corner of the Thomas Speer
League;
Thence northward along the east line of the Thomas Speer League to the southwest corner of the H. R. Williams Survey, said point also being the
northwest corner of the Hezekiah Williams, Jr. Survey;
Thence eastward along the south line of the H. R. Williams Survey and the north line of the Hezekiah Williams, Jr. Survey to a point on the right bank of
the water's edge of the Neches River;
Thence following the right bank of the water's edge of the Neches River down said river in an easterly direction to its intersection with the center line of
Collier's Ferry Road;
Thence southwestward, following the center line of said Collier's Ferry Road to a point where said center line intersects the south line of LaSalle Street;
Thence eastward along the south line of LaSalle Street produced eastward, said line also being the north line of Beaumont Heights Subdivision, to its
intersection with the center line of Brakes Bayou;
Thence down the center line of Brakes Bayou with its meanderings to the right bank of the water's edge of the Neches River;
Thence down the right bank of the water's edge of the Neches River with its meanderings to the place of beginning.”
Section 4 – ANNEXATION OF ADDITIONAL TERRITORY.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/376
(a) By Ordinance: The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix boundary limits of the City of Beaumont and to provide for the alteration and the extension
of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed. Upon the
introduction of any such ordinances in the City Council, it shall be published in the form in which it may be finally passed, in a daily newspaper published in the City of
Beaumont, at least one time, and said ordinance shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty (30) days have elapsed after said publication. Additionally,
those persons living within the area to be annexed shall be given written notice of the City's intention to annex the property. Written notice shall be provided to those
persons shown as the owners of the property on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located. Written notice shall be adequate if sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested. Upon the final passage of any such ordinance, the boundary limits of the City shall thereafter be as fixed in such ordinance.
When any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Beaumont, for municipal purposes only, and the property situated therein shall bear
its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens who shall be bound by the acts,
ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. (Amended 4/5/86)
(b) By Petition: Whenever a majority of the qualified voters who are citizens of the State and inhabitants of any territory adjoining Beaumont, as said territory may be
designated by the City Council or in case there are no qualified voters in said territory, then when persons owning a majority of the land in area in said territory desires the
annexation of such territory to Beaumont, they may present a written petition to that effect to the City Council and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more
of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters, or in case there are no qualified voters, said affidavit shall be to the effect
that there are no qualified voters in said territory and that the persons signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory; and thereupon the City
Council may by ordinance annex such territory to Beaumont for municipal purposes only. From thenceforth the said territory shall be a part of Beaumont, and the
inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of said City.
State law reference–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.
Section 5 – CREATION OF WARD BOUNDARIES: Repealed 8/13/83.
Section 6 – CHANGE OF WARD BOUNDARIES: The City Council shall have power to establish, alter or change the ward boundaries of the City of Beaumont; and to
divide the City into wards, designating the same by number and describing same; provided that there shall at all times be four (4) wards within the City; and to change
such wards from time to time as the City Council may deem expedient so that each ward shall contain as nearly as possible the same number of electors. (Amended
8/13/83)
Article II
POWERS OF THE CITY.*
Section 1 – GENERAL: The City of Beaumont, as such body politic and corporate, shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; and shall have all the powers
granted to cities by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The
City may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or
condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control any property now owned by it or which it hereafter may acquire, and may construct, own, lease, operate and
regulate public utilities; may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of
the City by the issuance and sale of bonds or notes of the City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for
whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations, and may pass such ordinances as may be
expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of
its inhabitants, and to protect the peace, lives, health and property of the inhabitants; and may provide suitable penalties for the violation of any ordinance enacted by the
City of Beaumont; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution of this State or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights,
privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
Section 2 – GENERAL POWERS ADOPTED: The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to
the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government
and all other powers which, under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The City of
Beaumont shall have and exercise all the powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title 28, Article 1175 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925 and
amendments thereto and hereafter enacted.
State law reference–General powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.
Section 3 – EMINENT DOMAIN: The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of
the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner
authorized or permitted by the Constitution and Laws of this State or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing body of the City. The
power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take the fee and land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right
to condemn public property for such purposes. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not
specifically enumerated in this Charter.
State law references–Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch. 21; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 251.
Section 4 – SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The City shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system and to require property owners to connect their
premises with such sewer system; and to provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections.
Article III
THE CITY COUNCIL.
Section 1 – GENERAL: Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all powers conferred on the City shall be vested in a body to be known as “The City Council” and
shall be exercised by the City Council.
Section 2 – NUMBER AND TERM: The City Council shall be composed of a Mayor and six (6) Councilmembers. Four (4) Councilmembers shall be designated as
“ward Councilmembers,” each of whom shall be elected only by the qualified voters residing in the ward from which each such ward Councilmember is elected. Each
ward Councilmember shall reside in the ward to which such Councilmember is elected to represent. Two (2) Councilmembers shall be designated “Councilmembers-atlarge;”
and the Mayor and Councilmembers-at-large shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the City. At the general election in 2004, the Mayor and at-large
Councilmembers shall be elected to one (1) year terms. Thereafter, the Mayor and all Councilmembers shall be elected for two (2) year terms. (Amended 9/16/03)
Section 3 – QUALIFICATIONS: The Mayor and each of the six (6) Councilmembers shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, shall be a citizen of the United
States, a qualified voter of the City of Beaumont and shall not be in arrears in the payment of any liability due the City. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 4 – SALARY: Salaries of Mayor and Council members shall be set by ordinance but may not be increased in the current term of the Mayor or Councilmembers
enacting such ordinance. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 5 – MAYOR: The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council. He shall be known as the official head of the City Government but shall have no regular
administrative duties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/376
Section 6 – MAYOR PRO TEMPORE: The City Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore for a one (1) year term. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in case of the absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of his office, and, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor for the
unexpired term. If the Mayor Pro Tempore is unwilling to assume the duties of Mayor in the event of a vacancy in that office, then the City Council shall appoint a Mayor
Pro Tempore from its membership. (Amended 5/2/98)
Section 7 – VACANCIES: A vacancy in a ward position, whether filled by the City Council or by election, shall be filled by a resident of the ward in which the vacancy
occurred. Vacancies in the City Council where the same do not exceed two (2) at any one time shall be filled by a majority of the remaining members of the City Council
and the person elected shall serve for the unexpired term only. When more than two (2) vacancies occur, a special election shall be called to elect their successors to fill
their unexpired terms; provided, however, if such vacancies occur within ninety (90) days prior to a general election, then no special election shall be called. But in that
event, the remaining members of the City Council shall by a majority vote fill such vacancies and the person so elected shall serve only until the next general City election
when such vacancies shall be filled. If four (4) or more vacancies occur within ninety (90) days of a general election, then, and in that event, a special election shall be
called to fill the vacancies and the persons so elected shall serve only until the next general City election when such vacancies shall be filled. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
Section 8 – MEETINGS: The City Council shall meet at regular meetings each week unless postponed for valid reasons. Special meetings of the City Council shall be
called by the City Clerk, at the request of the Mayor, City Manager or four (4) members of the City Council. Four (4) or more members of the City Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All meetings of the City Council shall be held in a public place in the City of Beaumont. Meetings of the City Council
shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas which require meetings of public bodies to be open to the public. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
Section 9 – PROCEDURE: The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep a true and correct journal of all of its proceedings which
said journal shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 10 – APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER: The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the
City.
Section 11 – CITY CLERK: The City Council shall appoint a City Clerk and prescribe the duties and compensation of said officer and provide him with such assistance
as it may deem necessary. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council.
Section 12 – AUDITORS: Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the City Council shall designate one or more qualified public accountants who shall make an independent
audit of accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the City government for the fiscal year for which appointed, and shall submit their report to the City
Council. A summary of said report shall be published in a local newspaper within thirty (30) days after receipt of same. Special audits shall be made when deemed
necessary by the City Council. The original reports of the City auditors shall be kept among the permanent records of the City. No auditor or firm of auditors shall serve as
auditor for the City of Beaumont for more than four (4) successive years. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
Section 13 – INVESTIGATIONS: The City Council or any person or committee appointed by it shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office,
agency or officer of the City; to make investigations as to City affairs and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books,
papers and other evidence material to said inquiry. The City Council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in refusing to obey any such subpoena or failure to
produce books, papers, and other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such content [contempt] in a manner provided by ordinance.
Article IV
ELECTIONS.
Section 1 – LAWS GOVERNING CITY ELECTIONS: All City elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by the laws of the State of
Texas governing general and municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in the event there should be any failure of the general laws or this Charter
to provide for some feature of the City elections, then the City Council shall have the power to provide for such deficiency. No informalities in conducting a City election
shall invalidate the same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and the Charter and ordinances of the City.
State law reference–Applicability of Election Code, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 1.002.
Section 2 – ELECTION OFFICERS AND CANVASSING RETURNS: The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall
be appointed by the Council, and they shall be qualified voters of the election precinct in which they are to serve. The election judges shall certify their count of the
ballots, attaching the tally sheet to their certificate and deposit it with the City Clerk in a sealed envelope. Within five (5) days after an election, the Council shall meet and
canvass the returns and officially declare the result of the election.
State law references–Appointment of election judges, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 32.005; canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
Section 3 – GENERAL ELECTIONS HELD: All elective officers under this Charter shall be elected on regular election days as established by the Election Code of the
State of Texas. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law reference–Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 41.
Section 4 – ELECTION BY MAJORITY, VOTING AT LARGE, RUNOFF ELECTION: The candidate for Mayor receiving the majority of the votes cast by the
qualified voters of the City for Mayor shall be declared elected. The two (2) candidates for Councilmember-at-large receiving the greatest number of votes cast by the
qualified voters of the City for Councilmember-at-large shall be declared elected; it being the intention of this section that the Councilmembers-at-large shall be elected by
a plurality rather than a majority of the votes. Each qualified voter shall be entitled, but shall not be required, to vote for two (2) candidates for Councilmember-at-large.
The candidate for “ward Councilmember” receiving the majority of votes cast by the qualified voters residing in the ward shall be declared elected; it being the intention
of this section that each ward as it may hereafter exist shall have equal representation on the Council, but that the four (4) ward Councilmembers shall be voted upon only
by the qualified voters residing in each of the four (4) wards established by the City Council as provided in Article I of this Charter. If no candidate for Mayor or for ward
Councilmember receives a majority of all votes cast in the general election for the position for which he is a candidate, a runoff election for such position shall be called to
be held fourteen (14) days following the date of the general election, said runoff election to be held between the two (2) candidates who received the greatest number of
votes cast in the general election for such position. In the event of a tie vote between two (2) or more candidates with the second greatest number of votes in the general
election, or in the event of a tie vote between the two (2) candidates in a runoff election, the respective candidates so tied shall cast lots to determine who shall be, in the
first instance, the successful candidate for the runoff election, or, in the second instance, the duly elected officer. In the event of a tie vote between three (3) or more
candidates with the greatest number of votes or in the event of a tie vote between two (2) or more of the candidates with the second greatest number of votes in the general
election for the position of Councilmember-at-large, the respective candidates so tied shall cast lots to determine who shall be, in the first instance, the duly elected
officers or who shall be, in the second instance, the duly elected officer. All officers duly elected shall take office on the first Tuesday following the runoff election, if one
is required; and if no run-off election is required, then all said officers shall take office on the first Tuesday following the general election. (Amended 8/13/83)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/376
State law references–Election by plurality, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.001 et seq.; runoff election, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.021 et seq.
Section 5 – ELECTIONS AND NOMINATIONS: Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of Mayor or
Councilmember by filing a sworn application for a place on the ballot pursuant to the Texas Election Code. (Amended 5/2/98)
State law reference–Candidate's application for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 143.005.
Section 6 – BALLOTS: The official ballot shall be prepared in accordance with law. (Amended 8/13/83)
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
Article V
THE CITY MANAGER.
Section 1 – APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS: The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of
the City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City. He shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis
of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Beaumont, but during his tenure of office he
shall reside within the City. No member of the City Council shall, during the time for which he is elected, be chosen as City Manager.
Section 2 – TERM AND SALARY: The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the City Council by a
vote of the majority of the entire Council. If removed after serving six (6) months, he may demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of
the City Council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect; but pending such hearing, the City Council may suspend him from office. The action of the
City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such
suspension or removal in the City Council. In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some qualified person to perform the
duties of the office during such absence or disability. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council.
Section 3 – POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER: The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows:
(1) Appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided by this Charter and
except as he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. The decision of the City
Manager or other appointing officer shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other office, body or court whatsoever.
(2) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the City Council and be responsible for its administration after adoption.
(3) Prepare and submit to the City Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete finance report for the preceding year.
(4) Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and to recommend to the City Council for adoption such resolutions
as he may deem necessary or expedient.
(5) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the City Council not inconsistent with this Charter.
Section 4 – INTERFERENCE BY CITY COUNCIL PROHIBITED: Neither the City Council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate the appointment of
any person to, or removal from, office or employment or discipline by the City Manager or any of his subordinates or in any manner interfere in the appointment or
removal or discipline of employees under the City Manager's authority. (Amended 9/16/03)
Article VI
THE BUDGET.*
Section 1 – FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of the following
calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this Charter the term “budget year” shall mean the fiscal year for which any
particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. In order to implement the change of the fiscal year, there shall be an interim budget from the 1st day of July,
1972, to the 30th day of September, 1972, after which the fiscal year shall be as hereinbefore provided in this section. (Amended 1/25/72)
State law reference–General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
Section 2 – PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET: The City Manager, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall
submit to the City Council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided by Article VI, Sections 13 and 15. For such
purpose, at such date as he shall determine, he, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each office, department or agency, estimates of revenue and
expenditures of that office, department, or agency detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditure, and such other supporting data as he may
request. Total proposed expenditures shall not exceed total anticipated revenues in the City Manager's proposed budget. In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall
review the estimates, shall hold hearings thereon and may revise the estimates, as he may deem advisable. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law references–Itemized budget and contents, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.003; information furnished by municipal officers and boards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
102.004.
Section 3 – BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD: The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the City Clerk open
to public inspection by anyone. The City Manager shall cause a reasonable number of copies of the budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested
persons.
State law reference–Proposed budget filed with municipal clerk and public inspection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.005
Section 4 – PUBLICATION OF NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING: At the meeting of the Council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the Council
shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published a notice of the place and time, not less than seven (7) days after
date of publication, at which the Council will hold a public hearing.
State law reference–Special notice by publication for budget hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.0065.
Section 5 – PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET: At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be
adjourned, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the
estimates or any item thereof.
State law reference–Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.006.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/376
Section 6 – FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF BUDGET: After the conclusion of such public hearing, the Council may insert new items or may increase or decrease
the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. Before inserting any additional item or increasing any item of appropriation, it must cause to
be published a notice setting forth the nature of the proposed increases and fixing a place and time, not less than five (5) days after publication, at which the Council will
hold a public hearing thereon.
Section 7 – ADOPTION OF BUDGET: After such further hearing, the Council may insert the additional item or items, and make the increase or increases, to the amount
in each case indicated by the published notice, or to a lesser amount, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also increase the total anticipated
revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures.
State law reference–Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.007.
Section 8 – VOTE REQUIRED FOR ADOPTION: The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the Council.
Section 9 – DATE OF FINAL ADOPTION; FAILURE TO ADOPT: The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh (27th) day of the last month
of the fiscal year. Should the Council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the City Manager shall be deemed to have been finally
adopted by the Council.
Section 10 – EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET; CERTIFICATION; COPIES MADE AVAILABLE: Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget
year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the City Clerk, the County Clerk of Jefferson County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts in
Austin. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and a reasonable number of copies shall be made available for the use of all offices,
departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations.
State law reference–Approved budget filed with municipal clerk, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.008.
Section 11 – BUDGET ESTABLISHES APPROPRIATIONS: From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall
be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.
Section 12 – BUDGET ESTABLISHES AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY PROPERTY TAX: From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the
amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the City, in the corresponding tax year.
Section 13 – BUDGET MESSAGE; CURRENT OPERATIONS: The budget message submitted by the City Manager to the City Council shall be explanatory of the
budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the City for the budget year and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the
budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in expenditure and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial
policy.
Section 14 – BUDGET MESSAGE; SUPPORTING SCHEDULES: Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory
material, in respect to both current operations and capital outlays as the City Manager shall believe useful to the City Council.
Section 15 – BUDGET:
(a) Budget Preparation: The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all funds for the fiscal year, which shall include (a) a budget message, (b) general
summary, (c) detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues applicable to proposed expenditures, and (d) all proposed expenditures. The expenditures for general and
special revenue funds shall be by function, department, activity, and by character and object. In funds other than general and revenue (enterprise funds), the proposed
expenditures shall be presented in an understandable manner according to the discretion of the City Manager. (Amended 4/5/86)
(b) Enforcement of the Budget: The City Manager shall strictly enforce the provisions of the budget as specified in the ordinance adopting the budget. He shall not
authorize or approve any expenditure unless an appropriation has been made in the budget ordinance adopting the budget, and there is an available unencumbered balance
of the appropriation sufficient to pay the liability to be incurred. No officer or employee of the City shall place any orders or make any purchase except for the purposes
authorized in the budget. Any officer or employee placing such orders or making such purchases may be held personally liable for same. (Added by amendment 4/5/86)
Section 16 – ANTICIPATED REVENUES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS: In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue there shall be placed the
actual amount of such item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year.
Section 17 – PROPOSED EXPENDITURES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS: The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance
and capital outlay of each office, department or agency of the City shall be itemized by character and object. In parallel columns opposite the various items of
expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and
the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year.
Section 18 – CONTINGENT APPROPRIATION: Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an
amount not more than three (3) per centum of the total general fund expenditure, to be used in the case of unforeseen items of expenditures. Such contingent appropriation
shall be under the control of the City Manager and distributed by him, after approval by the City Council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case
of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed
only by transfer to other departmental appropriations, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made.
Section 19 – CAPITAL PROGRAM:
(a) Submission to Council: The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council a five (5) year Capital Program at least three (3) months prior to the final date for
submission of the budget.
(b) Contents: The Capital Program shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents;
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity of such improvements; and,
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement.
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
(Added by amendment 1/25/72; effective date: 3 months prior to the 1973-74 budget year)
Section 20 – COUNCIL ACTION ON CAPITAL PROGRAM: The Council shall give notice of a public hearing on the proposed Capital Program and shall hold said
hearing in the same manner as provided in this Chapter for the annual budget. The hearing for the proposed Capital Program and the notice of same may be in conjunction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/376
with the annual budget. The Council shall, by resolution, adopt the Capital Program with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the 27th day of
the last month of the current fiscal year. (Added by amendment 1/25/72; effective: 3 months prior to the 1973-74 budget year)
Section 21 – FIVE-YEAR PLANNING BUDGET: Repealed 9/16/03.
Article VII
FINANCE ADMINISTRATION.*
Section 1 – DIRECTOR OF FINANCE GENERAL: The City Manager shall be the Director of Finance. He shall have control of the custody and disbursement of City
funds and monies according to ordinances and regulations of the City Council. If required by the City Council, he shall provide a standard surety company bond in such
amount as the City Council may require, but not less than $250,000, said bond to be underwritten by a recognized and approved surety company with a permit to do
business within the State of Texas, the premium of which bond shall be paid out of the funds of the City. (Amended 9/16/03)
Section 2 – DIRECTOR OF FINANCE POWERS AND DUTIES: The Director of Finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City
and to that end he shall have authority and be required to:
(a) Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget;
(b) Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded;
(c) Maintain a general accounting system for the City Government and each of its offices, departments and agencies and such subsidiary accounts and cost
records as may be required by ordinance for purposes of administrative direction and financial control, keeping separate accounts for the items of appropriation
contained in the City budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid thereunder, the unpaid obligations against it
and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the City Government to be made at
such intervals as he may deem expedient;
(d) Submit to the City Council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City;
(e) Prepare as of the end of each fiscal year a complete financial statement and report;
(f) Collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City or for whose collection the City is responsible;
(g) Shall have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the City or any of its departments and shall deposit same in such depositories
as may be designated by the City Council; shall have custody of all investments, bonds and notes of the City and be responsible for their safekeeping;
(h) Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office,
department or agency of the City Government;
(i) Approve all proposed expenditures; unless there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no expenditure shall be made.
(Amended 9/16/03)
Section 3 – ACCOUNTING SUPERVISION AND CONTROL: The Director of Finance shall have power and be required to:
(a) Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the City Government;
(b) Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the City Government incurs financial obligations, having previously
ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable;
(c) Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the City Government and
determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges;
(d) Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the City Government
apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office;
(e) Annually inventory and retain in a “property book” all property assets belonging to the City of Beaumont which are tangible, have a useful life longer
than the current fiscal year, and have a significant value.
(Amended 1/25/72)
Section 4 – TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS: Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the City Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation
balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another in the manner provided by law.
Section 5 – FEES: All fees collected by any officer or employee shall be paid to the Department of Finance at such times as required by the Director of Finance.
Section 6 – APPROPRIATIONS LAPSE: All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully
encumbered.
Section 7 – PURCHASE PROCEDURE: All purchases made by the City of Beaumont shall be made in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code as it may be
amended from time to time. The exemptions from the necessity of competitive bidding as established by State law are adopted. All contracts and purchases shall be
handled so as to obtain the best value for the City, with bids or quotes solicited whenever practicable. Nothing herein shall apply to a contract for personal or professional
services or to work done by the City and paid for by the day as such work progresses. (Amended 9/16/03)
State law reference–Purchasing and contracting authority of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chs. 252, 271.
Section 8 – CONTRACTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS: Contracts for City improvements shall be executed in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code as it
may be amended from time to time. The City Council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. Alterations or change orders may be made or approved by
the City Manager, provided such alterations or change orders do not increase the cost to the City more than ten (10) percent of the original amounts. Any single change in
excess of $10,000 shall be approved by the City Council. Council shall receive a report on a monthly basis of all change orders approved by the City Manager within the
ten (10) percent limit. (Amended 9/16/03)
Section 9 – BORROWING IN ANTICIPATION OF TAXES: For the purpose of temporary borrowing, the City Council shall have the power by ordinance to raise
money on the credit of the City by the issuance of warrants or notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes or of special assessments.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/376
Section 10 – SALE OF NOTES; WARRANTS: All notes or warrants issued pursuant to this Article may be sold at not less than par and accrued interest at private sale
by the Director of Finance without previous advertisement, but such sale shall be authorized by the City Council.
Article VIII
TAXATION.*
Section 1 – DIVISION OF TAXATION: The Finance Officer of the City of Beaumont shall be responsible for assuring that the assessing and collection of taxes is done
in the best interest of the City of Beaumont. (Enacted 4/5/86; amended 9/16/03)
Section 2 – POWER TO TAX: The City Council shall have the power under the provision of State law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon taxable property
within the City to the maximum provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. (Enacted 4/5/86)
State law references–Local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 301 et seq.; property taxes authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.001.
Section 3 – ASSESSMENT OF TAXES: All property, real, personal or mixed, lying and being within the corporate limits of the City of Beaumont on the first day of
January in each year not expressly exempt by law shall be subject to annual taxation in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Constitution or general laws of the
State of Texas. (Enacted 4/5/86)
State law reference–Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.01 et seq.
Section 4 – TAXES; WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE: All taxes due to the City of Beaumont shall be payable at the entity designated by the City to collect taxes for the
City of Beaumont. Taxes shall be due and shall become delinquent as provided in the Texas Tax Code as amended, which code further provides for delinquent taxes,
interest, attorneys fees, penalty, and procedures for the collection of taxes. (Enacted 4/5/86; amended 9/16/03)
State law reference–Delinquency date for payment of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.02.
Section 5 – SEIZURE AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY: The seizure and sale of personal property for taxes due shall be accomplished according to the
provisions of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. (Enacted 4/5/86)
Section 6 – TAX LIENS: The tax levied by the City shall be a first and prior lien upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien may be enforced and foreclosed
according to the provisions of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. (Enacted 4/5/86)
State law reference–Tax liens, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32.
Article IX
ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS.*
Section 1 – POWER TO BORROW: The City of Beaumont shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the City for permanent public
improvements or for any other public purpose consistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
State law references–Municipal bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1331; authority of municipality to issue bonds for public improvements, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 1331.052.
Section 2 – BOND ORDINANCE AND ELECTION: The City shall authorize the issuance of bonds by a Bond Ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of a majority of
all members of the City Council, and approved by a majority of the qualified property taxpaying voters voting at an election called for the purpose of authorizing the
issuance of such bonds. The Bond Ordinance shall provide for proper notice, the calling of the election, and the propositions to be submitted. The latter shall distinctly
specify:
(a) The purpose for which the bonds are to be issued, and, where possible, the probable period of usefulness of improvements for which the bond funds are
to be expended;
(b) The amount thereof;
(c) The rate of interest;
(d) The levy of taxes sufficient to pay interest and sinking fund;
(e) That the bonds to be issued shall mature serially within a given number of years not to exceed forty.
The Bond Ordinance and the manner of conducting the election shall in all respects conform to the general laws of this State.
State law reference–Bond elections generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1251.
Section 3 – ISSUANCE OF BONDS: Repealed 1/25/72.
Section 4 – ADVERTISING AND SALE OF BONDS: All bonds of the City, after having been authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of this Charter
and the laws of the State, shall be advertised once a week for two consecutive weeks, the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the time set for the sale,
and shall be sold at public sale for the best bid. The City Council shall have the right to reject any or all bids.
Section 5 – CREATION OF SINKING FUND AND INVESTMENTS: The ordinance authorizing any bonds or warrants to be issued shall provide for the creation of a
sinking fund sufficient to pay the bonds or warrants at maturity, and make provision for the payment of the interest thereon as it matures, and any surplus in any sinking
fund or any general fund may be invested in bonds of the State of Texas, or in securities of the United States, or such funds may be used for the purchase of the bonds or
warrants of the City of Beaumont which are not yet due, provided, however, that the price paid for said bonds or securities shall not exceed the market value at the time of
purchase and the accrued interest provided for in said bonds or securities, and provided further that no such bonds or securities shall be purchased which, according to
their terms, mature at a date subsequent to the time of maturity of the bonds for the payment of which such sinking fund was created. Neither interest nor sinking fund
shall be devoted to any other purpose whatsoever.
Article X
ORDINANCES.*
Section 1 – ENACTING CLAUSE: Every ordinance passed by the City Council shall begin with the following heading:
“BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF BEAUMONT”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/376
Section 2 – GENERAL: The Code of the City of Beaumont and all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of said City heretofore ordained, passed, adopted or
enacted that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective and are not in conflict herewith shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed; provided
that the same were valid and authorized by the Charter under which they were enacted.
Section 3 – READING: Except as otherwise provided herein it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or
considered at more than one session of the City Council.
Section 4 – PENAL ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION: The City Clerk shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, imprisonment or
forfeiture for violation of its provisions by causing a descriptive caption or title of same to be published within ten (10) days after passage thereof for three (3) successive
days in some newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaumont. Such ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after the publication thereof unless
otherwise expressly provided herein.
Section 5 – PUBLICATION OF FRANCHISE ORDINANCES: All ordinances granting or confirming a franchise shall be accepted in writing by the grantees and
before taking effect shall be published as otherwise provided in this Charter.
Section 6 – PUBLICATION NOT NECESSARY: Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of ordinances shall not be necessary.
Section 7 – DATE TO TAKE EFFECT: Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from and after their passage unless otherwise therein expressly provided.
Ordinances requiring publication shall take effect from and after the last required publication, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
Section 8 – ENROLLMENT: Every ordinance passed by the City Council shall be enrolled by the City Clerk as soon as practicable after its passage.
Section 9 – CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES: The City Council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the City to be printed in code form as often as the
Council may deem advisable and such printed code when adopted by the Council shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part
thereof in a newspaper. All printed ordinances or code of ordinances shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as would the
original ordinance.
State law reference–Code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 53.
Article XI
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
Section 1 – POWER OF INITIATIVE REFERENDUM: The electors shall have the power to propose any ordinance or to repeal any ordinance except an ordinance
appropriating money, authorizing the levy of taxes, making the annual tax levy, or an ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds which have been authorized by a vote of
the people. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 2 – PETITION: Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the City Council in the form in which the petitioner desires the same to be passed, by a petition
filed with the City Clerk in the following manner:
1. Any elector shall make application to the City Clerk and file an intention to circulate a petition giving the date and the proposed ordinance to be
circulated. Unless the final petition, with the required number of signatures, is returned within sixty (60) days, it shall not be received for any purpose. For the
purpose of this section only, if the 60th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the final petition, with the required number of signatures, must be
received the next business day by 5:00 p.m. (Amended 5/2/98)
2. The petition must contain the names of a number of qualified voters in the City of Beaumont equal to five percent (5%) of the qualified voters of the City
of Beaumont as appears on the latest available county voter registration list, as of the date of the last general municipal election.
3. To be valid, a petition submitted for the purpose of complying with this section must:
(a) contain signatures that comply with requirements prescribed by the Texas Election Code and any other applicable requirements prescribed by law;
(Amended 5/2/98)
(b) contain on each page the text of the proposed ordinance to be circulated; and
(c) contain on each page the name of the person circulating the petition. The person circulating the petition must be an elector of the City.
4. Every person circulating any page of a petition shall file with the City Clerk a sworn statement containing his or her name, address, voting precinct
number, voter registration number and a statement that:
“I circulated the attached ____ (number[s]) pages of this petition. I am an elector of the City of Beaumont and the signers freely signed this petition.
________________ (signature of circulator)
SWORN to this the ____ day of ____________, 20___.
Notary Public”
(Amended 5/2/98)
Section 3 – DUTIES OF THE CLERK: Each page comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Within ten (10) days after
a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether each page of the petition complies with the requirements of Article XI, Section 2, and whether the petition is
sufficient. After completing the examination of the petition, the City Clerk shall certify the result thereof to the City Council at its next regular meeting. If the petition is
found by the Clerk to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing same along with a written statement concerning the reasons for the insufficiency. The petition
may be amended within ten (10) days after notice of insufficiency. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same
purpose. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 4 – CONSIDERATION BY THE COUNCIL: Whenever the City Council receives a certified petition from the City Clerk, it shall consider same and shall
either (a) pass said ordinance within thirty (30) days after date of City Clerk's certificate of sufficiency to the petition; or (b) submit said proposed ordinance to a vote of
the people at the next election date as set by the election code of the State of Texas, which is at least thirty (30) days after the date of the City Clerk's certificate to the
Council. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 5 – RESULTS OF ELECTION: If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative or referendum ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance
shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the City of Beaumont. (Amended 4/5/86)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/376
Section 6 – AMENDMENTS: Initiative ordinances adopted by the electors may be amended or repealed as in the case of other ordinances, provided that no such
ordinance shall be amended in such manner as to defeat its purpose nor may such ordinance be repealed sooner than six (6) months after its enactment. Ordinances which
have been the subject of a successful referendum shall not be re-enacted by the City Council sooner than six (6) months after their repeal by the referendum. (Amended
4/5/86)
Section 7 – POWER OF REFERENDUM: Repealed 4/5/86.
Section 8 – REFERENDUM PETITION; EFFECT: Repealed 4/5/86.
Section 9 – CONSIDERATION OF REFERENDUM PETITION BY CITY COUNCIL: Repealed 4/5/86.
Section 10 – RESULTS OF ELECTION: Repealed 4/5/86.
Section 11 – FORM OF BALLOT FOR INITIATED AND REFERRED ORDINANCES: Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the
initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot which shall state the title of the ordinance to be voted on and shall have below the title the
following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated:
“For the Ordinance”
“Against the Ordinance”
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot.
Section 12 – RECALL; GENERAL: The Mayor or any member of the City Council may be removed from office by recall.
Section 13 – RECALL; PROCEDURE: Any elector of the City of Beaumont may make and file with the City Clerk an affidavit containing the name or names of the
officer or officers whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The Clerk shall thereupon deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of
petition blanks demanding such removal. The Clerk shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by
the City Clerk shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the City Council, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom
issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The City Clerk shall
enter in a record to be kept in his office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person.
Section 14 – RECALL PETITIONS: The recall petition, to be effective, must be returned and filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the filing of the
sworn statement required in Article XI, Section 13, and it must be signed by qualified electors of the City of Beaumont equal to at least five percent (5%) of the qualified
voters of the City of Beaumont as it appears on the latest available county voter registration list as of the date of the last general municipal election. Said petition shall
conform to the provisions of Article XI, Section 2. No petition paper shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the City Clerk as required in
Article XI, Section 13. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 15 – DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK: Each page comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Within ten (10)
days after a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether each page of the petition complies with the requirements of Article XI, Section 2, and whether the
petition is sufficient. After completing the examination of the petition, the City Clerk shall certify the result thereof to the City Council at its next regular meeting, and
notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the petition is found by the City Clerk to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing same along with a
written statement concerning the reasons for the insufficiency. The petition may be amended within ten (10) days after notice of insufficiency. The finding of the
insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days
after notice from the City Clerk of the sufficiency of the recall petition or amended recall petition, the City Council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall
election. Any such election shall be held at the next election date as provided by the Election Code of the State of Texas, which is at least thirty (30) days after the date of
the City Clerk's certificate to the City Council. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 16 – BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION: Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted “Shall [name of person] be removed from the office of [name of
office] by recall?”
(b) Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated:
“For the recall of [name of person]”
Against the recall of [name of person]”
Section 17 – RESULTS OF RECALL ELECTION: If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he
shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer
named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council
as in other vacancies.
Section 18 – LIMITATIONS ON RECALLS: No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor or a Councilman within six (6) months after he takes office nor in
respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after such election.
Section 19 – DISTRICT JUDGE MAY ORDER ELECTION: Should the City Council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this Article, when
all the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this Article of the Charter, then it shall be the duty of any one
of the District Judges of Jefferson County, Texas, upon proper application being made therefor, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the
provisions of this Article of this Charter.
Article XII
LAW-MUNICIPAL COURT.
Section 1 – CITY ATTORNEY:
(a) The City Council shall appoint the City Attorney who must be a competent practicing attorney in the City of Beaumont. He shall receive for his services such
compensation as may be fixed by the Council and shall hold his office until his successor is appointed and qualified.
(b) The City Attorney shall represent the City in all litigations. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the City and for all officers and departments
thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/376
(c) The City Attorney shall have power to appoint such assistants as may be deemed necessary by him, subject to the approval of the City Council, at such
compensation as fixed by the Council.
Section 2 – MUNICIPAL COURT: There shall be a court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses known as the Municipal Court of the City of Beaumont, with such
powers and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. (Amended 1/25/72)
State law references–Municipal courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.001 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003.
Section 3 – CITY MAGISTRATE: There shall be one or more magistrates of said Municipal Court known as City Magistrates, one of whom shall be designated Chief
Magistrate, who shall be elected by a majority vote of the City Council for a term of two (2) years. The Chief Magistrate and other City Magistrates shall be licensed
attorneys at law, in good standing, and residents of the City of Beaumont for at least one (1) year preceding his or their appointment. Compensation for said Magistrates
shall be fixed by the City Council. The Magistrates may be removed by the City Council for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance. (Amended 1/25/72)
Section 4 – CLERK OF COURT: The City Manager shall appoint the Clerk of Municipal Court. The Clerk and the deputies to the Clerk shall have the power to
administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the said court thereto and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by clerks of
courts in issuing processes of said courts and conducting the business thereof. (Amended 9/16/03)
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
Article XIII
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.*
Section 1 – GENERAL: There shall be a Finance Department and such other departments and offices as may be established by ordinance. All of said departments shall
be under the control of the City Manager except where otherwise provided in this Charter. The City Council may discontinue any department or office established by
ordinance and may prescribe, combine, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of departments and offices, but no function or duty assigned by this Charter to a
particular department or office shall be abolished or assigned to any other department or office.
Section 2 – DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS: At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall have supervision and control of the department
subject to supervision and approval by the City Manager except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter. Two (2) or more departments may be headed by the
same individual. The City Manager may head one or more departments and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. The work of each
administrative department may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by resolution of the City Council upon the recommendation of the City
Manager.
Section 3 – DIRECTORS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS; SALARY: The directors of all administrative departments shall be appointed by the City
Manager unless otherwise provided in this Charter, and shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the City Council, and before entering upon the duties of
the office shall, if required by the Council, make bond in some responsible Surety Company acceptable to the City Council, for such amount as the Council may prescribe,
the premium of which bond shall be paid by the City.
State law references–Compensation of officers in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.004; official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
Article XIV
STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENT.
Section 1 – POWER AND CONTROL OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS: The City of Beaumont shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen,
lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and
bridges and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places all obstructions and encroachments of
every nature or character upon any of said streets and sidewalks, and to vacate and close private ways as permitted by general law.
State law references–Authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.001; authority over sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 311.004.
Section 2 – STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS: The City of Beaumont shall have dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under the
public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys and highways of the City, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, repaving, raising, lowering, grading, draining
or otherwise. The provisions of the Texas Transportation Code of the State of Texas, Chapter 313, together with existing and future amendments, are expressly adopted
and made a part of this charter. (Amended 9/16/03)
State law reference–Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000 inhabitants, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 313.
Article XV
FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES.*
Section 1 – GENERAL: The ownership, right of control and use of the streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places, and all other real property of the City of Beaumont
is hereby declared to be inalienable to said City except by ordinances passed by a vote of the governing body of the City as hereinafter provided; and no franchise or
easement involving the right to use same either along, across, over or under the same shall ever be valid unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the
terms hereof and of the ordinances granting the same. No act or omission of the City, its governing body, officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by
estoppel or indirection any right, franchise or easement not expressly granted by ordinance.
Section 2 – POWER OF CITY COUNCIL: The City Council shall have power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every
character operating within the City of Beaumont and, with the consent of the franchise holder, to amend same, and for such purposes is granted full power. And said City
Council shall have the power by ordinance, after reasonable notice and hearing, to determine, fix and regulate charges, fares, or rates of any person, firm or corporation
enjoying or that may enjoy a franchise or exercising any other public privilege in said City, and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished by such person, firm or
corporation; and the manner in which it shall be rendered and from time to time to alter or change such rules, regulations and charges. Unless provided in the ordinance
granting the same, no public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the City Council expressed by ordinance. No exclusive franchise or
extension or renewal thereof shall ever be granted nor shall any franchise or privilege ever be granted to commence at any time after six months subsequent to the taking
effect of the ordinance granting the same.
Section 3 – ORDINANCE GRANTING FRANCHISES: All ordinances granting, amending, renewing or extending franchises shall be read at three (3) separate regular
meetings of the City Council and shall not be passed finally until the final reading which shall be not less than thirty (30) days from the first reading, and such ordinances
shall not take effect until sixty (60) days after their adoption on third and final reading; provided, however, if at any time before any such ordinance shall finally take
effect a petition or petitions shall be presented to the City Council signed by not less than five hundred (500) of the bona fide qualified voters of the City, then the
governing body shall submit the question of the granting of said franchise to a vote of the qualified voters of the City of Beaumont at its next succeeding general election
to be held in said City, provided that notice thereof shall be published at least twenty (20) days successively in a daily newspaper in the City of Beaumont prior to the
holding of the election. In the event the next succeeding general election is not within twelve (12) months from the effective date of the ordinance, then the City Council
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/376
may submit same at a special election. Ballots shall be used briefly describing the franchise to be voted on and the terms thereof; and shall contain the words “For the
granting of a franchise” and “Against the granting of a franchise.” The vote shall be canvassed by the City Council and, should it result in a majority of those voting
thereon casting their votes in favor of granting a franchise, the City Council shall so declare by order entered in its minutes and said franchise shall at once take effect in
accordance with its terms. In the event the majority of such votes be cast “against granting a franchise” then said City Council shall by order entered in its minutes so
declare that such franchise shall not take effect. If, at the expiration of any franchise term, the franchise holder has applied for a new franchise and is refused by the City
Council, and a petition complying with the foregoing provisions of this section is presented to the City Council, then the Council shall submit the question of the granting
of the franchise to the qualified voters in the same manner as heretofore provided. The failure to pass finally on the application within four (4) months after it is filed shall
be construed as a refusal. The City Council, in passing an ordinance granting a franchise, may provide therein that it shall not take effect until the same shall have been
submitted to and approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at a general election. After the passage of a franchise ordinance and before its effective
date, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City of
Beaumont and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise.
Section 4 – EXCEPTIONS – SPUR TRACKS: The provisions of Section 3 of this Article relating to effective date of ordinance and publication thereof shall not be
applicable to the granting of side track, spur track, or switch privileges to any franchise-holding railway connections and switch privileges to the owners or users of any
industrial site. Franchises granting these privileges shall take effect ten (10) days after their adoption on third and final reading, and the full text of such ordinance shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City of Beaumont at the expense of the proponent of the franchise.
Section 5 – TERM: No indeterminate franchise shall be granted. No determinate or fixed term franchise shall ever be granted for a longer term than thirty-five (35) years.
No determinate franchise shall ever be granted except upon the condition that the City shall have the right at any time within five (5) years of the expiration of the term
thereof, but prior to the last twelve (12) months of said term, to purchase or cause to be purchased the property of the franchise holder devoted to public service
thereunder, same to be effective at the expiration of the fixed term. Before the City shall purchase, or cause to be purchased, property from any franchise holder, the matter
of the acquisition of such property shall be submitted at a municipal election to be determined by a majority vote of the qualified taxpayers voting thereon. (Amended
1/25/72)
Section 6 – RIGHT OF REGULATION: All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not,
shall be subject to the right of the City:
(a) To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the
terms of the franchise.
(b) To require proper and adequate extensions of the plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practicable standard of
efficiency.
(c) To prescribe the forms of accounts kept by each such utility (where a public utility keeps its accounts and books according to a system prescribed by
Federal or State authority or Commission, the keeping of such accounts and books in the manner so prescribed shall be deemed a compliance with the
foregoing provisions of this subsection); and at any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other
reports including reports on local operations by each such utility.
(d) To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be desired or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
(e) To at any time require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 7 – CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS: The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension,
maintenance or operation of any public utility; but nothing in this Charter or any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner
of any right of action for damages or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law.
Section 8 – EXTENSION: All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as
such and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use or maintain any
extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in Section 6 of this Article. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a
franchise hereafter granted such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.
Section 9 – ANNUAL REPORT: The City Council shall require all public service corporations operating within the corporate limits of the City of Beaumont to file a
sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of the said business for the current year; how expended, how much thereof for the betterment or improvements and
the rate of tolls or charges for services rendered to the public. Such annual report shall show any other facts or information that the City Council may deem pertinent for
its use in intelligently passing upon any questions that may arise between the City and the said public service corporations; said reports to be filed with the City Clerk.
Section 10 – POWER TO REGULATE TRACKS: The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to require any or all railroad companies operating any track or
tracks upon or across any public streets of the City of Beaumont to reduce such tracks below the level of the streets intersected or occupied by such tracks, or to elevate
such tracks, and to require the company or companies owning or operating such tracks to provide necessary and proper crossing for the public travel at intersecting streets
or to remove any tracks from any street occupied by such tracks and to reroute same as designated in the ordinance, provided that the railway company involved be given
thirty (30) days notice prior to the adoption of the ordinance.
Section 11 – FRANCHISE RECORDS: Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of a public utility franchise shall file
with the City as may be prescribed by ordinance certified copies of all the franchises owned or claimed within the City or under which such utility operated within the
City. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of all public utility franchises issued by the City.
Section 12 – PRESENT FRANCHISES TO REMAIN IN FORCE: All franchises now legally in force shall remain in full force and effect for the remainder of the term
designated therein. All such franchises, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter, provided no vested rights are impaired thereby.
Article XVI
MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES.*
Section 1 – POWERS OF THE CITY: The City shall have the power to buy, own, construct, maintain and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity,
gas or anything else that may be needed or used by the public, and shall have such further powers that may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of
the State of Texas.
Section 2 – OPERATION AND CONTROL: All municipally owned utilities shall be operated by the City in such a manner as to be self-sustaining insofar as is
practical, and shall not be converted into general revenue producing agencies of the City. The City Council may transfer funds of municipally owned utilities to the
general fund of the City, provided, however, that the amount so transferred shall not exceed annually 20% of the gross revenue of said utilities for the previous fiscal year.
Such sums so transferred to be in lieu of taxes, street rentals or other contributions to general administrative expenses of the City; provided, however, nothing herein is to
apply to the operation of charitable and educational facilities operated by the City. Such transfers shall be made annually and shall be non-cumulative.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/376
Section 3 – ACCOUNTS OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES: Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City in such manner as to
show the true and complete financial results of such City ownership and operation, including all assets appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liabilities
subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other
distribution of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the City of each public utility owned, also the costs of all extensions, additions and
improvements and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by
any such utility to any other city or governmental department. The City Council shall annually cause to be made and published a report showing the financial results of
such City ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such additional data as the City Council shall deem expedient.
Section 4 – SALE OR LEASE OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES: No public utility or park and/or swimming pools owned by the City of Beaumont shall ever
be sold or leased for a period longer than five (5) years until such sale or lease is authorized by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the City; nor shall same be
encumbered for more than $5,000.00 except for purchase money or to refund any existing indebtedness lawfully created, until authorized in like manner.
Section 5 – ELECTION: When properties named in Section 4 of this Article are to be sold or leased for a period of more than five (5) years or encumbered for more than
$5,000.00 as provided in said section, the City Council shall, by ordinance, call an election submitting said proposition to the qualified voters of the City of Beaumont; the
time and places of holding the election shall be designated in said ordinance and said election shall be held not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days from
the passage of said ordinance. Notice of said election shall be given by posting a copy of said ordinance in each of the election precincts in the City and at the City Hall;
such ordinance shall also be published on the same day in each of two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published within the City of Beaumont,
the date of the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set for the election.
Section 6 – FORM OF BALLOTS: The question to sell, lease or mortgage shall be submitted on ballots which shall describe the property to be sold, leased or
mortgaged, and the terms of the sale, lease or mortgage, and shall have printed below the description and terms:
“For the sale (lease) (mortgage)”
“Against the sale (lease) (mortgage)”
No special election shall be called within sixty (60) days of a general municipal election for the submission of a proposition to sell, lease or mortgage such property but
same shall be submitted as herein provided at said general election.
Article XVII
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Section 1 – BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS: With a goal of making boards, committees and commissions representative of the diversity of the
population within the City of Beaumont, the City Council shall have the power to create by ordinance such boards, committees and commissions which it deems
necessary to effectively carry on the business and welfare of the City. (Amended 4/5/86)
Section 2 – CONDEMNATION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES: Whenever in the opinion of the City Council, any building, fence, shed, or structure of any kind or
any part thereof is liable to fall down and injure or endanger persons or property, the City Council may order the owner or agent of the same, or occupant of the same, or
any owner of the premises upon which such building, shed, awning, or other structure stands or to which it is attached, to take down and remove the same or any part
thereof within such time as it may direct, and may punish by fine all persons failing to do so. The City Council shall have the additional power to remove the same at the
expense of the City but on the account of the owner of the property and assess the expenses thereof, including the expense of condemnation proceedings, if any, as a
special tax against the land and the same may be collected as other special taxes provided for in this Charter or as provided by ordinance, or by suit in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to regulate dangerous and substandard structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.001 et seq.
Section 3 – CHURCH AND SCHOOL PROPERTY NOT EXEMPT FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS: No property of any kind, church, school, or otherwise, in
the City of Beaumont, shall be exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized by this Charter for local improvements unless exemption is required by
State law.
Section 4 – LIENS AGAINST CITY PROPERTY: No lien of any kind shall ever exist against any property, real or personal, owned by the City except that same be
created as provided in this Charter.
Section 5 – CITY EXEMPT FROM APPEAL BONDS: It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Beaumont is a party, for any
bond, undertaking, or security to be executed in behalf of said City, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such
bond, undertaking or security had been given and said City shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
Section 6 – EXECUTION, GARNISHMENT AND ASSIGNMENT: The property, real and personal, belonging to said City shall not be liable to be sold or
appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill, nor shall the funds belonging to said City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, be liable to garnishment
on account of any debt it may owe or funds it may have on hand due any person, nor shall the City or any of its officers or agents be required to answer to any writ of
garnishment on any account whatsoever, nor shall said City be liable to the assignee of any wages or [of] any officer, agent or employee of said City, whether earned or
unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the City such assignment shall be absolutely void.
State law references–Authority relating to property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.076; authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 101.023.
Section 7 – CITIZENS GIVEN PREFERENCE IN EMPLOYMENT: Except as herein otherwise provided, qualifications being equal, citizens of Beaumont shall be
given preference in employment by the City as well as by any contractor doing work for the City under contract, and such contractors shall pay the prevailing rate of
wages paid for the class of work done; and qualifications, prices and quality of material being equal, citizens of Beaumont shall be given preference in the awarding of all
contracts over which the City has jurisdiction, provided that this section shall not interfere with the system of purchasing supplies for the various departments by
competitive bidding.
Section 8 – NO OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE TO ACCEPT GIFTS: No officer or employee of the City of Beaumont shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift,
favor, privilege or employment with a value in excess of $100 from any public utility corporation enjoying the grant of any franchise, privilege or easement from the City
during the term of office of such officer or during such employment of such employee except as may be authorized by law or ordinance; provided, however, that
policemen or firemen in uniform or wearing their official badges may accept such free service where the same is permitted by ordinance. Any officer or employee of the
City who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this
offense and shall forthwith be removed from office. (Amended 9/16/03)
Section 9 – OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES NOT TO HAVE FINANCIAL INTEREST IN ANY CONTRACT OF THE CITY: No officer or employee of the City
shall have a financial interest direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City, or be financially interested directly or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/376
indirectly in the sale to the City of any land, materials, supplies, or services except on behalf of the City as an officer or employee; provided, however, that the provisions
of this Section shall only be applicable when the stock owned by the officer or employee exceeds one percent (1%) of the total capital stock of the corporation. Any
willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit the office or position. Any violation
of this section with the knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting with the governing body of the City shall render the contract voidable by
the City Council.
State law reference–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171.
Section 10 – RELATIVES OF OFFICERS SHALL NOT BE APPOINTED OR EMPLOYED: No person related within the second degree of affinity, or within the
third degree of consanguinity, to the Mayor, members of the City Council or City Manager shall be appointed to any office, position or service in the City, but this
provision shall not affect officers or employees who were already employed by the City at the time when an officer who may be related within the named degree takes
office.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
Section 11 – PERSONS INDEBTED TO CITY SHALL NOT HOLD OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT: Repealed 5/2/98.
Section 12 – SERVICE OR PROCESS AGAINST: All legal process against the City shall be served upon the Mayor, or acting Mayor.
Section 13 – POWER TO REMIT PENALTIES: The City Council shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the City, which
may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed in pursuance of this Charter.
Section 14 – POWER TO SETTLE CLAIMS: The City Council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and
character in favor of or against the City, including suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.
Section 15 – WRITTEN NOTICE OF INJURY OR DAMAGE: Before the City of Beaumont shall be liable for personal injuries of any kind, the person injured or
someone in his behalf shall give the City Council notice in writing of such injury within six (6) months after the same has been sustained, stating specifically in such
notice when, where and how the injury occurred and the extent thereof, and the names and addresses of any person or persons, if any, witnessing the same, if such names
and addresses can be ascertained by reasonable diligence. No officer or employee of the City shall have authority to waive any of the provisions of this section as to
notice, but same may be waived only by a resolution of the City Council, made and passed before the expiration of the period herein provided, and evidenced by the
minutes of the City Council. (Amended 4/5/86)
State law references–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101; notice procedures, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.101.
Section 16 – DISABLED EMPLOYEES, PENSIONS, INSURANCE: The City shall provide a disability and pension plan in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. City Council shall have authority to provide for rules and regulations for maintaining employees when injured and disabled
while performing their duties or it may provide for such plan of insurance as it deems proper. All those falling under the heading of employees in this charter and who are
employed by the City when the same is in effect, shall be entitled to a credit for the years of continuous service heretofore served; provided, however, that any payment
under this provision shall never constitute a waiver or estop the City from asserting any defenses it might have under Section 15 of Article XVII of this charter. (Amended
9/16/03)
Section 17 – SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN UTILITIES OR ACQUIRED BY TAX SALE: Any real property owned by the City of Beaumont
may be sold or leased by the City Council when in its judgment such sale or lease will be for the best interests of the City; provided, however, a sale or a lease for more
than five (5) years shall never become effective until thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance or resolution effecting same. If, during such thirty-day period, a
referendum petition is presented to the City Clerk, which in all respects conforms to the provisions of Section 2 of Article XI of this Charter, and same is found to be
sufficient, then the City Clerk shall certify the sufficiency of same to the City Council, and an election shall be called submitting the question of whether or not the sale or
lease, as the case may be, shall be consummated; provided, further, however, the provisions of this Article shall not apply to the sale or lease of public utilities as provided
for under Article XIV, Section 14 [Article XVI, Section 4], of this Charter, nor shall it apply to property purchased by the City at tax sales.
State law reference–Authority relating to property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.076.
Section 18 – PROVISION FOR INDEPENDENT PORT DISTRICT: Repealed 9/16/03.
Section 19 – DIVORCEMENT OF BEAUMONT INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DISTRICT: Repealed 9/16/03.
Section 20 – CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS: All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full
force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or ordinances existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to
completion in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws and ordinances.
Section 21 – MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP – ACCOUNTS: Accounts shall be kept for each revenue producing property, tract or parcel of real estate owned or operated
by the City, including revenue producing properties owned or held by the City or its officers as trustees, and other trust funds, in such manner as to show the true and
complete financial results of such ownership and operation, including all revenues and all distributions of such revenues, and the City Council shall annually cause to be
made and published a report showing the financial results of such ownership and operation, and giving such information and such additional data as the City Council shall
deem expedient.
Section 22 – PARTIAL INVALIDITY: If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate
or impair the validity, force, or effect, of any other section or part of a section of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section is wholly
or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part of a section so held unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 23 – EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER AND INTERIM GOVERNMENT: Repealed 9/16/03.
Section 24 – CITY PLANNING COMMISSION: There shall be a City Planning Commission. The number of members to serve on said Commission, their term of
office, and qualifications for office shall be determined by the City Council. The City Council may combine the City Planning Commission with a City Zoning
Commission. The City Planning Commission may make recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council on all matters affecting the physical development of
the City, shall be consulted on the comprehensive plan and the implementation thereof as provided in Section 25, and shall exercise all other responsibilities as may be
provided by law. (Added by amendment 1/25/72)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Section 25 – COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
(a) Content: The City Council shall adopt a comprehensive plan for the City of Beaumont to be composed of land use, parks and open space, transportation and
economic development elements. Said comprehensive plan shall set forth in graphic and textual form policies to govern the future development of the City. Such plan and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/376
its elements shall cover the entire City and all of its functions and services. After the adoption of each element of the comprehensive plan, each element shall be reviewed
and readopted by the City Council as directed by the City Council. (Amended 9/16/03)
(b) Adoption: Upon receipt from the City Manager or his designee of a proposed comprehensive plan or any element thereof or a proposed modification of the existing
plan or any element thereof, the City Council shall refer such proposal to the City Planning Commission which shall, within the time specified by City Council, report its
recommendations thereon. After receipt of the recommendations of the City Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
comprehensive plan or element thereof or modification thereof and shall adopt it be resolution with or without amendment. (Amended 4/5/86)
(c) Effect: The comprehensive plan shall serve as a guide to all future Council action concerning land use and development regulations.
(d) Effective Date: Repealed 4/5/86.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont, Texas, as compiled, edited and published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Beaumont,
Texas,” and may be so cited. (1978 Code, sec. 1-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article, division or section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1978 Code, sec. 1-3; Ordinance adopting
Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Beaumont, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or
other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or
department, respectively, of the City of Beaumont, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded
and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of the City of Beaumont, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Jefferson, Texas.
Court or municipal court. Whenever the term “court” or “municipal court” is used herein, it shall mean the municipal court of the City of Beaumont, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it
shall be construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision
specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers
or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/376
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic
and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Public place. Unless otherwise defined, the term “public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is
not limited to, any street or highway; park; cemetery; and the common areas of any school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, and shop; any
beach, canal or other waterway; and any portion of an area, building, or other structure or vehicle that is not used for private residential purposes.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public
rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(1978 Code, sec. 1-2; Ordinance 07-006, sec. 2, adopted 1/23/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the
city council without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (1978 Code, sec. 1-5; Ordinance adopting
Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/376
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (1978
Code, sec. 1-4; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted,
so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of
the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way
affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances. (1978 Code, sec. 1-6; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the
code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where
necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in
such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may
be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the
codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this
code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of
any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of
refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this
code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to
the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance 82-47, sec. 1, adopted 5/11/82; Ordinance 87-7, sec. 1, adopted 2/10/87; Ordinance 92-27, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/92; Ordinance 92-28, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/92;
1978 Code, secs. 1-8, 1-8.1; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A.,
Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Altering code
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages, or portions
thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 1-7)
ARTICLE 1.02 EMINENT DOMAIN*
Sec. 1.02.001 Relocation assistance
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply only to city projects involving “federal financial assistance,” as hereinafter defined. The provisions of this section shall be
performed by the city manager or such employees or agents of the city as he shall from time to time designate. All departments involved in land acquisition shall
cooperate to the fullest extent to achieve the purposes of this section. This section shall not apply to parcel acquisitions when such acquisitions are obtained or to be
obtained wholly by city funds.
(b) Damages and costs within the purview of this section shall not be considered elements of market value or damage, and shall not be recoverable in any eminent
domain proceeding instituted by or against the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/376
(c) The city manager or his designee is hereby directed to comply with all regulations of any agency of the federal government, relating to land acquisition, relocation
assistance, moving expenses and replacement housing payments, when any such agency is rendering financial assistance to any city project.
(d) The city manager or his designee shall adopt a relocation program which shall include requirements of decent, safe and sanitary dwelling, the implementation of a
relocation assistance program, moving expense provisions relating to relocatees, fixed allowance in lieu of moving and related expenses, replacement housing payments,
provisions for appeals by relocatees to the city manager or his designee, the keeping of records, and such other provisions, programs or policies as may be required by the
appropriate federal agency providing financial assistance to a city project.
(e) No payment or expenditure made by virtue of this section shall be in excess of those authorized by or under the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies Program.
(f) The phrase “federal financial assistance,” as used in this section, means a grant, loan or contribution by the United States, excepting a federal guarantee or insurance,
revenue sharing funding, and such other federal funding as may be exempt, by law, from the provisions of the United States Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies for Federal and Federally Assisted Programs Act, 42 U.S.C. section 4601.
(1958 Code, sec. 31A-1; Ordinance 75-63, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/75; 1978 Code, sec. 14-60)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.03.001 Organization
(a) Office of director. There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(b) Emergency management coordinator. An emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) Responsibility for emergency management program. The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management with the city and for
carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator.
(d) Emergency management organization; composition; functions and duties. The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the
officers and employees of the city so designated in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization
shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; 1978 Code, sec. 2-37)
Sec. 1.03.002 Duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and
requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did
occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all
mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority as the mayor to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days
except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city clerk.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives during times of declared emergency which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of
this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the
general public and, unless circumstances attendant to the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city clerk.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
emergency management plan.
(9) Coordination and review of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local
political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision and procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the
purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney and city council, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act, 1975 (Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Government Code, chapter 418).
(Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; Ordinance 93-81, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/93; 1978 Code, sec. 2-38; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 8, adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 1.03.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management program shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish
and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article.
When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current
state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/376
The city manager is hereby authorized to revise the plan from time to time to keep it current. Such changes shall be effective when filed with the city clerk. (Ordinance
87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; 1978 Code, sec. 2-39)
Sec. 1.03.004 Emergency management program
The mayor is hereby authorized to establish an emergency management program for the city and shall have the authority and all powers necessary to implement such
program of emergency management. (Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; Ordinance 93-81, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/93; 1978 Code, sec. 2-40; Ordinance 07-010, sec.
9, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 08-026, sec. 2, adopted 4/15/08)
Sec. 1.03.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; 1978 Code, sec. 2-41)
Sec. 1.03.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and
representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained
to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a
license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering
persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for
the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of
such person. (Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; 1978 Code, sec. 2-42)
Sec. 1.03.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity outside the normal process when not in an
emergency situation nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless,
during a disaster, the emergency management director may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of
health, life or property. (Ordinance 87-25, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87; 1978 Code, sec. 2-43)
Sec. 1.03.008 Violations; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display an emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency
management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Conviction for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 87-25, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/87; Ordinance 93-81, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/93; 1978 Code, sec. 2-44; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 10, adopted 2/6/07)
ARTICLE 1.04 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.04.031 Declaration of policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing
without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(b) It is further declared that this policy is based upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access to adequate housing of a person's own choice without
regard to race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status; and, further, that the denial of such right through considerations based upon race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, handicap or familial status is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation
of such rights which is within the power and proper responsibility of government to prevent.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-30)
Sec. 1.04.032 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Administrator. The fair housing administrator as designated in this division, and any authorized representatives.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under section 1.04.035, 1.04.036 or 1.04.037.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any
vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual.
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-31)
Sec. 1.04.033 Fair housing administrator
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/376
(a) The city manager shall act as administrator or appoint some other competent person as the fair housing administrator, who shall have the responsibility for
implementing this division.
(b) The fair housing administrator shall be provided with sufficient staff to perform the duties as required by this division.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-32)
Sec. 1.04.034 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of section 1.04.035:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses,
wherever located, at any one time; provided further that, in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in
such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided further that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, the sale or rental of any such single-family
house shall be excepted from the application of section 1.04.035 only if such house is sold or rented:
(A) Without the use in any manner of the sale or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services
of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and
(B) Without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 1.04.035(3);
but nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect the transfer of title.
(2) The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence.
(b) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than
a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color,
national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-34; Ordinance 07-038, sec. 2, adopted 4/3/07)
Sec. 1.04.035 Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by section 1.04.034, it shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a
dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in
connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(3) To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) To profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, by inducing or attempting to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or
familial status.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-33)
Sec. 1.04.036 Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or
participation, on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status. (Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-35)
Sec. 1.04.037 Discrimination in financing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole
or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status of such person or of any person
associated with such [person] in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the
dwelling or a dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. (Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-
36)
Sec. 1.04.038 Complaints
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that an irrevocable injury resulting from a discriminatory housing
practice is about to occur (hereafter referred to as “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Any complaints shall be in writing and shall identify
the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The administrator is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/376
directed to prepare and adopt from time to time standard complaint forms and to furnish them upon request, without charge, to any person aggrieved. The administrator
and employees of that office may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints.
(b) The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints
filed directly by the person aggrieved.
(c) If, in the course of any investigation of a complaint filed with or referred to the administrator, credible evidence is received and the administrator has probable cause
to believe that the person or persons named in such complaint have committed a discriminatory housing practice not stated in such complaint, the administrator may
prepare and file a supplementary complaint and such supplementary complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as an original complaint filed by a person
aggrieved.
(d) If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory
housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint, and such complaint shall thereafter be
treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
(e) Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall furnish a copy of the same to the persons named in the complaint.
(f) A complaint under subsections (a), (c), (d), and (e) of this section shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing
practice occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably or fairly
amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint and, with the leave of the administrator, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable
and fair to do so, may amend the answer at any time. A copy of any amendment to a complaint or an answer shall be furnished to the opposing party. Both complaints and
answers shall be signed by the persons making them.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-37)
Sec. 1.04.039 Investigation
(a) Upon the filing of a complaint valid on its face as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the
complaint.
(b) In connection with such investigation, the administrator may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appear, and may examine,
record and copy documents which are produced.
(c) During or after the investigation, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt by informal
endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance or rectification of the discriminatory housing practice and voluntary compliance and adequate
assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this division.
(d) In the event conciliation is effected, the administrator shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way as to make public
identification of the persons named in the complaint without the written consent of the person concerned.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-38)
Sec. 1.04.040 Certificate to city attorney
Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the
administrator, and if the administrator has concluded that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, and the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary
compliance have been unsuccessful, the administrator may certify in writing to the city attorney that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request the
city attorney to forthwith prosecute such violation in municipal court. (Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-39)
Sec. 1.04.041 Legal procedures
(a) Upon certification by the administrator, the city attorney may institute a charge in municipal court and prosecute the same to final conclusion as rapidly as
practicable.
(b) It is the intent of this division to increase the available remedies which citizens may have to insure their rights under federal, state or local statutory or case law.
Therefore nothing in this division shall be construed as an administrative prerequisite to a citizen pursuing rights under any other federal, state or local statute, case
decision or administrative ruling.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-40)
Sec. 1.04.042 Education and public information
In order to further the objectives of this division, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs designed to acquaint the general public with
the provisions and objectives of this division. (Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-41)
Sec. 1.04.043 Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
The administrator is authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the
provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as he shall deem appropriate to further the policies of
this division; the city manager may accept reimbursement from the Secretary for services rendered to assist in carrying out the provisions of the above-cited federal law.
(Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-42)
Sec. 1.04.044 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person by force or threat of force willfully to injure, intimidate or interface [interfere] with any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, handicap or familial status, and because the person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings. (Ordinance 89-86, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/89; 1978 Code, sec. 14-43)
ARTICLE 1.05 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY*
Sec. 1.05.001 General liability claims; maximum amount
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/376
The city attorney's office is hereby authorized to negotiate and/or settle any general liability claim or lawsuit in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per occurrence. A claim or lawsuit involving property damage only may be settled by the city attorney's office with the concurrence of the city manager in an
amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per occurrence. (Ordinance 86-116, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/86; Ordinance 96-48, adopted 9/3/96; 1978 Code, sec.
2-3.1)
ARTICLE 1.06 PUBLIC RECORDS†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.06.001–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Records Management Program*
Sec. 1.06.031 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information-recording media,
regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or
any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city. (Ordinance 90-14, sec. 1, adopted
2/27/90; 1978 Code, sec. 2-81)
Sec. 1.06.032 City records declared public property; unauthorized destruction, removal, etc.
All city records as defined in section 1.06.031 of this division are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position,
any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of
such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 90-14, sec. 2, adopted 2/27/90; 1978 Code, sec. 2-82)
Sec. 1.06.033 Designation of records management officer
The city clerk, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the
office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Ordinance 90-14, sec. 3, adopted 2/27/90; 1978 Code, sec. 2-83)
Sec. 1.06.034 Electronic scanning of public records
The city clerk is hereby authorized to digitize all official records of the city, which shall include but not be limited to deeds, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, easements,
leases, liens, and franchises. The city clerk shall properly scan said records in accordance with the technical standards established by state law. The city clerk or his
designee shall be responsible to check and certify that each scanned record is a true and correct duplication of the original public record. The public shall have access to
the information contained in the scanned public records as provided by law. (Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-84; Ordinance 07-010, sec.
15, adopted 2/6/07)
ARTICLE 1.07 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.07.001 Local rules
The Local Rules of the Municipal Court, on file of the office of the city clerk and made a part hereof for all purposes, are hereby adopted by reference. (Ordinance 07-103,
sec. 1, adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.07.002–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fines, Fees, and Funds†
Sec. 1.07.031 Collection fee
There is hereby authorized a collection fee in the amount of thirty (30) percent of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds
and restitutions, ordered paid by a municipal court serving the city and on amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear:
(1) As promised under subchapter A, chapter 543, Transportation Code, or other law;
(2) In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under article 14.06b, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, or other law;
(3) In compliance with a lawful summons issued under article 15.03b, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; or
(4) In compliance with a lawful order of court serving the city when such debts, accounts receivable and amounts are more than sixty (60) days past due and
have been referred to an attorney or other vendor for collection.
(Ordinance 03-079, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/03; 1978 Code, sec. 8-1)
Sec. 1.07.032 Municipal court juvenile case manager fund
(a) There is hereby established a municipal court juvenile case manager fund, the money from which may only be used for the purposes outlined in article 102.0174 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure to provide for the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager in the municipal court.
(b) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect a five dollar ($5.00) juvenile case manager fee from each person convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in
municipal court as a cost of court from and after the effective date of this section. This fee shall be deposited into the municipal court juvenile case manager fund. For
purposes of collection of this juvenile case manager fee, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives deferred disposition,
or the person receives deferred adjudication from the court.
(c) The municipal court judge is hereby authorized to waive the fee required by this section in a case of financial hardship.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/376
(d) The city manager be and he is hereby authorized to expend monies from the fund in accordance with the ordinances of the city and laws of the state.
(e) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 06-004, secs. 2–5, 7, adopted 1/24/06; 1978 Code, sec. 8-2; Ordinance 10-065, sec. 1, adopted 8/10/10)
State law references–Authority to employ juvenile case managers and reimbursement, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.056; juvenile case manager fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0174.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Officers and their duties
The officers of this city shall be such as are provided for in the city charter and the ordinances of the city, and they shall perform the duties as are therein provided. It is the
intention of the city council in the enactment of this chapter to provide exclusively for the city's administrative chain under the direction of the city manager. All
administrative offices or responsibilities not established by this chapter or by the charter, and which are not otherwise specifically assigned to a department created by this
chapter, shall be deemed to be offices under the direct supervision and control of the city manager, and he may assign same, at his discretion, to any department or
division created by this chapter. (Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-1)
Charter reference–Administrative departments, art. XIII.
ARTICLE 2.02 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Establishment; membership; appointment, term and qualifications of members
(a) City boards and commissions and their duties and responsibilities shall be established by ordinance. The size of the membership of the board shall be determined by
the city council and, to the extent not conflicting with existing ordinances, members of boards and commissions shall be appointed for two-year terms, unless otherwise
specified. Boards and commissions shall contain an odd number of members with each councilmember having an equal number of nominations to the committee except
that the mayor may nominate one additional member. Appointments shall be by the city council for two-year terms effective October 1 of odd-numbered years.
Appointments made to fill vacancies will expire September 30 of odd-numbered years.
(b) The mayor shall appoint the chair and vice-chair of all boards and commissions when the ordinance establishing the board or commission does not provide
otherwise.
(c) Persons appointed to advisory committees and commissions must be residents of the city. Persons may serve on no more than two (2) advisory boards and
commissions of the city at the same time.
(d) All members of boards, committee and commissions shall serve without compensation.
(e) All members of boards, committee and commissions shall be subject to removal at the will and pleasure of the city council.
(f) These provisions shall not apply to the Beaumont Youth Advisory Council.
(Ordinance 92-64, sec. 1, adopted 8/25/92; Ordinance 00-19, sec. 1, adopted 2/15/00; Ordinance 05-035, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/05; 1978 Code, sec. 2-53; Ordinance 07-010,
sec. 13, 2/6/07; Ordinance 15-049, secs. 1–2, adopted 11/10/15; Ordinance 17-037, sec. 1, adopted 6/6/17)
Secs. 2.02.002–2.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Beaumont Youth Advisory Council*
Sec. 2.02.031 Established
(a) There is hereby established a Beaumont Youth Advisory Council to be composed of ten (10) members to be confirmed by the city council. The members shall be
residents of the city and must attend one of the following schools:
(1) Beaumont United High School.
(2) Harmony Science Academy.
(3) Legacy Christian Academy.
(4) Monsignor Kelly Catholic High School.
(5) West Brook High School.
(b) The advisory council will be composed of two (2) members from each school listed in subsection (a) above.
(c) The members shall meet at least once per month.
(d) The members serve at the pleasure of the city council.
(Ordinance 17-037, sec. 2, adopted 6/6/17; Ordinance 18-044 adopted 7/31/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/376
Sec. 2.02.032 Duties
The duties of the youth advisory council shall be advisory in nature and shall consist of the following:
(1) Serve as the voice of the youth in the community.
(2) Serve in an advisory capacity to the city council regarding youth programs and activities.
(3) Encourage youth to learn about and become involved in city government.
(Ordinance 17-037, sec. 2, adopted 6/6/17)
Sec. 2.02.033 Term
Members of the youth advisory council shall serve a nine (9) month term, beginning in September and concluding in May of the following year. (Ordinance 17-037, sec.
2, adopted 6/6/17)
Secs. 2.02.034–2.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Community Development Advisory Committee
Sec. 2.02.061 Established
There is hereby established a community development advisory committee to be composed of fifteen (15) members who are resident citizens of the city. The members of
the community development advisory committee shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years. The mayor
shall appoint three (3) members and each councilmember shall appoint two (2). The city council shall name one of the members as chairman and one as vice-chairman.
Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. (Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-34; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 5, adopted
2/6/07; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 4, adopted 11/10/15)
Sec. 2.02.062 Secretary
The city manager, or his designee, shall serve as secretary of the committee without vote. The duties of the secretary will be as follows:
(1) To serve as a nonvoting member;
(2) To attend all meetings of the committee and of its appointed committees;
(3) To maintain a record of all activities of the committee;
(4) To provide the committee with all information necessary for the performance of its duties;
(5) To submit a proposed agenda to the committee chairman and members;
(6) To invite the participation of the interested parties concerned with topics of the agenda;
(7) To coordinate the attendance of staff personnel of the city;
(8) To introduce items on the agenda and present applicable information as shall be necessary to aid in resolving problems;
(9) To provide such clerical-administrative support as is required by the committee;
(10) To arrange for all meetings to be held as directed by the chairman of the committee.
(Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-35; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 6, adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 2.02.063 Duties and responsibilities
The duties and the responsibilities of the community development advisory committee shall be as follows:
(1) To act as an advisory board to the city council and the city manager;
(2) To recommend objectives to the city for the community development block grant program;
(3) To assist the city council and the city manager's staff in planning for a continuing program of community development;
(4) To keep the city council and the city manager's staff informed of current trends and to recommend changes and improvements which will update the
community development and housing assistance plan.
(Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-36; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 7, adopted 2/6/07)
Secs. 2.02.064–2.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. Small Business Revolving Loan Fund Board
Sec. 2.02.091 Established
There is hereby created a small business revolving loan fund board composed of nine (9) members who are resident citizens and voters of the city. The board shall consist
of at least one member from local financial institutions, at least one member from the entrepreneurial studies program at Lamar University, two (2) members from small
and minority business or community organizations, two (2) members from the citizens advisory committee of the community development block grant program, the city
finance officer, and two (2) members at large. The terms shall be for two (2) years, expiring on September 30 of the odd-numbered years. The board shall elect from its
membership officers and committee chairs, as necessary. The board's duties, among others, shall be to review requests for small business revolving loans and to approve
loan packages under the program. The board shall report to the city council as requested concerning the effectiveness of the program and advise the city council
concerning potential improvements to the structure and procedures of the program. The city manager is hereby authorized to take all necessary action including litigation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/376
to collect delinquent accounts resulting from loans made from the small business revolving loan fund. (Ordinance 87-92, sec. 1, adopted 12/8/87; Ordinance 91-23, sec. 1,
adopted 3/5/91; 1978 Code, sec. 2-52; Ordinance 07-010, sec. 12, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 5, adopted 11/10/15)
Secs. 2.02.092–2.02.120 Reserved
Division 5. Reserved*
Secs. 2.02.121–2.02.150 Reserved
Division 6. Convention and Tourism Advisory Board
Sec. 2.02.151 Established
(a) Composition; terms; vacancies; compensation. There is hereby created a convention and tourism advisory board to be composed of sixteen (16) members who are
resident citizens and qualified voters of the city. The members of the convention and tourism advisory board shall be appointed by the city council from the following
occupational specialties or agencies as well as from the community at large:
(1) Hotel/motel;
(2) Restaurant;
(3) Museum-attraction;
(4) Travel;
(5) Advertising;
(6) Media;
(7) Chamber of commerce; and
(8) Lamar University.
The term of the office of each member of the convention and tourism advisory board shall be for two (2) years, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years or until
a successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term.
(b) Duties; officers; bylaws. The duties of the convention and tourism advisory board shall be advisory in nature to the city council and the city manager. It shall
participate with the director of the CVB department or his or her designee, in developing convention and tourism goals and objectives, in devising marketing strategies for
accomplishment of those goals and objectives, and in monitoring the results of implementation of those strategies. It shall participate in the formulation of the annual
budget for convention and tourism activities. The city council shall select from the membership of the board a chairman, and vice-chairman and such other officers as may
be deemed appropriate.
(Ordinance 86-75, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/86; Ordinance 86-94, sec. 1, adopted 9/9/86; Ordinance 90-61, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/90; 1978 Code, sec. 20-34; Ordinance 15-049,
sec. 7, adopted 11/10/15)
Secs. 2.02.152–2.02.180 Reserved
Division 7. Library Commission
Sec. 2.02.181 Established; membership
There is hereby created a library commission which shall be composed of nine (9) members who are resident citizens and qualified voters of this city. The members of the
library commission shall be appointed by the city council for two (2) years, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years, or until a successor is appointed. The city
council shall name one of the commissioners as chairman and one as vice-chairman. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. (1958 Code, sec.
18-1; Ordinance 83-175, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 16-1; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 8, adopted 11/10/15)
Sec. 2.02.182 Duties
The duties of the library commission shall be advisory in nature to the city council and the city manager. It shall recommend library objectives and policies, assist in
planning for a continuing program of library services and development, assist the library director in keeping the city officials and the public informed about current library
trends, and recommend to the library director changes and improvements which will update the library services. (1958 Code, sec. 18-2; 1978 Code, sec. 16-2)
Secs. 2.02.183–2.02.210 Reserved
Division 8. Reserved*
Secs. 2.02.211–2.02.240 Reserved
Division 9. Animal Care Advisory Committee
Sec. 2.02.241 Established
(a) There is hereby established an animal care advisory committee of the city to act in an advisory capacity to the city council and to the animal care division
concerning rules and regulations pertaining to the operations of the animal care facility and to make recommendations to the animal care manager concerning animal
control by the city.
(b) Such committee shall consist of seven (7) members composed of the city veterinarian, the animal care manager, a representative from the city police department,
one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization, and three (3) residents-at-large as recommended by the mayor, all of whom shall be appointed for two-year
terms, expiring on September 30th of odd-numbered years.
(c) The advisory committee shall meet at least three (3) times a year.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/376
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 04-097, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/04; 1978 Code, sec. 5-37; Ordinance 15-031, sec. 1, adopted 8/25/15; Ordinance 15-
049, sec. 10, adopted 11/10/15; Ordinance 17-006 adopted 1/31/17)
Secs. 2.02.242–2.02.270 Reserved
Division 10. Parks and Recreation Committee
Sec. 2.02.271 Established
(a) There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory committee to be composed of fourteen (14) members who are resident citizens and qualified voters of the
city. The members of the parks and recreation advisory committee shall be appointed by the city council. The term of office of each member of the parks and recreation
advisory committee shall be for two (2) years, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years, or until a successor is appointed. The city council shall name one (1) of
the members of the parks and recreation advisory committee as chairman for two (2) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term.
(b) The duties of the parks and recreation committee shall be advisory in nature to the city council and the city manager. It shall recommend parks and recreation
objectives and policies, assist in planning for a continuing program of parks and recreation services and development, assist the parks and recreation director in keeping
the city officials and the public informed about the current parks and recreation trends, and recommend to the parks and recreation director changes and improvements
which will update the parks and recreation services.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-9; Ordinance 80-20, sec. 1, adopted 4/1/80; Ordinance 82-63, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/82; Ordinance 84-88, sec. 9, adopted 6/26/84; 1978 Code, sec. 20-
2; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 1, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 11, adopted 11/10/15)
Secs. 2.02.272–2.02.290 Reserved
Division 11. Police Department Community Advisory Committee
Sec. 2.02.291 Established
There is hereby established a police community advisory committee to be composed of fifteen (15) members. The members shall be appointed by the city council for twoyear
terms, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years. The mayor shall name one of the members as chairperson and one person as vice-chairperson. Vacancies on
the committee shall be filled by city council for unexpired terms. Due to the nature of the committee, each nominee will be subject to a background inquiry. (Ordinance
10-099, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 12, adopted 11/10/15)
Sec. 2.02.292 Mission statement; requirements; attendance
The mission of the committee shall be to enhance citizen understanding, communication, and cooperation between the police department and the community. The
committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the chief of police. Nominees will be required to attend the Citizens Police Academy, participate in a ride-along with a
patrol officer, and attend monthly committee meetings. (Ordinance 10-099, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10; Ordinance 15-049, sec. 13, adopted 11/10/15)
Sec. 2.02.293 Duties and responsibilities
The duties and responsibilities of the police community advisory committee shall be as follows:
(1) To assist the police department in achieving a greater understanding of complex police/community issues.
(2) To study, examine, and recommend methods and approaches to develop an active citizen-police partnership in the prevention of crime.
(3) To promote cooperative citizen-police programs and approaches in order to resolve community crime problems and police/community issues.
(4) To recommend policies, programs, and/or legislation that will enhance cooperation among citizens and the police department.
(5) To receive information concerning police department programs, services, and operations.
(6) To act as liaison between the community and the police department on matters addressed by the committee.
(7) To participate in meaningful dialogue and provide meaningful input related to the objectives of the committee.
(8) At the direction of the chief of police, assume other tasks or duties to facilitate the accomplishment of the committee objectives.
(Ordinance 10-099, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10)
Sec. 2.02.294 Organization; meetings
The police department shall designate times and places for monthly meetings. Since the committee is advisory in nature, a quorum of members is not required to conduct
business. (Ordinance 10-099, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10)
ARTICLE 2.03 DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.03.001 Establishment; duties
The departments and divisions of the city shall be those which are established and adopted from year to year in the fiscal budget of the city, except, however, in
accordance with the charter, there shall be a finance department. The duties of each department shall be those which are set out in the fiscal budget of the city and may be
amended by the city manager. In accordance with the charter of the city, the city council may, by ordinance, discontinue any department or office and may prescribe,
combine, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of any and all departments and offices other than the finance department. (Ordinance 86-98, sec. 2, adopted
9/23/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2-4)
Sec. 2.03.002 Transfer of employees between departments and divisions authorized
In order to expedite the work of any department and to administer an increase in duties which may evolve upon any department, or to cope with periodical seasonal
changes, the city manager is hereby empowered to transfer employees temporarily from one department to perform similar duties in another department. Similarly, each
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/376
department director shall have the power to transfer employees from one division to another within his department. This section shall not be construed to permit transfers
of employees in violation of civil service law. (Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, sec. 2-2)
Secs. 2.03.003–2.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police and Fire Departments†
Part I. In General
Sec. 2.03.031 Employee Relations Act adopted
The provisions of chapter 174 of Texas Local Government Code, the same being the Fire and Police Employee Relations Act, are adopted by the city and placed into
effect in accordance with the requirements of said act. (Ordinance 74-67, sec. 1, adopted 10/22/74; 1978 Code, sec. 21-70)
State law reference–Fire and police employee relations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 174.
Sec. 2.03.032 Interlocal police assistance
(a) Authority of police chief. Pursuant to the provisions of Texas Government Code, chapter 791, the chief of police of the city is authorized to assign regularly
employed law enforcement personnel of his department to assist any other county or municipality in this state, when a state of civil emergency in such other county or
municipality has been declared by proper authority, upon request by such proper authority, and when, in the opinion of such proper authority, a need exists in such other
county or municipality for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants
and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat thereof by three (3) or more persons acting together
or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or man-made calamity.
(b) Supervision and power of assigned officer. Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is assigned to the city, under authority of an
order adopted by the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, such officer shall
be a peace officer of this city and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this city, while so assigned, and he shall have all the powers of a regular law
enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he were within the county or municipality where regularly employed and his qualification for office where regularly
employed shall constitute his qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond or compensation shall be made.
(c) Compensation and benefits to officer. When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties outside the
territorial limits of this city, he shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death
benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within this city, and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food or lodging, as well as for
damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses which he may incur while on duty outside this city, or while traveling to or from such assignment.
(d) Reimbursement to city or county. When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another county or city under the circumstances described above,
and upon request of the proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request, reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement
officer for his actual expenses of travel, food, lodging and for such cost of damage to equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such law enforcement officer
in this city and for which the county or city where he is regularly employed has paid.
(Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; 1978 Code, secs. 2-23–2-26)
Sec. 2.03.033 Fire department established; chief; functions
There is hereby established the fire department, the director of which shall be the fire chief. The fire department shall be responsible for the sole command of fires and all
persons within the vicinity of fires; for taking proper measures to extinguish fires; for the protection of property from fires; for the preservation of order and observance of
laws, ordinances and regulations relating to fires and the prevention of same; and the inspection of oil and gas installations. The fire department shall perform such other
duties and functions as may be delegated to it from time to time by the fire chief or the city manager. (Ordinance 84-163, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/84; Ordinance 01-022, sec.
1, adopted 3/20/01; 1978 Code, sec. 2-27)
State law reference–Fire department in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.011.
Sec. 2.03.034 Firemen's relief and retirement fund
City firefighters who are members of the city firemen's relief and retirement fund shall be permitted to defer federal income taxes under the terms of section 10F(a) and
section 10F(b) of the state Firemen's Relief and Retirement Law, as amended, subject to a favorable determination by the Internal Revenue Service that the firefighters'
pension plan is a qualified retirement plan. (Ordinance 83-171, adopted 12/16/83; 1978 Code, sec. 21-77)
Secs. 2.03.035–2.03.070 Reserved
Part II. Civil Service System*
Sec. 2.03.071 Established
In accordance with the provisions of the Firemen's and Policemen's Civil Service Act, being chapter 143 of Texas Local Government Code, which was adopted by the
qualified voters of this city, there is hereby established a civil service system for firemen and policemen in the city. (1958 Code, sec. 12-16; 1978 Code, sec. 21-71)
Sec. 2.03.072 Commission created
There is hereby established a firemen's and policemen's civil service commission consisting of three (3) members who shall be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of the Firemen's and Policemen's Civil Service Act and shall serve without compensation. Any member of the commission may be removed by the city council
for just cause. (1958 Code, sec. 12-17; 1978 Code, sec. 21-72)
Sec. 2.03.073 Director; duties; removal
There is hereby established the office of director of firemen's and policemen's civil service, which shall be filled by the appointment of the commission in accordance with
the provisions of the Firemen's and Policemen's Civil Service Act. Said director may be either a member of the commission, another employee of the city, or some other
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/376
person. The city council shall determine what salary, if any, shall be paid to such director. Said director shall at all times be subject to removal by the commission. He
shall serve as secretary of the commission, and shall perform all such work incidental to the firemen's and policemen's civil service as may be required of him by the
commission. (1958 Code, sec. 12-18; 1978 Code, sec. 21-73)
Sec. 2.03.074 Grades and classifications within fire department
The following number of positions in the following classifications are hereby established within the fire department:
Grade Classification Positions
I Firefighters 100
II Drivers/Operators 70
III Captains 46
IV District Fire Chiefs 12
V Deputy Fire Chiefs 5
VI Assistant Fire Chief 1
Total 234
(Ordinance 90-20, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/90; Ordinance 92-74, sec. 1, adopted 9/22/92; Ordinance 94-62, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/94; Ordinance 96-18, sec. 1, adopted
3/19/96; Ordinance 98-33, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/98; Ordinance 99-90, sec. 1, adopted 11/23/99; Ordinance 00-32, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/00; Ordinance 00-85, sec. 1, adopted
9/26/00; Ordinance 01-081, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/01; 1978 Code, sec. 21-74; Ordinance 07-053, sec. 13, adopted 5/1/07; Ordinance 13-035, sec. 1, adopted 6/18/13;
Ordinance 16-021, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/16)
Sec. 2.03.075 Grades and classifications within police department
The following grades and classifications and number of positions in each classification are hereby established within the police department:
Grade Classification Positions
I Officers 197
II Sergeants 44
III Lieutenants 14
IV Captains 3
V Assistant Police Chief 2
Total 260
(Ordinance 90-21, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/90; Ordinance 91-34, sec. 1, adopted 4/2/91; Ordinance 91-85, sec. 1, adopted 10/15/91; Ordinance 93-27, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/93;
Ordinance 94-28, sec. 1, adopted 5/17/94; Ordinance 94-42, sec. 1, adopted 9/13/94; Ordinance 96-9, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/96; Ordinance 96-40, sec. 1, adopted 8/6/96;
Ordinance 98-33, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/98; Ordinance 98-53, sec. 1, adopted 8/11/98; Ordinance 99-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/19/99; Ordinance 99-45, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/99;
Ordinance 99-98, sec. 1, adopted 12/21/99; Ordinance 00-08, sec. 1, adopted 1/18/00; Ordinance 00-47, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/00; Ordinance 01-004, sec. 1, adopted
1/23/01; Ordinance 01-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/01; Ordinance 01-070, sec. 1, adopted 9/18/01; Ordinance 02-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/22/02; Ordinance 02-016, sec. 1,
adopted 3/5/02; Ordinance 02-031, sec. 1, adopted 4/30/02; Ordinance 02-091, 11/5/02; Ordinance 03-051, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/03; Ordinance 03-081, sec. 1, adopted
10/28/03; Ordinance 04-009, sec. 1, adopted 2/10/04; Ordinance 05-012, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/05; Ordinance 06-009, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/06; Ordinance 06-078, sec. 1,
adopted 12/5/06; 1978 Code, sec. 21-75; Ordinance 08-008, sec. 1, adopted 1/22/08; Ordinance 08-047, sec. 1, adopted 5/27/08; Ordinance 08-101, sec. 1, adopted
11/18/08; Ordinance 09-026, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/09; Ordinance 10-010, sec. 1, adopted 1/26/10; Ordinance 10-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/10; Ordinance 10-094, sec. 1,
adopted 11/9/10; Ordinance 11-026, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/11; Ordinance 11-041, sec. 1, adopted 6/21/11; Ordinance 11-085, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/11; Ordinance 12-008,
sec. 2, adopted 2/7/12; Ordinance 13-027, sec. 1, adopted 4/30/13; Ordinance 14-022, sec. 1, adopted 5/27/14; Ordinance 15-024, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/15; Ordinance 15-
036, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/15; Ordinance 15-044, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/15; Ordinance 16-007, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/16; Ordinance 16-015, sec. 1, adopted 3/15/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/376
Sec. 2.03.076 Class specifications adopted, filed with city clerk
The “class specifications” for grades in the police department and the fire department as set forth in the official copy of “Class Specifications for Police Department and
Fire Department” on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby adopted. Such class specifications are descriptive and not restrictive. They are intended to illustrate the
duties of the various grades and are not intended to set forth all of said duties. (1958 Code, sec. 12-21; 1978 Code, sec. 21-76)
ARTICLE 2.04 PERSONNEL POLICIES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Application of article
Unless expressly so stated otherwise, this article shall apply to all employees in the service of the city except firemen and policemen. (Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted
5/24/88; 1978 Code, sec. 21-1)
Sec. 2.04.002 Holidays
(a) The following holidays shall be declared official holidays for city employees to be observed in accordance with regulations established by the city manager:
(1) New Year's Day;
(2) Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. (3rd Monday in January);
(3) Good Friday;
(4) Memorial Day;
(5) Independence Day;
(6) Labor Day;
(7) Veterans Day;
(8) Thanksgiving Day;
(9) Day after Thanksgiving Day;
(10) Christmas Day;
(11) A special day taken at any time.
(b) Each emergency medical services employee shall earn one half (1/2) shift time for each holiday.
(Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; Ordinance 00-92, sec. 1, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 01-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/30/01; 1978 Code, sec. 21-5; Ordinance 07-
053, sec. 2, adopted 5/1/07)
Sec. 2.04.003 Leave
(a) Regular full-time civilian employees regularly assigned to work forty (40) hours (average 56 hours - EMT/paramedic employees) per week shall earn paid time off
on a biweekly basis in accordance with the following schedules:
(1) Paid time off.
Full Years of
Service
Hours Per Pay
Period Hours Per Year Weeks Per Year
0-5 4.62 120 3
5-10 6.16 160 4
10-20 7.69 200 5
20+ 9.23 240 6
Each regular full-time civilian employee shall earn paid time off leave only when he/she is paid for forty (40) hours (average of 56 hours -
EMT/paramedic employees) each week of the pay period.
(2) Paid time off - EMT/paramedic employees.
Full Years of
Service
Hours Per Pay
Period Hours Per Year Weeks Per Year
0-5 6.47 168 3
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/376
5-10 8.61 224 4
10-20 10.77 280 5
20+ 12.92 336 6
(b) An employee who is regularly assigned to work more than forty (40) hours per week shall have paid time off and short-term disability accrual amended to reflect the
percentage that their expanded work schedule exceeds forty (40) hours per week.
(c) An employee may not carry more than twelve hundred and eighty (1,280) hours of paid time off leave into the next calendar year (1,792) hours - EMT/paramedic
employees).
(d) Employees who are separated from employment before completing twelve (12) months of continuous service shall not be entitled to payment for unused paid time
off leave.
(e) An employee who is on leave of absence without pay shall not earn paid time off leave during that period of time.
(f) Each regular full-time employee shall earn paid time off leave which may be available for use for any purpose upon employment with the supervisor's approval.
(g) Each regular full-time employee who leaves the city after completing twelve (12) continuous months of service will be paid for all accumulated paid time off leave;
however, if the accumulated paid time off leave exceeds twelve hundred and eighty (1,280) hours, the employee will not be paid for any short term disability (sick leave)
accumulated prior to October 1, 1991.
(h) Short-term disability. Each regular full-time employee regularly assigned to work forty (40) hours (average of 56 hours - EMT/paramedic employees) per week shall
earn a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours of short-term disability per year (134.4 hours - EMT/paramedic employees). Such employee shall earn short-term disability
leave only when he/she is paid for forty (40) hours (average of 56 hours - EMT/paramedic employees) each week of the pay period.
(i) An employee may use his/her earned paid time off, compensatory time or leave without pay to satisfy the forty (40) hours (average of 56 hours - EMT/paramedic
employees) condition of absence for the same non-job related illness, injury or disability as a requirement to using short-term disability.
(j) Each regular full-time employee may accumulate up to seven hundred and twenty (720) hours of short-term disability leave (1,008 hours - EMT/paramedic
employees).
(k) Upon termination, an employee shall not be paid for any short-term disability hours which the employee has on the date of termination in excess of the number of
hours existing as of September 30, 1991.
(l) An employee who leaves the city after completing twelve (12) month of continuous service and had accumulated short-term disability leave (sick leave) prior to
October 1, 1991, shall be paid upon termination for such leave if such leave in combination with accumulated paid time off does not exceed a combined total of twelve
hundred and eighty (1,280) hours. The pay for such unused accumulated hours of short-term disability leave (sick leave) shall be at the employee's rate of pay as of
September 30, 1991.
(Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; Ordinance 88-71, sec. 1, adopted 8/2/88; Ordinance 91-73, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/91; Ordinance 96-65, sec. 1, adopted 10/29/96;
Ordinance 05-013, sec. 1, adopted 1/31/05; Ordinance 05-014, sec. 1, adopted 1/31/05; 1978 Code, sec. 21-6; Ordinance 07-053, sec. 3, adopted 5/1/07; Ordinance 09-
071, sec. 1, adopted 12/8/09; Ordinance 14-068, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/14; Ordinance 19-026, secs. 1–3, adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 2.04.004 Occupational disabilities and injuries
An employee injured in the course of employment shall receive benefits as provided by the worker's compensation program adopted by the city and by any other
applicable regulations and directives. An employee shall not be eligible to use leave in conjunction with short-term disability and worker's compensation benefits to
exceed his/her regular base salary. (Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; 1978 Code, sec. 21-7)
Sec. 2.04.005 Longevity pay
Each regular full-time employee with five (5) or more years of service will be paid longevity pay at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per month for each year of service up
to and including twenty-five (25) years. Such pay shall be computed only on the basis of continuous, unbroken service. Longevity pay will not be paid to civilian
employees hired on or after March 2, 2010. (Ordinance 07-053, sec. 4, adopted 5/1/07; Ordinance 10-016, sec. 1, adopted 3/2/10)
Secs. 2.04.006–2.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Position Classification-Compensation Plan
Sec. 2.04.041 Responsibility for administration
The city manager shall be responsible for administering the classification and compensation plans for all positions. He shall be responsible for working out arrangements
which will insure the administration of the plan for all employees on an equitable basis. He may assign other officials or employees to assist him in this activity.
(Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; 1978 Code, sec. 21-13)
Sec. 2.04.042 Interpretation
The city manager shall be responsible for interpreting the application of the plan to pay problems which are not specifically covered by this article using the principles
expressed herein as a policy guide. (Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; 1978 Code, sec. 21-14)
Sec. 2.04.043 Reduction in force
(a) Whenever it is necessary to reduce the workforce in any city department or division, temporary, part-time and probationary employees shall be considered for layoff
first. The city shall attempt to transfer full-time employees to other departments. The city manager shall define the process that will be used in determining which
employees will be laid off for overall consistency and fairness.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/376
(b) The salary for each employee rehired in his previous classification shall be commensurate with his pay rate prior to the layoff. The salary of each employee rehired
in a lower grade shall be adjusted to a salary comparable to other employees with the same seniority in the new classification.
(c) Other such benefits shall be defined in accordance with the established rules as promulgated by the city manager.
(Ordinance 88-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/88; 1978 Code, sec. 21-24)
ARTICLE 2.05 RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 2.05.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The specific ordinances regarding participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS), as adopted by the city, are not included in the code, but they are
specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Local health authority designated
The city animal care manager will be designated as the local health authority for the purpose of this chapter. Immediately upon intake at the animal care facility, the
animal care manager shall be considered the designated caretaker of the animal for purposes of examinations, care, or disposition if necessary. His duties will be to
enforce all city and state laws pertaining to the control of animals within the city. Any reference to the animal care manager will include his designee, any animal care
officers, or law enforcement officer of the city. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 06-048, sec. 3, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-15; Ordinance
17-007, sec. 2, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.002 Office of animal control supervisor established; duties; enforcement
(a) The animal care manager shall have the authority to issue citations and file charges in any court of competent jurisdiction for any violation of this chapter and any
other power or duty stated within the terms of this chapter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prevent, interfere with, or obstruct the animal care manager in the performance of his duties. It shall be unlawful for
any person to fail to comply with any lawful order of the animal care manager.
(c) The animal care manager has the authority to enforce any and all provisions of this chapter.
(d) The city shall be entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of federal, state or local law.
(Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-42; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 3, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.003 Abatement and imminent threat; right of entry
The animal care manager shall have the power to impound animals that create an animal nuisance per se for the purpose of abating a nuisance and in cases where he has
reason to believe an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, has rabies or exhibits other violations of law as follows:
(1) On public property, in all cases;
(2) On private property, if:
(A) The consent of the resident or property owner is obtained;
(B) He reasonably believes there is immediate and imminent danger or peril to the public or to the animal if the animal in question is not impounded;
or
(C) Authorized by appropriate courts of law.
(3) The animal care manager has the right to pursue and apprehend animals running at-large onto private property while enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-38; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 4, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.004 Immediate euthanasia authorized
(a) The animal care manager is authorized to immediately euthanize any animal found at-large or any impounded animal in the following circumstances:
(1) The animal appears to be suffering from serious injury, pain or agony;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/376
(2) Circumstances exist which reasonably cause the animal care manager to believe that the animal presents a serious risk to the health or safety of the
public;
(3) Circumstances exist which reasonably cause the animal care manager to believe that the animal presents a serious risk to the health or safety of the
animal population of the city animal care facility or the animal population of the city.
(b) The animal care division may euthanize or release to a bona fide rescue entity or individual any impounded animal immediately upon declaration of evacuation of
the city due to natural or manmade disasters; any quarantined animals will be handled at the discretion of the animal care manager, who is authorized to do one of the
following:
(1) Euthanize any quarantined animal, remove the head or brain of the animal and submit it to the nearest Texas Department of State Health Services
laboratory for testing for rabies;
(2) Release the quarantined animal to the owners, requiring the return of said animal upon request.
(Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-41; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 5, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.005 Wounded or sick animals, fowl or birds; killing
When, from any cause, any animal within the city shall be sick, wounded, maimed or injured, so as to render its recovery hopeless, it shall be permissible for the animal
care manager to euthanize, or cause to be euthanized, such animal so ill or injured, and as soon after such injury as practicable, and in such manner as in his judgment
shall be the least painful, and to cause the carcass thereof to be removed. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-3; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 6,
adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.006 Previous convictions
If a person has been previously convicted of an offense under this chapter, a subsequent conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) but not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-43; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 7, adopted
1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.007 Sale of animals in food establishments
It shall be unlawful to keep for sale any bird or domestic animal in any department store, novelty store or any other store or business establishment where food is served or
sold to the public, unless such animals and birds are confined in enclosures and kept completely separated from the part of the store where food is served or sold.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-2)
Sec. 4.01.008 Selling or displaying animals in certain places; private animal sales
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away, or display for commercial purpose any live animal, on any roadside, public right-ofway,
commercial parking lot, or any flea market within the city. This provision does not prohibit the sale or purchase of animals from a person's private residence.
(Ordinance 06-048, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-2.1; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 1, adopted 2/13-07; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 8, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.009 Kennels
(a) Commercial kennels generally; dog and cat fanciers permit.
(1) Commercial kennel.
(A) The words “commercial kennel” shall mean any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where one (1) or more dogs, cats or other pet
animals are kept for commercial purposes, including boarding, breeding, sale of goods or animals, or the rendering of services for profit. No person,
group of persons or business entity shall operate a commercial kennel without first having obtained a valid commercial kennel permit from the animal
care division. For the purposes hereof, the breeding and sale of the litter of animals kept and maintained as household pets, and/or the litter of animals
kept and maintained by the holder of a dog and cat fancier's permit, shall not be deemed and considered a commercial kennel. Unless the premises are
covered by a commercial kennel permit, only one (1) litter from animals kept as household pets of a dog and cat fancier's permit shall be allowed on
premises at any given time.
(B) Such permit shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof during which such kennel shall be maintained. The yearly license fee for kennels
shall be in accordance with section 4.10.001 of this code. The fee shall be due and payable in advance on or before January 1st of each year. No kennel
permit shall be issued or renewed until an inspection certificate has been issued giving evidence that a sanitary inspection of the premises has been made
by the animal care division of the city. The permit issued shall specify the maximum number of animals permitted to be kept, handled or exhibited by the
permit holder. It shall be unlawful for the permit holder to keep, handle or exhibit any number of animals in excess of the maximum specified on the
permit. All applicants for a kennel permit with the city, if required by state statute to be licensed by a state agency, the applicant must have a valid license
issued by said agency to qualify for a permit by the city. The possession of a state license shall not in itself assure that a city permit will be granted.
(C) Should the animal care manager believe a commercial kennel permitted under this section is in violation of any zoning law, health law, or any other
applicable law of the city or state or believe the commercial kennel is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of
mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, the animal care manager may provide written notice to the permit holder specifically stating the
nature and facts supporting the nature of the alleged violation or detrimental condition. Such notice shall also state the intention to repeal the commercial
kennel permit and provide an effective date of such permit repeal not less than twenty-five (25) days after the date of the letter of notice. Should the
person or persons holding the commercial kennel permit desire to appeal the decision of the animal care manager such appeal should be made in writing
within ten (10) days of the date of the letter of notice and in such case the animal care manager shall convene the animal care advisory committee to hear
the appeal. The decision of the animal care advisory committee shall be final concerning revocation or nonrevocation of the commercial kennel permit.
The decision of the committee shall be made prior to the date of repeal set out in the notice letter; if the decision is not timely made, the permit shall
continue in full force and effect until a decision is made.
(D) This section shall not apply to and will not be construed to require a commercial kennel permit for:
(i) A veterinary hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian which retains animals for veterinary medical care;
(ii) A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park;
(iii) A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research;
(iv) A publicly owned animal shelter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/376
(E) A certificate shall be issued by the animal care division to the person paying for a commercial kennel permit, which certificate shall contain the
data specified in this section and which certificate shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place in the kennel.
(F) The animal care division shall keep a permanent record of all commercial kennel permits issued under the terms of this section, which record shall
show the name and address of persons being issued a kennel permit, the name and address of the kennel, the number of the commercial kennel permit, the
date issued and the amount paid.
(2) Permit, dog and cat fancier.
(A) The words “dog and cat fancier's premises” shall mean any lot, building, structure, enclosure or other premises where nine (9) or more dogs and/or
cats, each over the age of four (4) months, are kept, harbored or maintained:
(i) For showing in recognized dog shows, obedience trials, or field trials.
(ii) For working and hunting.
(iii) For exhibition in shows and trials.
(iv) For household pets.
(B) No person may operate a dog and cat fancier's premises without first having obtained a valid permit from the animal care division. A person may
apply for a permit for a dog and cat fancier's premises prior to purchase of such premises; in such case, the permit if issued may be issued subject to such
purchase. The application shall be in writing and shall provide sufficient information to document the following:
(i) That the animals will not create nuisance conditions for adjoining or nearby properties;
(ii) That all animals will be securely confined to the property;
(iii) That adequate methods for sanitation and sewage disposal are provided;
(iv) A list of all animals by number, breed, sex, age, and color.
(C) Outside structures or enclosures used to maintain the animals should be located only in the back yard and shall not occupy more than twenty (20)
percent of the yard area.
(D) The applicant shall pay to the city a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) at the time the application is submitted. If the application
is acceptable to the animal care manager the permit shall be granted for a one (1) year period; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Appeals of denials
will be handled in accordance with the provisions of subsection (F) of this subsection.
(E) Permits will be issued for one (1) year periods and must be renewed annually by payment in accordance with section 4.10.001. A permitted dog
and cat fancier's premises is an allowable use in any zoning classification. Prior to issuance of any permit, either original or renewal, the animal care
manager shall inspect the premises to assure compliance with this section. The number, breed, sex, age, and color or colors of all animals shall be listed
on the permit. No new animals may be added nor shall exchanges be allowed unless application for amendment to the permit is made and approved.
(F) Permits may be revoked by the animal care manager if provisions of this section, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, or the terms
and conditions of the permit are violated. Appeals of revocation of a permit or the refusal to grant a permit shall be made to the animal care manager. The
request for appeals shall be made in writing within five (5) days of the receipt of the written notification of the refusal to grant the permit or the
revocation of the permit. Upon receipt of request for such an appeal, the animal care manager shall convene the animal care advisory committee to hear
the appeal within fourteen (14) days. The decision of the animal care advisory committee shall be final.
(b) Structure requirements; feeding, watering, and sanitation.
(1) General structure.
(A) Structural strength. Housing facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair in order to protect the animals from injury,
to contain them, and to prevent exposure to other animals.
(B) Water and electric power. Reliable and adequate electric power, if required to comply with other provisions of this section, and adequate potable
water shall be available.
(C) Storage. Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored in facilities which adequately protect such supplies against infestation or contamination by
vermin. Refrigeration shall be provided for supplies of perishable food.
(D) Waste disposal. Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food waste, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal
facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestations, odors, and disease hazards.
(E) Washrooms and sinks. Facilities for personal hygiene, such as washrooms, basins or sinks, shall be provided for employees.
(2) Indoor facilities.
(A) Heating. Indoor housing facilities shall be sufficiently heated when necessary to protect the animals.
(B) Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Such facilities
shall be provided with fresh air either by means of windows, doors, vents, or air conditioning and shall be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors, and
moisture condensation.
(C) Lighting. Indoor housing facilities shall have ample light of sufficient intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning during the entire work
period. Primary enclosures shall be situated to protect the animals from excess illumination.
(D) Interior surfaces. The interior building surfaces shall be constructed and maintained so that they are impervious to moisture and may be readily
sanitized.
(E) Drainage. A suitable drainage method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from indoor housing facilities. If drains are used, they
shall be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors therefrom. If closed drainage systems are used, they shall be equipped with traps
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/376
and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the floor of the room.
(3) Outdoor facilities.
(A) Outdoor holding facilities shall be of adequate size and construction to handle any animal housed therein.
(B) Adequate shelter shall be provided to protect animals from any form of overheating or cold or inclement weather.
(C) Outdoor holding facilities must be constructed in such manner that they will protect the animal, be readily sanitized, and will not create a nuisance.
A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water.
(4) Primary enclosures. Primary enclosures shall:
(A) Be structurally sound and maintained in good repair.
(B) Provide convenient access to clean food and water.
(C) Enable the animal to remain dry and clean.
(D) Be constructed so as to protect the animal's feet and legs from injury.
(E) Provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn around fully, stand, sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position.
(5) Feeding.
(A) Dogs and cats shall be fed at least once a day except as otherwise might be directed by a licensed veterinarian. The food shall be free from
contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the
dog or cat.
(B) Food receptacles shall be accessible to all dogs and cats and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be
durable and kept clean and sanitary. Disposable food receptacles may be used but must be discarded after each feeding. Self feeders may be used for the
feeding of dog food, and shall be kept clean and sanitary to prevent molding, deterioration, or caking of food.
(6) Watering.
(A) If potable water is not accessible to the dogs and cats at all times, it shall be offered to them at least twice daily for periods of not less than one (1)
hour, except as directed by a licensed veterinarian.
(B) Watering receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary.
(7) Sanitation.
(A) Cleaning of primary enclosures. Excreta shall be removed from primary enclosures as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the
inhabitants and to reduce disease hazards and odors.
(B) Sanitation of primary enclosures. Cages, rooms and pens shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(C) Building and premises shall be kept clean.
(D) A regular program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, and other pests shall be established and maintained.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 86-16, sec. 1, adopted 2/25/86; Ordinance 91-69, sec. 1, adopted 9/3/91; 1978 Code, secs. 5-17, 5-17.1;
Ordinance 17-007, sec. 9, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.010 Number of animals allowed per residence
(a) The maximum number of adult dogs and/or cats allowed at any residence is eight (8). Any combination of dogs and/or cats in excess of eight (8), with the exception
of dogs or cats younger than four (4) months old, will constitute a violation.
(b) This provision does not apply if:
(1) The individual has a commercial kennel permit or a dog and cat fanciers permit; or
(2) The individual is registered as a bona fide rescue entity or foster family; in which case the maximum number allowed would be ten (10) adult dogs
and/or cats in any combination.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 10, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.011 Barking dogs
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to harbor or keep on his premises or in or about his premises, or
premises under his control, any dog or animal of the canine species, which by loud or unusual barking, howling, or yelping shall cause the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-18; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 11,
adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.012 Dead animal disposal
(a) No person shall place or deposit the exposed carcass of any animal or fowl on any street, alley, highway or public place or upon private property or permit to stand
any truck or other vehicle containing such carcass on any street, alley, highway or public place or on private property within the city. The term “exposed” as used in this
section means the exposure of the carcass of an animal so that putrefying odors may escape and contaminate the air.
(b) Such person or persons shall cause the carcass of such animal or fowl to be disposed of as follows:
(1) Putting the carcass in tied, double plastic bags and placing at the edge of the driveway, close to but not on the roadway;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/376
(2) Calling the animal care division upon immediate discover of the dead animal to pick up and dispose of the bagged dead animal before such time that the
carcass begins to putrefy, decay and/or become infested with maggots.
(A) Any animal weighing 80 pounds or more must be disposed of by the owner or persons in possession of said dead animal.
(Ordinance 06-048, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8-22-06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-16; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 5, adopted 2/13/07; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 12, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.01.013 Fee for picking up dead animals from veterinarian
In accordance with section 4.10.001, a fee will be charged for each trip made by the animal care division to pick up dead animals from veterinarians. The humane society
shall be exempt from the payment of these fees. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-27; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 13, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.02 CARE AND TREATMENT*
Sec. 4.02.001 Generally
Any person, including but not limited to the owner and/or the person who has the care, custody or control of such animal, commits an offense if he:
(1) Fails to provide a sufficient amount and type of food suitable for the species, size and age of the animal and in a quantity for the animal to maintain a
healthy body condition and wellness;
(2) Fails to provide clean, potable water that is available at all times. The water container shall be affixed in a way that prevents the animal from knocking it
over;
(3) Cruelly confines an animal or forces, allows, or permits any animal to remain in its own filth and/or waste;
(4) Crops a dog's ears, docks a tail, removes dew claws, or performs other surgical procedures on a dog or cat, except as provided by the Veterinary
Licensing Act by a licensed veterinarian;
(5) Uses any steel-jawed, killer-type, toothed trap designed in such a fashion as to reasonably ensure the cutting, slicing, tearing, or otherwise traumatizing
of entrapped prey and commonly known as a bear trap, wolf trap, or coyote trap in any zoning district within the city limits;
(6) Instigates or permits any dog fight, cock fight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans;
(7) Throws or allows an animal to jump from a moving vehicle in a manner likely to injure the animal; or
(8) Ties or tethers a dog or other animal to a stationary object for any period of time or in a location so as to create an unhealthy situation for the animal or a
potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian. If an animal is tied or tethered, it must have an appropriate swivel attached to the chain or cable.
(A) A restraint must be five times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail, or 10 feet.
(9) Fails to provide adequate shelter. Dogs shall have protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species and physical
condition of the dog so as to maintain the dog in a good state of health. Shelter shall consist of one the following:
(A) A doghouse that is enclosed with at least three (3) sides, a roof and a floor which is not the ground.
(B) A structure, including, but not limited to, a garage, barn, or shed that is to protect the dog from exposure. This structure shall be secured in such a
way as to offer the animal protection from the sun and rain.
(C) The interior height and width of such structure is six (6) inches or more in excess of the length of the dog as measured from its nose to the base of
its tail.
(Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-39; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 14, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.02.002 Placement and baiting of animal traps
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or place and bait or to permit the placing or placing and baiting of any trap designed for trapping animals in any
highway, street, alley or other public place within the city limits unless specific permission by the animal care manager has been granted. However, nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the animal care manager from placing such traps on public or private property as may be necessary to capture animals running at-large.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to or set out by the animal care division.
(Ordinance 06-048, sec. 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-40; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 15, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.02.003 Abandoning or dumping animal in city
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, forsake or dump any dog, cat or other animal within the city for any reason.
(b) The term “abandon” as used in this section means to leave an animal in any place without providing reasonable and necessary care for the animal under
circumstances under which no reasonable and similarly situated owner would leave an animal.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 06-048, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-1; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 16, adopted 1/31/17)
State law references–Cruelty by abandoning livestock animal, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09(a)(3); cruelty by abandoning nonlivestock animal, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092(b)(4).
Sec. 4.02.004 Safety of animals in motor vehicles
(a) A person may not transport an animal in a motor vehicle on a public roadway unless:
(1) The animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle; or
(2) If the animal is transported in an unenclosed vehicle, including a convertible, pick-up truck, flatbed truck, or motorcycle, the animal shall be confined in
a secure and appropriately sized and vented container or confined in a manner that prevents the animal from falling, jumping, or being thrown from a vehicle
or otherwise being injured.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/376
(b) A person may not keep an animal in a motor vehicle or other enclosed space in which the animal's health or life is endangered by high temperature, low temperature
or inadequate ventilation.
(1) A law enforcement officer or animal care officer may, after attempting to locate the animal's owner, remove the animal from a vehicle or enclosed space
using any reasonable means necessary, including breaking a window or lock. If professional services are required to remove the animal, the owner is
responsible for the cost.
(2) A law enforcement officer or animal care officer who removes an animal from a vehicle or enclosed space in accordance with this subsection is not liable
for any resulting property damage.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 17, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.03 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 4.03.001 Dogs at-large prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any dog to be at-large within the city. Any dog on the streets, alleys or public places or on private premises not under the control of the owner,
possessor, keeper or harborer of such dog within the city shall be considered to be at-large in violation of this section, except that a dog being under the control of a person
by means of a leash of sufficient strength to hold such dog shall not be deemed to be at-large. A person who owns, possesses, keeps or harbors any dog that is found atlarge
shall be in violation of this section. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-20; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 18, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.03.002 Holding periods; reclaiming; shelter fee; sustenance for animals
It shall be the duty of the animal care manager to pick up any dog or cat found at-large and confine such dog or cat in the city animal care facility for seventy-two (72)
hours in the case of a dog or cat without a microchip, collar or harness with tag attached, and for one hundred twenty (120) hours in the case of a dog or cat wearing a
current tag or microchip, during which time the owner or person entitled to such dog or cat, upon satisfactory proof to the animal care division of ownership, may redeem
his dog or cat upon the payment of all required fees in accordance with section 4.10.001 and all other such applicable fees provided by that section. The animal care
division shall provide, at the cost of the city, suitable and necessary sustenance for all dogs or cats so impounded. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978
Code, sec. 5-21; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 19, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.03.003 Notice to owner
It shall be the duty of the animal care manager to maintain a list of each animal impounded describing all dogs and cats, whether bearing an immunization tag, microchip
or not, and giving the number of the tag and the name of the person registering the dog or cat in the case where the dog or cat bears an immunization tag or microchip. In
case the dog or cat bears an immunization tag or microchip, then in addition to maintaining a list as required herein, it shall be the duty of the animal care manager to
notify such person to whom such immunization tag or microchip was issued, by letter, postal card, or telephone. The mailing of such letter or postal card shall be deemed
sufficient notice whether or not the person addressed received the same. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-22; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 20,
adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.03.004 Refusal to deliver an animal to officer
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to deliver any unimmunized dog or cat to the animal care manager upon demand for impounding. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1,
adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-23; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 21, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.03.005 Redemption or disposition of unclaimed animals
(a) The person entitled to the possession of any dog or cat impounded as provided herein, upon proper application within the time limits specified in this article, after
the impounding of such dog or cat, shall be entitled to have the dog or cat given to him, provided such dog or cat is not affected or thought to be affected with rabies, upon
the payment of the reclaim fee as provided in section 4.10.001 for each dog or cat impounded.
(b) If the owner of a dog or cat impounded fails to claim such animal within seventy-two (72) hours, in the case of a dog or cat without microchip or collar and
immunization tag attached, the animal cares manager shall deliver such dog or cat to the first approved applicant who applies for possession of such dog or cat within the
applicable time limit specified above, provided such dog or cat is not affected or thought to be affected with rabies. Such delivery shall be made upon payment of the
appropriate fees as provided for in section 4.10.001, and in addition thereto, in the case of unimmunized dogs or cats, upon obtaining an immunization for such dog or cat
as provided in this chapter.
(c) If the owner of a dog or cat impounded fails to claim such dog or cat and no person applies for possession of said dog or cat, it shall be the duty of the animal care
manager, at his discretion, to release to a bona fide rescue entity or individual, persons who have applied for adoption, or to euthanize the dog or cat without collar and
vaccination tag at the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hours and the dog or cat with collar and immunization tag attached at the expiration of one hundred twenty (120)
hours.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-24; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 22, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.03.006 Interference with officers
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to prevent the animal care manager from catching or impounding any dog or cat at-large, whether on public
or private property not under the control of the owner, possessor, keeper or harborer of such animal. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-25;
Ordinance 17-007, sec. 23, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.04 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 4.04.001 Report of bites; suspected rabies
(a) Any person having knowledge that an animal capable of transmitting rabies has bitten or scratched a person, dog, cat or other animal shall immediately report the
incident to the city's animal care division. The report shall include, if known, the name and address of any victim, the name and address of the owner of the animal, and
any other data which may aid in locating the victim or the animal.
(b) It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the animal care division the names and addresses of persons treated for bites or scratches
inflicted by animals capable of transmitting rabies.
(c) Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or any other domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the
incident to the animal care manager stating as precisely as possible where such animal may be found. If a known or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks a domestic
animal such incident shall also be reported as required above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/376
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-29; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 25, adopted 1/31/17)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 4.04.002 Taking up and observing
(a) The owner of a dog or cat which has bitten, scratched or attacked a person, dog or other animal shall be notified of the incident and shall cause such animal to be
immediately quarantined at the owner's expense for a period of not less than ten (10) days in the city animal care facility or a veterinary hospital in the city operated by a
duly licensed veterinarian. A fee shall be charged for each day of confinement at the animal care facility when an animal is under observation in bite cases. This boarding
fee shall be assessed in accordance with section 4.10.001. Refusal or failure to produce said dog or other animal constitutes a violation of this section and each day of such
refusal or failure shall constitute a separate individual violation.
(1) The animal care manager may authorize a dog or cat owner's request for home quarantine subject to the following requirements:
(A) Secure facilities are available at the owner's home;
(B) The animal has a current vaccination against rabies;
(C) The animal was not a stray or otherwise wandering loose or at-large when the bite occurred;
(D) A licensed veterinarian must examine the dog on the first day and last day of the ten (10) day quarantine period and the animal owner must show
proof that a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog; and
(E) The animal care division must be advised immediately if the dog becomes sick or a change in its condition develops.
(2) If the above requirements are met, home quarantine may only be allowed under the following circumstances:
(A) The owner or owner's spouse or child is the bite victim;
(B) The bite victim is an animal; or
(C) The bite victim or parent or guardian of a minor bite victim agrees to and signs an agreement form allowing home quarantine.
(3) Dogs owned by the city and used actively by the city police department in police work are exempt from the confinement requirements of this section if
the bite incident occurs while the dog is actively involved in police work.
(4) Any person who is the keeper or has custody and control of an animal shall be deemed the owner for purposes of this section. If it is determined by a
veterinarian that an animal shows the clinical signs of the disease of rabies, the animal care manager shall euthanize the animal.
(b) If the animal dies or is euthanized while in quarantine, the animal care manager shall remove the head or brain of the animal and submit it to the nearest department
of state health services for testing. If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal does not show the clinical signs of rabies, the animal care manager shall release it
to the owner following the quarantine period if:
(1) The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the animal; or
(2) The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense.
The owner of an animal that is quarantined under this section shall pay to the animal care division the reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal as
set out herein and the animal care manager may bring suit to collect those costs. The animal care manager shall euthanize an animal that the owner or custodian does not
take possession of on or before the third day following the final day of the quarantine.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 85-77, sec. 1, adopted 8/6/85; Ordinance 92-51, sec. 1, adopted 7/14/92; 1978 Code, sec. 5-30; Ordinance 17-
007, sec. 26, adopted 1/31/17)
State law references–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042; release or disposition of quarantined animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043.
Sec. 4.04.003 Vaccination
Every owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by four (4) months of age. The animal must receive a booster within the twelve (12)
month interval following the initial vaccination and then must be revaccinated against rabies once every three (3) years by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice in the
state. There shall be a fee charged for vaccinations administered at the city animal care facility as provided for in section 4.10.001. Any person moving into the city shall
comply with this section within thirty (30) days after relocation. To prevent improper vaccination of animals against and the accidental exposure of humans to rabies,
killed virus rabies vaccine for animals shall be administered only by or under the direct supervision of a veterinarian who is licensed to practice in the state. (Ordinance
84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 06-048, sec. 3, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-31; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 27, adopted 1/31/17; Ordinance 18-019, sec.
1, adopted 4/24/18)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 4.04.004 Inspecting dog or cat to determine immunization; right of entry therefor
The animal care manager shall have the right at any reasonable time to inspect any dog or cat to determine if such animal is vaccinated as required by this article and shall
have the authority, with a warrant properly issued by a magistrate, to enter any premises for such purpose, and it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to the
animal care manager or to impede, obstruct or exclude the animal care manager when attempting to enter such premises for the purpose of inspecting such dog or cat.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-32; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 28, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.04.005 Tag, certificate from veterinarian required
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat immunized against rabies shall procure a written certificate of vaccination on forms to be provided by a veterinarian giving an
accurate description of the animal, the date of immunization and the name and address of the owner of such dog or cat, the certificate shall be signed by the veterinarian
administering the vaccine. A metal tag will be issued bearing a number corresponding to the number placed on such certificate and with lettering showing immunization,
that tag shall be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat for which it was issued and shall be worn in a conspicuous place on the collar or harness at all times.
The tag issued shall be valid for three (3) years after the date of vaccination of the dog or cat to which issued and shall be nontransferable. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1,
adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-33; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 29, adopted 1/31/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/376
Sec. 4.04.006 Removal of tag prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any metal tag issued under the provisions of this article from any dog or cat without the written consent of the owner of such
animal. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-34; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 30, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.04.007 Proof of vaccination
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any
person charged with enforcement of this article. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-35; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 31, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.04.008 Animals exposed to rabies
Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of having been exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge
to the animal care manager giving him any information which he may require. When any animal is known to have been or is suspected of having been exposed to rabies,
the following rules shall be enforced by the animal care manager:
(1) Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissue shall be:
(A) Euthanized; or
(B) If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal should be immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict
isolation for six (6) months and given a booster vaccination one (1) month prior to release from isolation at the owner's expense.
(2) Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal shall be:
(A) Euthanized; or
(B) If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed vaccinated animal shall be given a booster rabies vaccination and placed in
strict isolation for three (3) months at the owner's expense.
(3) These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is available.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-36; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 32, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.05 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS*
Sec. 4.05.001 Definition; impoundment
(a) A dangerous/vicious animal shall be defined as an animal which:
(1) Has inflicted severe injury or death to a person or bites a person other than the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family, without provocation,
on public or private property;
(2) Has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property;
(3) Has a known or apparent propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or
domestic animals; or
(4) Is trained or harbored for fighting which may be determined based on whether the animal exhibits behavior and/or bears physical scars or injuries which
indicate that the animal has been trained or used for the purpose of fighting.
(b) If an animal acts as stated in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section or is trained or harbored for fighting, the animal care manager shall impound the animal
immediately if it is at-large; or, if it is in the possession of some person, the animal care manager may issue a notice requiring that the animal be taken to a designated
location for impoundment. An animal which is impounded shall not be released until a final determination is made on the disposition of the animal.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 33, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.002 Declaration of a dangerous animal
(a) The animal care manager may declare an animal to be a dangerous animal if the official has sufficient cause to believe that an animal is dangerous as defined under
section 4.05.001(a)(1), (2), (3), (4).
(b) Within five (5) working days of declaring an animal to be a dangerous animal, written notice shall be given to the owner that the animal care manager has
determined that the animal is a dangerous animal. This notice shall also set out the requirements for a dangerous animal which the owner must comply with as set forth in
section 4.05.003. This notice shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event that certified mail, return receipt
requested, cannot be delivered, the animal care manager may then give notice by ordinary mail.
(c) The owner of an animal declared to be dangerous may appeal the determination of the animal care manager to the animal care advisory committee. The request for a
determination hearing must be in writing and must be received by the animal care manager no later than five (5) working days from receipt by the owner of the dangerous
animal declaration. Failure to appeal the declaration within five (5) working days shall result in the animal care manager's declaration becoming final.
(d) If the owner of a dangerous animal cannot be determined after reasonable efforts to do so and after holding the animal for seventy-two (72) hours, the animal may
be euthanized. If the owner of a dangerous animal which has been impounded is known but cannot be located for service of the notice required herein either in person or
by mail, the animal may be euthanized after a reasonable effort has been made to locate such owner. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city to hold the
dangerous animal longer than seventy-two (72) hours because it is unclaimed.
(e) Determination hearing.
(1) Upon written request for a determination hearing by the owner of an animal declared dangerous herein, the animal care manager shall schedule said
hearing. The hearing committee shall be made up of members of the animal care advisory committee. The determination hearing shall be conducted within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request for such hearing. The owner shall be notified of said hearing by first class mail. Failure of the owner to appear at the
determination hearing shall in no way prevent the hearing committee from proceeding with the hearing. A determination of the committee shall be made at the
conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the committee shall be the final administrative determination by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/376
(2) Pending the outcome of the determination hearing, the animal must be securely confined in the animal care facility or at the request of the owner of the
animal, with a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner. The costs of securing said animal at the animal care facility pending the determination hearing
shall be borne by the owner.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.1; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 34, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.003 Requirements for owner of a dangerous animal
(a) No later than fifteen (15) days after an animal is declared dangerous the owner must comply with all of the following requirements before the subject animal can be
released to the owner by the animal care division:
(1) Register the animal as a dangerous animal with the animal care division and pay an annual fee in accordance with section 4.10.001.
(2) Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to
cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a person or for damages to any person's property resulting from the
keeping of such dangerous animal. A certificate of insurance or other evidence of meeting the above requirements shall be filed with the city animal care
division before said dangerous animal shall be returned to the owner if it is being held by the city or a veterinarian.
(3) Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure. The enclosure must have secure sides,
a secure top attached to the sides, and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or else the sides of the structure must be embedded in the ground no
less than two (2) feet. In addition, the secure enclosure must be:
(A) Locked;
(B) Capable of preventing the escape or release of the animal;
(C) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal.
(4) The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a “dangerous animal on the property.” This sign shall be visible and capable of being
read from the public street. In addition, the area where the animal is kept must be kept secure from small children from gaining access.
(5) The dangerous animal, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with
its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
(6) A dangerous animal may not be chained to any object outside the dwelling or locked enclosure either on or off the property of the owner.
(b) If the owner of an animal declared to be dangerous is unable or unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed above at any time, the animal must be
euthanized by the city animal care division or a licensed veterinarian or removed from the city. An animal declared to be dangerous under this chapter shall not be offered
for adoption or sale within the city unless the new owner is willing to comply with the provisions of this article. Transfer of the dangerous animal to a new owner must be
approved by the animal care advisory committee.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.2; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 35, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.004 Reporting significant events
(a) The owner of an animal declared dangerous under the provisions of this article shall report any of the following events within five (5) days to the animal care
manager:
(1) Permanent removal of the animal from the city.
(2) Death of the animal.
(3) The birth of any offspring of the animal, including the number, markings, color and sex.
(4) Change of location within the city.
(b) The owner of an animal declared dangerous under the provisions of this article shall report immediately to the animal care manager the escape of the animal or an
attack or biting of a person or other animal.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.3; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 6, adopted 2/13/07; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 36, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.005 Penalties for violation
Upon conviction the owner of an animal declared to be dangerous herein shall be subject to a fine pursuant to section 1.01.009 of this code for each violation of section
4.05.003 or 4.05.004 of this chapter or for interference with enforcement of this chapter. This penal provision is in addition to any administrative determination by the
animal care manager. (Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; Ordinance 06-048, sec. 3, adopted 8/22/06; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.4; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 7, adopted
2/13/07; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 37, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.006 Notice to law enforcement authorities and victims before euthanasia or disposal of animal involved in fatal or serious injury to persons
(a) No animal known or believed to have inflicted a serious injury or fatality of a person shall be euthanized or disposed of pursuant to section 4.05.002(d), section
4.05.003(b), or any other provision of this chapter, unless and until the city police department, and any other law enforcement authority known or believed to be involved
in an investigation of the incident, has been notified of the intention of the animal care division to euthanize the animal and such law enforcement authorities have been
given a reasonable opportunity to assume custody of the animal should they choose to do so.
(b) No animal known or believed to have inflicted a serious injury or fatality of a person shall be euthanized or disposed of pursuant to section 4.05.002(d), section
4.05.003(b), or any other provision of this chapter, unless and until the victim, the victim's next-of-kin or the victim's legal representative has been notified of the intention
of the animal care division to euthanize the animal and such person given a reasonable opportunity to investigate the animal and gather evidence (such as size and weight
measurements, photographs and videotapes) as they deem appropriate and a reasonable opportunity to secure an order concerning preservation and continuing custody of
the animal as evidence from a court of competent jurisdiction, should they choose to do so.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.5; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 38, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.05.007 Exceptions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/376
(a) No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury or damage caused by the animal was the result of a willful trespass upon another's property, or
the person injured was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of injury unless other
independent grounds exist for such a declaration.
(b) If the sole cause of the attack was that the animal was injured and responding to pain.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
(Ordinance 03-065, sec. 1, adopted 7/29/03; 1978 Code, sec. 5-19.6; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 39, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.06 LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND OTHER ANIMALS*
Sec. 4.06.001 Livestock permitted, number
(a) Definitions.
(1) Fowl. Birds, chickens, turkeys, pheasant, quail, geese, ducks, ostriches, emus, pigeons, or similar feathered animals regardless of age, sex or breed.
(2) Livestock. Any horse, mule, cattle, hog, pig, sheep, goat, or similar animal classified as livestock. For the purposes of this article, micro or mini pigs shall
not be classified as livestock.
(b) General prohibition. It shall be unlawful, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, for any person to keep, possess, or maintain, or permit keeping on any
premises owned by him or under his control, any livestock within the city limits.
(c) Area limitations and maintenance requirements for the keeping of livestock. The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to the following
situations:
(1) Bona fide zoos, stock shows, fairs, animal judging and shows, and circuses.
(2) Bona fide public or private school projects, when conducted upon school property and under faculty supervision.
(3) Facilities owned and used by a licensed veterinarian in connection with his practice of veterinary medicine.
(4) Guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits, chickens, ducks or other animals or fowl of similar size which are kept entirely within an enclosed building, which
building is of such design and material as to retain any noises or odors caused by such animals or fowl.
(5) Livestock which are kept in compliance with the following requirements:
(A) Horses or other equine animals, as a private stable (not for commercial purposes), and other livestock may be kept on tracts of land of not less than
one (1) acre.
(B) Bovine animals may be kept for personal use (not for commercial purposes) on tracts of land of not less than one-half (1/2) acre.
(C) All other livestock (except those listed in section (5)(A)) which are kept as pets for noncommercial purposes, may be kept on tracts of land of not
less than one-half (1/2) acre.
(D) In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections (5)(A), (5)(B), and (5)(C), it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any
livestock within the corporate limits of the city, where there is less than three thousand (3,000) square feet per livestock.
(E) In connection with all of the above-described exceptions, the premises and facilities used for the keeping of animals and fowls authorized to be
kept under any of the provisions of this section must be, kept in a manner as to prevent the emission of odor or noise offensive to persons of ordinary
sensibilities in the residing vicinity or the existence of any nuisance dangerous to the public health. Any premises and facilities used for the keeping of
animals or fowls authorized to be kept under any provision of this section must be approved for such purposes by the animal care manager.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 01-080, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/01; 1978 Code, sec. 5-4; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 2, adopted 2/13/07; Ordinance 17-
007, secs. 40–42, adopted 1/31/17; Ordinance 19-016, secs. 1–2, adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 4.06.002 Minimum distance of livestock and fowl from dwellings, etc.
(a) The keeping on any premises in the city of any livestock not prohibited by section 4.06.001(b) is prohibited unless the pens, stalls, or other facilities for keeping the
same shall be so located that the livestock cannot come within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any dwelling, church, school, hospital or business building owned, used or
maintained by any person other than the keeper of the livestock, or within five hundred (500) feet of any food service establishment or food processing establishment,
regardless of ownership or occupancy of such establishment. A variance in the one hundred fifty (150) feet distance requirement may be granted by the animal care
advisory committee if all property owners who have a dwelling, church, school, hospital or business within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the area within which livestock
are kept give their written consent for such a variance. Such variance shall specify the minimum distance requirement approved and shall not be less than seventy-five
(75) feet.
(b) This provision shall not apply to fowl which are kept in completely enclosed facilities.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 01-080, sec. 2, adopted 10/16/01; 1978 Code, sec. 5-5; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 43, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.003 Noisy animals and fowl prohibited
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to stable or keep any animal or fowl in the city in such manner that
such animal or fowl, by stamping or kicking, braying, bleating, barking, yelping, neighing, crowing or making any other utterance or disturbance, creates such a noise
which disturbs those living in the vicinity. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-6; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 44, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.004 Removal of livestock transport vehicles
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for the owner, operator, agent, or driver of any truck, trailer or other vehicle that has
been used for the hauling of any livestock, animals or fowl, and when same has been parked in or on any highway, street, alley, vacant lots, or tract of land, either public
or private, or in any service station or garage within the city, to fail to move such truck, trailer or other vehicle containing manure or excreta or liquid discharge to a
location which will not disturb the inhabitants of the city by reason of the odor, gases or fumes caused by the contents of such truck, trailer or other vehicle. (Ordinance
84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-7; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 45, adopted 1/31/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/376
Sec. 4.06.005 Unclean animal pens; health nuisances
(a) It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person owning or having charge of any stable, stall, shed, or yard or
appurtenance thereto, in which any horse, cow, or other animal shall be kept, or any place within the city in which manure or liquid discharge of such animal shall collect
and accumulate, to allow such stable, stall, shed, or yard or appurtenance thereto to be kept in other than a clean and sanitary condition, or allow the same to remain in a
condition which would constitute a breeding place for flies; provided nothing in this section shall be so construed as to include manure deposits upon private property for
the purpose of cultivation or to be used as fertilizer.
(b) The maintaining or keeping of all animals within the city shall be allowed only if the presence of noise, flies, mosquitoes, insects, vermin, rodent harborage, odors,
dust, ponded water, accumulation of manure, garbage, refuse or other obnoxious or putrescible material or any other objectionable matter or effect does not cause, create,
contribute to or become a health nuisance.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 01-080, sec. 3, adopted 10/16/01; 1978 Code, sec. 5-8; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 3, adopted 2/13/07; Ordinance 17-
007, sec. 46, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.006 Cows kept by distillers, butchers, etc.
No distiller, butcher, stock dealer, or other person shall collect or keep any cows in a pen, or otherwise confine any cows in the city, so as to create a stench or so as to
become a nuisance. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-9; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 47, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.007 Fowl, rabbit or rodent pens
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to keep or cause to be kept any chickens, geese, ducks, guineas,
pigeons, or rabbits or other rodents in pens or enclosed areas in an unclean condition or in such a manner as to become offensive, producing odors capable of annoying
persons living in the vicinity. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-10; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 48, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.008 Livestock at-large prohibited
It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in charge of any livestock to permit the same to run at-large or to be found unattended in the city. (Ordinance 84-166,
sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-12; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 49, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.009 Confinement of fowl or other birds; impounding
(a) It shall be required of every person owning or having control of any domestic fowl or any other bird to keep the same confined within his own premises, and it shall
be unlawful for any person within the city to suffer, permit or allow any domestic fowl or any other bird which he may own or have the charge of to go or be found upon
any street or other public place of the city or upon the premises of another without the consent of the owner or the person in charge of the premises upon which such
domestic fowl or other bird may be found.
(b) It shall be the duty of the animal care manager to take up any domestic fowl or other bird found at-large and confine such domestic fowl or bird in the city animal
care facility for seventy-two (72) hours. If the owner of a domestic fowl impounded fails to claim such fowl within seventy-two (72) hours, it shall be the duty of the
animal care manager, at his discretion, to euthanize or to find an appropriate adopter to adopt the confined fowl or bird, as authorized by the Texas Health & Safety Code.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-13; Ordinance 07-014, sec. 4, adopted 2/13/07; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 50, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.010 Impounding fee for fowl
The city shall collect from the owner or other person to whom impounded domestic fowl or other bird or birds are delivered an impounding fee as provided in section
4.10.001 for the period of time the domesticated fowl or other bird or birds remains in the possession and custody of the animal care division. (Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1,
adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-14; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 51, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.011 Wild animals; definitions and restrictions on keeping
(a) For the purposes of this article, the term “wild animal” shall mean any nondomesticated or dangerous wild animal, including wolf, lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar,
leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote, jackal, baboon, chimpanzee, orangutan, gorilla, or any hybrid of these listed.
(b) No wild animals may be kept within the city; provided, however, wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions in
accordance with all laws and regulations.
(Ordinance 84-166, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; 1978 Code, sec. 5-11; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 52, adopted 1/31/17)
Sec. 4.06.012 Snakes within the city; regulation
(a) It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Own, harbor, possess, sell, breed, or transport any venomous snakes or reptiles within the city limits.
(2) To release a nonindigenous species of snake into the wild:
(3) To own, harbor, or possess more than four (4) boa constrictors at one residence within the city limits.
(b) Persons found to be in violation of this section shall be assessed a fine up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Exceptions to this code would be zoos, circuses, or
any other entity that is permitted by the city.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 53, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.07 EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS
Sec. 4.07.001 Generally; permit required
(a) “Animal exhibition” shall refer to a circus, carnival, petting zoo or event owning or maintaining animals for the purposes of displaying or performing in exhibitions
of temporary duration not to exceed thirty (30) days, where attendance of the general public is solicited.
(b) An animal exhibition permit shall be granted under the following conditions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/376
(1) No less than fourteen (14) days before the event is to take place, the owner exhibitor shall apply for an animal exhibition permit from the city's animal
care division.
(2) A one-time permit application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed and paid in full before the event.
(3) On a day agreed upon by the animal care manager and the event coordinator, the animal care manager will inspect all animals that will be shown, held or
demonstrated pursuant to the animal exhibition permit. The animal exhibition permit shall specify all the items that will be inspected by the animal care
manager. Issues arising as a result of the inspection process will be handled at the discretion of the animal care manager.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 54, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.08 EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AUTHORIZED
Sec. 4.08.001 Medical care
(a) The animal care division shall have the authority to administer emergency medical treatment to any at-large, astray, surrendered, or impounded animal.
(b) Costs incurred by the animal care division as the result of treatment given in accordance with subsection (a) above shall be the responsibility of the animal owner.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 55, adopted 1/31/17)
ARTICLE 4.09 TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN
Sec 4.09.001 Definitions
Ear tipped. A surgical process performed on a cat during sterilization as part of a trap, neuter, return (TNR) program in which a diagonal cut is made on the left ear to
remove the point of a cat's ear.
Feral cat. Any homeless, wild or untamed cat.
Feral cat caretaker. A person who participates in a trap, neuter, return (TNR) program by providing care, including food, shelter, and/or medical care to feral cats.
Feral cat colony. A concentrated group or population of feral cats having a common food source.
Trap, neuter, return (TNR). A program in which feral cats are trapped, vaccinated, sterilized, and ear tipped (for identification purposes) and returned to the location where
they were originally trapped.
(Ordinance 18-036, sec. 1, adopted 7/3/18)
Sec 4.09.002 Feral cat colony registration
A feral cat caretaker who manages a feral cat colony with nine (9) or more cats shall be required to register the colony with the animal care manager, but shall not be
required to obtain a commercial kennel permit or a dog and cat fancier permit. This registration will serve as a clearinghouse for information on current caretakers,
education for new caretakers, and assistance with abating nuisance complaints. (Ordinance 18-036, sec. 1, adopted 7/3/18)
Sec 4.09.003 At-large and abandoned cats
(a) Any cat(s) participating in a TNR program shall not be considered to be at large and shall not be impounded, unless they are causing a nuisance as defined in section
4.01.003 or are dangerous as defined in section 4.05.001. Feral cats impounded on a nuisance complaint may be relocated to another feral cat colony, transferred to a barn
cat program, returned to a feral cat caretaker, humanely euthanized, or the nuisance may be abated by some other manner as determined by the animal care manager.
(b) A feral cat caretaker who returns a feral cat to its original location as part of a TNR program is not deemed to have abandoned or dumped the animal as those terms
are used in section 4.02.003.
(Ordinance 18-036, sec. 1, adopted 7/3/18)
Sec. 4.09.004 Feral cat ownership
A feral cat caretaker who manages cats as part of a TNR program shall not be considered the owner, harborer, keeper, holder, or possessor of such cats. (Ordinance 18-
036, sec. 1, adopted 7/3/18)
ARTICLE 4.10 ANIMAL CARE FEES
Sec. 4.10.001 Fees
(a) Reclaim fee:
(1) Reclaim fee: $45.00 per occurrence.
(2) Individuals will also be charged a “rabies vaccination fee: for any reclaimed animal that is not vaccinated against rabies.
(3) Reclaim fees may be waived at the discretion of the city manager.
(b) Rabies vaccination fees: $10.00.
(c) Preventative health vaccination: $15.00.
(d) FIV/feline leukemia virus test: $15.00.
(e) Heartworm test: $15.00.
(f) Boarding: $15.00 per day.
(g) Dead animal removal fee for veterinarians:
(1) Trip fee: $40.00 for one (1) animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/376
(2) Trip fee: $10.00 per animal in excess of one (1).
(h) Kennel permit fee: $75.00 per year.
(i) Dog and cat fanciers permit:
(1) New permit: $200.00.
(2) Renewal permit: $50.00.
(j) Trap rental fee (shall consist of an administrative fee and refundable usage fee):
(1) Administrative fee: $10.00.
(2) Refundable usage fee: $90.00.
(3) Special rates: The city manager may waive trap rental fees as circumstances warrant.
(k) Adoption fees:
(1) Unaltered adult animals:
(A) Cats: $70.00.
(B) Dogs: $70.00.
(2) Altered or underage animals or heartworm positive dogs:
(A) Cats: $30.00.
(B) Dogs: $30.00.
(3) All animals other than dogs and cats; $20.00.
(4) Adoption fees may be waived or modified at the discretion of the city manager.
(l) Microchipping: $15.00 per animal.
(1) The city manager may waive microchipping fees as circumstances warrant.
(m) Animal surrender fees (city residents only):
(1) Cats: $50.00.
(2) Dogs: $50.00.
(n) Dangerous animal registration: $125.00 per year.
(o) Animal exhibition permit fee: $75.00.
(Ordinance 17-007, sec. 56, adopted 1/31/17; Ordinance 17-076 adopted 12/12/17; Ordinance 18-019, sec. 2, adopted 4/24/18; Ordinance 18-036, sec. 2, adopted 7/3/18;
Ordinance 18-049 adopted 9/11/18)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.02.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/376
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a
stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. (Recorded messages to any police or fire station are prohibited by law.)
Alarm site. The specific property served by an alarm system that is under the control of one (1) owner, tenant or lessor.
Alarm system. Any electrical, mechanical, or electronic device or assembly of equipment that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would
reasonably be expected to summon, by direct or indirect means, the aid of the police services of the city. For purposes of this article, the following types of alarm systems
are exempted:
(1) An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site;
(2) An alarm system designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises which does not have a local alarm;
(3) An alarm system installed upon premises occupied by the United States government, or the state government when they occupy property owned by the
state;
(4) Any alarm system designed solely to detect or give notice of fire or smoke; and
(5) Any communication device not designed solely for alarm notification.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or the designated representative of the chief of police.
City manager. The city manager or the designated representative of the city manager.
False alarm. An alarm notification to which the city responds within thirty minutes and the responding officer of a subsequent investigation finds no evidence of
unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion, or other illegal activity for which the alarm was intended to report.
Master alarm permit. A permit issued to the owner or property manager of a residential apartment complex which provides an alarm system operated in one (1) or more
of the individual residential units. The fees for a master alarm permit shall be the same as those for an alarm permit.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, or association, organization or any legal entity.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-11; Ordinance 12-086, sec. 1, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.002 Nonresponse status
The police department will not respond to a permitted alarm site if the permit holder fails to pay a false alarm penalty within 21 days of notice of same. A location may be
reinstated to a response status upon payment of all unpaid penalties and a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for a residential location or a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee for a
commercial location. (Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-12; Ordinance 07-012, sec. 1, adopted
2/6/07; Ordinance 12-086, sec. 2, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.003 Apartment complexes
(a) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex which provides alarm services shall obtain a master alarm permit if any alarm system is operated on the
premises.
(b) A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain a permit before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in his residential unit.
(c) The permit of the tenant supersedes the master permit of the apartment complex, and the tenant is responsible for payment of fees for false alarm notifications
emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's unit. The master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of service fees for false alarm notifications emitted from
unoccupied units.
(d) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the
apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment areas.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-18; Ordinance 12-086, sec. 3, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.004 Policies and procedures
(a) The chief of police shall institute policies and procedures to implement this article.
(b) The chief of police shall publish standards of operation for alarm systems. Each permit holder will be provided copies of these standards and all changes thereto.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-19)
Sec. 6.02.005 Police response
(a) The response, if any, made to a signal from a permitted alarm system shall be subject to the policies and procedures of the police department and will be in
accordance with the priorities set for police response.
(b) The issuance of a permit authorizing the use of an alarm system is not intended to nor shall it create a contract, either express or implied, nor does it create a duty or
guarantee of response by the police department. Any and all liability and consequential damages resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed
and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-20)
Sec. 6.02.006 Operation and maintenance of alarm systems
(a) A permit holder shall:
(1) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/376
(3) Respond or cause a representative to respond within one (1) hour when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm system for any reason other than occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
(b) A permit holder of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than fifteen (15)
minutes after being activated.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-21)
Sec. 6.02.007 Violations
No person shall operate, cause to be operated or allow the operation of an alarm system:
(1) Without a permit issued under the provisions of this article;
(2) Without being in compliance with the procedures and provisions of this article; or
(3) That automatically dials the 911 emergency communications system.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-22)
Sec. 6.02.008 Penalty
(a) The failure to comply with the provisions of this article is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon first conviction, and not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon second and subsequent convictions. A person who violates
a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed or continued.
(b) For the purposes of this article a conviction is a finding of guilty or the defendant's placement on deferred disposition, deferred adjudication, or probation by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(c) During the permit period, a thirty dollar ($30.00) penalty will be charged for the fourth and fifth false alarm, a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty will be charged for the
sixth and seventh false alarm, and a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) penalty will be charged for each subsequent false alarm.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-23; Ordinance 07-012, sec. 6, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 12-
086, sec. 4, adopted 10/30/12)
Secs. 6.02.009–6.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.02.041 Application; term
(a) An application for a permit shall be made by a person who owns, leases, resides at, or manages the alarm site.
(b) The application shall be submitted with a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee for a residential location or a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for a commercial location to the city
on a form provided by the city. Any false statement made by an applicant on the application may be prosecuted as a violation of section 37.10 of the Texas Penal Code
(tampering with governmental record), a third degree felony.
(c) An alarm permit is issued to an individual or corporate entity and is nontransferable and nonrefundable.
(d) A permit shall be issued for a one-year term beginning on the date of issuance.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; Ordinance 00-25, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/00; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-13; Ordinance 07-
012, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 12-086, sec. 5, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.042 Revocation
The chief of police shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that:
(1) There was a false statement made in the application for a permit.
(2) Any false oral statement was made by the applicant in connection with the permit application.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-14)
Sec. 6.02.043 Grounds for denial
A permit may be denied for:
(1) Any false statement on the application;
(2) Any false statement by the applicant in connection with the application; or
(3) Any unpaid false alarm penalties or fees.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 97-65, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/97; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-15; Ordinance 07-012, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 12-
086, sec. 6, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.044 Renewal
An application to renew a permit shall be submitted to the city with a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee for a residential location or a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee for a
commercial location, along with full payment of all outstanding penalties and fees, on or before the expiration date on the permit. Effective January 1, 2014, the renewal
fee for a residential location shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for a commercial location, along with full payment of all outstanding
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/376
penalties and fees, on or before the expiration date on the permit. (Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; Ordinance 00-25, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/00; 1978 Code, sec. 2
1/2-16; Ordinance 07-012, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/07; Ordinance 12-086, sec. 7, adopted 10/30/12)
Sec. 6.02.045 Appeal from denial or revocation
(a) If the chief of police refuses to issue a permit or revokes a permit, the chief shall notify the applicant or holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the
reasons for the denial or revocation. The applicant or holder may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the chief of police. This notice setting forth the
reasons for appeal must be received within ten (10) calendar days of the date of receipt of the notice of revocation or denial. The receipt of the notice of appeal will stay
the revocation of the permit. If the notice of appeal is not timely, the revocation or denial is final.
(b) The city manager will designate a hearings officer to hear the appeal. At the hearing the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearings officer shall make his
decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. The hearings officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. The
hearings officer may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearings officer is final.
(c) When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice marked “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of
the notice is not affected and the notice is considered delivered.
(Ordinance 95-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/95; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/2-17; Ordinance 07-012, sec. 5, adopted 2/6/07)
ARTICLE 6.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Applicant. A person that submits an original or renewal application for a permit. The applicant is the intended person in charge of the establishment.
Chief building official. The chief building official for the city or the designated representative of the chief building official.
Church. A building, in possession of a certificate of occupancy, in which persons regularly assemble for purposes of religious worship, intended primarily for purposes
connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Beaumont or the designated representative of the city manager.
Establishment. The intended site for which the permit will be issued.
Fire chief. The chief of the city fire department or the designated representative of the chief of the fire department.
Permit. A current, valid permit issued by the city manager pursuant to the terms of this article to an applicant.
Permit holder. A person how has been issued a permit pursuant to this article.
Person. A natural person or association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, or employee of any of
them.
Police chief. The chief of the city police department or the designated representative of the chief of the police department.
Public health director. The public health director for the public health department for the city or the designated representative of the public health director.
School. A building, in possession of a certificate of occupancy, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the
playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to:
(1) Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades 1 through 12 classes are taught; and
(2) Special education facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes
in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.002 Prohibited locations
(a) Except as otherwise provided by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic
beverages where the establishment or place of business of any dealer is:
(1) Within three hundred (300) feet of a church or public or private school;
(2) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public school or a private school if the governing body of the city receives a request from the governing body of
the private school or from the board of trustees of the school district under section 38.007, Education Code; or
(3) Within 1000 feet of a day care center or child care facility, as those terms are defined by section 42.002 of the Texas Human Resources Code.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church, public or private school, day care center, or child
care facility shall be determined as described in sections 109.33 and 109.331 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
State law references–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33; sales near day-care center or child-care facility, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec.
109.331.
Sec. 6.03.003 Hours of operation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/376
(a) The city is hereby designated as an “extended (late) hours area,” and the times permitted for consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages defined by section
105.06 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, are hereby adopted and made effective in the city.
(b) The hours prescribed by section 105.05 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, for the sale of beer are hereby adopted and made effective in the city.
(c) The hours prescribed by section 105.03 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, for the sale of mixed beverages are hereby adopted and made effective
in the city.
(d) It shall be unlawful for holders of package store permits as provided in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code to sell, offer for sale, or deliver any liquor:
(1) Between 9:00 p.m. of any day and 10:00 a.m. of the following day;
(2) On Sunday;
(3) On New Year's Day;
(4) On July fourth;
(5) On Labor Day;
(6) On Thanksgiving Day;
(7) On Christmas Day;
(8) On the following Monday when Christmas Day or New Year's Day falls on a Sunday.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.004 Violation of existing laws not authorized
Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize the sale, offer to sell, or delivery of any liquor which is illegal or in violation
of any ordinance of the city, any section of the Penal Code of this state, or the Constitution of this state. (Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.005 Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of an establishment not to maintain and display a valid permit issued by the city.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by this section, if it be shown that a person has violated this article, upon conviction, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(c) Upon a second conviction of a violation of this article, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
(d) Any violation charged pursuant to this section shall be independent of, and may be in addition, to any administrative penalties which may be imposed regarding the
suspension, revocation or denial of any permit granted under this article.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.006 Injunctions
(a) In addition to the fines and penalties provided in this article, if it appears that a person has violated or is violating or is threatening to violate any provision of this
article, the city attorney may institute a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain the person from continuing the violation or threat of
violation.
(b) On application for injunctive relief and a finding that a person is violating or threatening to violate any provision of this article, the court shall grant such injunctive
relief as the facts may warrant.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.007 Strict enforcement
All law enforcement personnel, inspectors, and other designated city personnel shall carry out the provisions of this article and may issue citations for violations of this
article. All law enforcement personnel, inspectors, and other designated city personnel shall strictly enforce and prosecute the provisions of this article, and court officials
shall see that this article receives strict interpretation and adjudication in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Secs. 6.03.008–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 6.03.031 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to do the following in an establishment without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to this article by the city:
(1) Manufacture, distill, brew, sell, possess, import into this state, export from this state, transport, distribute, warehouse, or store any liquor or alcoholic
beverage;
(2) Solicit or take orders for any liquor or alcoholic beverage; or
(3) Bottle, rectify, blend, treat, fortify, mix or process any liquor or alcoholic beverage.
(b) A permit issued under this article is non-transferable and non-refundable.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.032 Display
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/376
It shall be unlawful for any person required to obtain a permit hereunder to fail to keep the same displayed in a conspicuous place at or near the principal public entrance
in the establishment for which it was issued. (Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.033 Application; term
(a) A permit issued under this article does not vest any property rights in the applicant or permit holder.
(b) All permits, excluding mixed beverages and late beverages, shall be valid for a two (2) year period starting from the date of issuance.
(c) Permits for mixed beverages and late beverages shall be valid for a three (3) year period and upon renewal shall be valid for a two (2) year period.
(d) The application for permit shall be submitted with the prescribed fee as outlined in the fee schedule. The application must be completed for each location sought to
be permitted. The following information is required in the application:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, including the trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of the proposed
establishment, and if incorporated, the name registered with the Secretary of State;
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the person(s) in charge of the establishment to be permitted;
(3) Whether a previous permit of the applicant has been revoked within three (3) years of filing of the application; and
(5) Proof of a valid state permit.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.034 Renewal
(a) An application for renewal must be submitted thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the existing permit to the city manager on a form provided by the city for
such purpose.
(b) The renewal application must be submitted with the prescribed fee not to exceed one-half the state fee.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 16-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/29/16)
Sec. 6.03.035 Grounds for denial or revocation
The city manager shall refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of a permit or shall revoke a permit for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a permit or renewal of a permit.
(2) Revocation of a permit; pursuant to this article, of the applicant or corporate officer of the applicant within three (3) years preceding the filing of the
application.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.036 Appeal from denial or revocation
If the city manager denies, refuses to approve the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit to an applicant, or revokes a permit issued under this article, this action is
final unless the applicant or permit holder, within ten (10) days after the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal to the city council by delivering said
notice to the city clerk setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The city council shall either hear the appeal or select a hearing officer to preside over the appeal
hearing. The city council or hearing officer shall within fourteen (14) days of the notice of appeal grant a hearing to consider the action. The city council and hearing
officer have the authority to sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The decision of either the city council or hearing officer is final. (Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1,
adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.037 Transfer of permit
(a) A permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be specific to the establishment site and personal to the permit holder thereof and shall not be transferable or
assignable.
(b) A separate permit is required for each establishment.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.038 Replacement permits
(a) A replacement permit shall be issued to the original applicant for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated after a written application is submitted with a fee of fifteen dollars
($15.00) to the city manager on a form provided by the city for such purpose.
(b) A replacement permit shall bear the same expiration date as the one it replaces.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.039 Occupation tax; permit fees
(a) There are hereby prescribed and levied occupation taxes or permit fees upon persons carrying on the business of manufacturing, distributing or dealing in alcoholic
beverages, as described in this article, in an amount not to exceed one-half of the taxes or fees levied upon such business by the state.
(b) The holder of a state retail dealer's on-premises late hours license shall pay to the city, before exercising any privilege by virtue of such late hours license, a fee not
to exceed one-half of the state fee for such late hours license.
(c) All taxes or fees for each place of business shall be paid in advance in compliance with the fee schedules authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/376
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic
Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 6.03.040 Inspections; compliance
(a) The establishment shall conform to all zoning ordinances, building codes, health and sanitization codes and fire prevention codes of the city and comply with all
federal, state and local ordinances and regulations relevant to the sale, manufacturing, or distributing of alcoholic beverages.
(b) The police chief, the fire chief, the chief building official, and public health director shall have the right to immediate access to enter and inspect all manufacturing,
distributing, and retailing establishments in possession of alcoholic beverages.
(c) Any person who does not allow immediate access to the establishment for the purpose of inspection commits an offense.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.041 Responsibility of permit holder
(a) The permit holder shall within fourteen (14) days of the effective date notify the city manager in writing of any changes to information submitted in the application.
(b) Failure to notify the city manager of changes may result in the revocation of the establishment's permit or the denial of the permit renewal.
(c) The permit holder shall within fourteen (14) days of the effective date notify the city manager of the establishment's closure.
(Ordinance 14-060, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14)
ARTICLE 6.04 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.04.001 Purpose and findings
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and
to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(b) Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult sexually oriented businesses on the community presented in hearings and workshops
and in reports made available to the council and on studies in other communities, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston,
Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma; and Cleveland, Ohio, the council finds:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses may lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that presently are sometimes uncontrolled by the
managers of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for certain activities that
occur on their premises.
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this article as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of
illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, may easily occur at sexually oriented businesses which provide private or semi-private booths
or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which may create unhealthy conditions.
(5) Many communicable diseases may be spread by activities which may occur in sexually oriented businesses.
(6) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
(7) The findings noted in subsections (1) through (6) raise substantial governmental concerns.
(8) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental
concerns.
(9) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the managers of the
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the managers to see that the sexually oriented
business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city.
(10) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity which may occur in such booths.
(11) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the
incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(12) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, may aid in preventing the spread
of sexually transmitted diseases.
(13) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may
engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
(14) The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee license has been convicted of a sexually related crime
leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/376
(15) The barring of such individuals from the management of or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(16) The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article.
(17) Sexually oriented businesses can exert negative influences on churches, schools and day care centers, and have negative effects on property values, can
contribute to increased criminal activities in surrounding areas, and can exert the same types of negative community influences on other forms of land usage,
such as public buildings and parks, that were not previously addressed in the prior ordinance.
(18) The offenses listed under specified criminal activity which may serve as grounds for denial, revocation or refusal of a license under this article are
offenses which relate to or bear on the management or operation of a sexually oriented business or employment in a sexually oriented business. The specified
criminal activity offenses would also be directly related to the fitness of an individual to receive a license as a sexually oriented business employee.
Accordingly, the specified criminal activity offenses are directly related to the duties and the responsibilities which may be authorized by a license issued under
this article. Accordingly, there is a serious need to protect members of the public and fellow employees of sexually oriented business enterprises from persons
who have committed the specified criminal activity offenses outlined in this article.
(19) Persons who hold or apply for sexually oriented business or business employee licenses under this article should be subject to a verification that they
have not either pled guilty or been convicted of any of the offenses noted under the definition for specified criminal activity.
(20) The provisions of the prior ordinance were insufficient regarding “booths” to properly address the issues associated with casual sexual activity that may
facilitate the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, criminal activities including lewd conduct, indecent exposure, etc., or other activities detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the public and therefore determines that there is a need to provide for the monitoring of activities in facilities which offer either
live entertainment or films, movies, videocassettes, video reproductions, video laser discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and therefore provides in this article provisions requiring that areas where
such activities occur be fully visible to and monitored by management employees of such sexually oriented businesses to ensure that the activities in the
building are in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(21) Instituting distance requirements as they address the location of sexually oriented businesses or the conduct of licensed employees is reasonable and
necessary to provide protection to the community from the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented business and may be done without depriving such
businesses of adequate opportunities to locate within the city or licensed employees from engaging in protected activities.
(22) The city council finds that the provisions of this article as they relate to signage requirements are proper subjects for city control and that the failure to
control signage related to sexually oriented businesses may have a negative secondary effect on the community, that the signage requirements would serve to
reduce the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses upon the community, that the signage requirements would not deprive such businesses of
adequate opportunity to provide notice to the public of their location and business, and that the requirement would further act to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-81)
Sec. 6.04.002 Definitions
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or, for any form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
(5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time on the premises, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore. A commercial establishment which, as one of its primary businesses, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the
following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that features:
(1) Persons who appear in a totally nude or semi-nude condition, or in a state of nudity;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult mini-theater. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or, for any form of consideration, electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disk players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to more than five (5) but less than one hundred (100) persons per machine at any one time on the premises, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult mini-theater shall not include any conventional motion
picture screen or projection area designed to be viewed in a room containing tiers or rows of seats with a viewer seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; [and] provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined in this article;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Adult motion picture theater. An establishment, containing a room with tiers or rows of seats facing a screen, or projection area, which offers, as one of its primary
businesses, the exhibition to customers of motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and which are
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult novelty store. A commercial establishment which, as one of its primary businesses, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following: instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/376
Adult video store. A commercial establishment which, as one of its primary businesses, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the
following: films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, video or laser disks, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Applicant. The person submitting the application for a sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee license. If applicable, this includes a designated
agent of the applicant and all persons who hold a five (5) percent or greater interest in the business.
Child care facility. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for
more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the
facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
Church. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with
such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
City. The City of Beaumont or a person designated to act on behalf of the city by the city manager.
City council. The elected mayor and councilmembers meeting with a quorum present after proper notice as required by state law.
Conspicuous place. A location within the sexually oriented business, near its entrance and lighted such that material posted there can be read from a distance of three (3)
feet.
Convicted. A judicial conviction, deferred prosecution, deferred adjudication, or probation, and shall include any of these which are on appeal.
Customer. Any person who:
(1) Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee, membership
fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity;
(2) Enters a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered therein; or
(3) Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private or membership club or a sexually oriented business that
reserves any portion of the premises of the sexually oriented business as a private or membership club.
Employee. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid or receives a salary, wage, tips, or other compensation by the
manager or customers of said business. By way of example, rather than limitation, the terms includes the operator and other management personnel, clerks, dancers,
models and other entertainers, food and beverage preparation and service personnel, door persons, bouncers, and cashiers. It is expressly intended that this definition cover
not only conventional employer-employee relationships but also independent contractor relationships, agency relationships, and any other scheme or system whereby the
“employee” has an expectation of receiving compensation, tips, or other benefits from the sexually oriented business or its customers in exchange for services performed.
Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to
the premises, and specifically does not include part-time maid services and lawn services.
Entertainer. Any employee of a sexually oriented business who performs or engages in entertainment.
Entertainment. Any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, fashion show, modeling performance, pantomime, role playing, encounter session, scene,
song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, that involves the display or exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term “entertainment”
shall include any employee or entertainer exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities whenever in the presence of customers.
Escort. An individual who, for consideration, agrees or offers to privately model, dance or similarly perform for another person, or to act as a private companion, guide or
date for another person and offers a service intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Escort agency. A business that, for consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes and offers a service
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Hearings officer. An attorney licensed by the supreme court of the state who is not an employee of the city.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as every individual listed as an applicant on the application for
a license; and, in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
Managing/operating. Control of the sexually oriented business, i.e., making operational or management decisions concerning the sexually oriented business. The person
making these decisions may be referred to as an operator or manager.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, or in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas, is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. “Nude model studio” shall not
include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university
which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
in a structure:
(1) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing;
(2) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
(3) Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Nude, nudity or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering,
or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Primary business. A commercial establishment may have other primary business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long
as one (1) of its primary business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/376
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purpose of this article, a primary business purpose is one which would generate at least ten (10) percent
of the gross revenue of the commercial enterprise from sexually oriented business activities.
Public building. A building used by federal, state, or local government that is open to the general public.
Public park. A publicly owned or leased tract of land, whether situated in the city or not, designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained and operated for use by the general
public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes by the city or any political subdivision of the state and containing improvements, pathways, access or facilities
intended for public recreational use. The term “public park” shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, esplanades, traffic circles, easements or traffic
triangles unless such tracts or areas contain and provide improvements or access to a recreational or leisure use by the public.
School. A building, whether situated within the city or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with the playgrounds,
stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to:
(1) Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades 1 through 12 classes are taught; and
(2) Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular
classes in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12.
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition. The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male
or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult mini-theater, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or other commercial enterprise, including parking lots and other areas used in the
operation of the sexually oriented business, where one of the primary businesses is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other
items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Sign. Any display, design, pictorial, or other representation, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner
whatsoever so that the same is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and that is sited to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or
merchandise available at such sexually oriented business, specifically including signs not located on the premises of the sexually oriented business. The term “sign” shall
also include such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business as well as such representations painted on or
otherwise affixed to any part of the property upon which such a sexually oriented business is situated.
Specific anatomical areas.
(1) The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;
(2) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
(3) Any combination of the foregoing.
Specified criminal activity. Any of the following offenses:
(1) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of harmful
material to a minor, sexual performance by a child, or possession of child pornography as described in chapter 43 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal
Code;
(2) Public lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child as described in chapter 21 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal Code;
(3) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in chapter 22 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal Code;
(4) Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal Code;
(5) Gambling, gambling promotion, keeping a gambling place, communicating gambling information, possession of gambling devices or equipment, or
possession of gambling paraphernalia as described in chapter 47 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal Code;
(6) Forgery, credit card abuse or commercial bribery as described in chapter 32 or bribery as described in chapter 36 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal
Code;
(7) A criminal offense described in chapter 481, subchapter D, or chapter 483, subchapter C, or successor statutes of the Health and Safety Code;
(8) A criminal offense as described in chapter 34 or successor statutes of the Texas Penal Code;
(9) A criminal offense defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code which occurred at any time in the scope of employment at a sexually oriented business
or any offense involving the use of alcohol except minor in possession and public intoxication convictions which do not exceed one (1) within a three-year
period;
(10) Any misdemeanor or felony offense associated with or related to the operation of a sexually oriented business or conduct by the holder of a sexually
oriented business employee license in the scope of employment at a sexually oriented business;
(11) Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or any other offense in another state or under federal statutes that,
if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the aforementioned offenses; or
(12) A violation of the provisions of this article.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether clothed or nude;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/376
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
(3) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above; or
(4) Any combination of the foregoing.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, receivership, bankruptcy, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or
other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-82; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 4, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.04.003 Discrimination
No sexually oriented business shall prohibit entry to the licensed premises based on race, sex, religion or national origin. (Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978
Code, sec. 7-98)
Sec. 6.04.004 Injunction
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of this article is subject to a suit for any injunction as
well as prosecution for criminal violations. (Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-99)
Sec. 6.04.005 Penalty
(a) The intentional, knowing, or reckless violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or declared to be unlawful
or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as provided by section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code or any
successor statute. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as provided by section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each
day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense.
(b) The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty, and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the
revocation or suspension of a permit.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-100)
Sec. 6.04.006 Notice
(a) Any notice required to be given by the city or any agent/employee of the city under these regulations to any application or sexually oriented business applicant,
licensee, operator or employee may be given by personal delivery or by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the
application for the sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee application or the most recent notice of address change.
(b) Mailed notice shall be deemed served three (3) days after deposit in the United States mail.
(c) In the event that notice given by mail is returned by the postal service as undeliverable, it shall be presumed that the sexually oriented business or employee did not
comply with the affirmative duty to notify the city clerk and police chief of any change of address, unless the sexually oriented business or employee can show there was
error on the part of the post office, and:
(1) In the case of notice in connection with a sexually oriented business, the police chief may have the notice posted at the entrance to the sexually oriented
business; or
(2) In the case of notice in connection with a sexually oriented business employee license, the police chief shall suspend the sexually oriented business
employee license until the applicant/holder contacts the city clerk and police chief with a current address. A licensee that conducts business or acts as an
employee under a suspended license pursuant to this section shall be in violation each and every day that she/he conducts business in the city.
(d) When notice is required to the city, city clerk, or police chief, such notice may be delivered and provided in person or by certified mail.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-101)
Sec. 6.04.007 Employee records
(a) A sexually oriented business has the duty to keep the following information on file on-site for each person employed at the sexually oriented business:
(1) The full legal name, professional or performing names and any other names used by the employee;
(2) A photocopy of the employee's valid driver's license or state department of public safety identification card and their sexually oriented business
employee license;
(3) The current address and telephone number of the employee;
(4) Employee's height, weight, eye color and natural hair color;
(5) A photograph of the employee taken within one (1) month immediately preceding the date of employment and updated every year; and
(6) A description of the capacity in which the employee is employed.
(b) The sexually oriented business has the duty to maintain and make available these records for inspection by the police, city attorney, or their designees. The city
attorney shall prepare and the city clerk shall provide a standard format for these records. These records shall include a time record reflecting the times and dates each
employee worked. Time records shall be available for inspection by the police, city attorney, or their designees on-site during the hours of operation of the sexually
oriented business for thirty (30) days. These records shall be retained for at least a period of two (2) years from creation. Upon written request, the sexually oriented
business has a duty to provide a copy of the records to the police, the city clerk, the city attorney or the city manager within seven (7) business days of the request.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/376
(c) Any employee who provides false information to any sexually oriented business pursuant to this section violates these regulations.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-102)
Sec. 6.04.008 Signage
(a) Notwithstanding section 28.04.003 of the Code of Ordinances or any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the licensee or
operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than one (1) primary sign
and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein.
(b) Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall:
(1) Not contain any flashing lights;
(2) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(3) Not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area; and
(4) Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
(c) Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only:
(1) The name of the sexually oriented business; and/or
(2) One (1) or more of the following phrases:
(A) “Adult bookstore”;
(B) “Adult motion picture theater”;
(C) “Adult video store”;
(D) “Adult cabaret”;
(E) “Adult motel”;
(F) “Adult novelty store”;
(G) “Adult theater”;
(H) “Adult arcade”;
(I) “Adult mini-theater”;
(J) “Nude model studio”;
(K) “Sexual encounter center”; or
(L) “Gentlemen's club”.
(3) Primary signs for adult motion picture theaters may contain the additional phrase, “Movie Titles Posted on Premises.”
(d) Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of a solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such
lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
(e) Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall:
(1) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(2) Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
(3) Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
(4) Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the sexually oriented business.
(f) The provisions of subsection (b)(1) and subsections (c) and (d) shall also apply to secondary signs.
(g) Any sign located on the premises of a commercial multi-unit center containing a sexually oriented business that displays the name, or any portion of the name, of the
sexually oriented business, or any name under which any sexually oriented business was formerly operated on the premises, or that contains any of the terms set forth in
subsection (c)(2) or any other terminology that is commonly used to identify or is associated with the presence of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all
restrictions of this section. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the use of signage identifying the commercial multi-tenant center itself from being used as a
subterfuge to evade the restrictions on sexually oriented business signs set forth in this section.
(h) The signage requirements and restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to fixed and permanent signs in place at licensed sexually oriented businesses on
the date this ordinance is adopted. If a sign is destroyed, it may be replaced. Any new signs or modifications of signs in place on the date this ordinance is adopted shall
meet the requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-103)
Sec. 6.04.009 Operating requirements
(a) The following shall be unlawful at a sexually oriented business:
(1) For any person to be nude in premises licensed hereunder, unless performing in accordance with subsection (5) below. Private rooms at adult motels,
public restrooms, and employees' designated dressing rooms that are not visible or accessible to patrons are excepted from this prohibition;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/376
(2) For any employee, licensee, operator, or manager to allow any patron to be in a state of nudity or a semi-nude condition at a premises licensed hereunder;
(3) For any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, duplicate or alter a license issued hereunder;
(4) For any person to offer or accept any gratuity at a sexually oriented business unless it is done pursuant to this subsection; specifically, gratuities being
offered to any person performing nude or semi-nude must be placed in a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities or delivered hand-to-hand. If the gratuity
is delivered hand-to-hand, the entertainer and the customer may not touch and the hand of each shall be extended at least one (1) foot from their torsos. A
receptacle may not be located on any person or their clothing;
(5) For any person performing nude at an enterprise to do so less than six (6) feet from the nearest patron and on a stage less than eighteen (18) inches above
floor level;
(6) For the licensee or operator of premises licensed hereunder to allow any location within the sexually oriented business to be used for the purpose of nude
live exhibitions unless it is marked with clear indications of the six-foot zone. The absence of this demarcation will create a presumption that there have been
violations of these regulations during performances in unmarked areas;
(7) For any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed hereunder unless such possession and/or consumption is
authorized by a permit or license issued pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
(8) For the intensity of illumination at every place that patrons are permitted access to be less than three (3) footcandles as measured at three (3) feet above
floor level;
(9) For any touching or contact to occur between an entertainer and a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical
areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer or customer to knowingly or recklessly cause any contact between
such entertainer or customer;
(10) For a sexually oriented business licensee to fail to post and maintain a sign at each entrance to said business, with a white background and block letters
of at least one (1) inch in height stating the provisions of subsection (9) of this section;
(11) For any entertainer or customer to be within one (1) foot of each other while the entertainer is engaging in entertainment or while exposing any
specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities, except for providing gratuities in accordance with subsection (a)(4) above;
(12) For any employee to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or engage in any specified sexual activities in the presence of
a customer in any separate area within a sexually oriented business to which viewing entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other
barrier separating entry to or viewing of such area from any other area of the sexually oriented business;
(13) For the licensee, operator, or any agent or employee present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theater to knowingly or recklessly allow or permit any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, indecent exposure, lewd conduct or masturbation to occur in the adult arcade or adult mini-theater or to
knowingly or recklessly allow or permit the adult arcade or adult mini-theater to be used as a place in which solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, lewd conduct or masturbation occur;
(14) For any licensee, operator, or manager in any sexually oriented business to permit any employee to provide any entertainment to any customer in any
separate area within a sexually oriented business to which viewing entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier, regardless of
whether entry to such separate area is by invitation, admission fee, club membership fee or any form of gratuity or consideration;
(15) For any licensee, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to fail or refuse to grant immediate access by any police officer, city fire
department official or health officer to any portion of the premises of the sexually oriented business, upon request, for purpose of inspection of such premises
for compliance with this article, or any other applicable law;
(16) For any licensee, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to fail to ensure that at least one on-site manager for each manager station is on
duty on the premises at all times during which the sexually oriented business is open for business or during which customers are on the premises, except in the
instance of adult cabarets as provided in section 6.04.092(a)(15);
(17) For any licensee, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to fail to ensure that all persons acting as managers or employees on the premises
hold licenses under section 6.04.051 of this article, that entertainers comply with this section 6.04.009, and that managers have their employee license on their
person at all times and conspicuously display identification as a manager; or
(18) For any licensee, operator or manager to fail to maintain a complete list of all persons, including names and addresses, who both conduct any business
on the premises and are required to obtain a license under section 6.04.051 of this article.
(b) A person commits a misdemeanor if the person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violates any of the provisions of this section.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-96)
Sec. 6.04.010 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel or escort services, may remain open at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 2:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on Sundays. (Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-97)
Sec. 6.04.011 Prohibition against persons younger than twenty-one
(a) A person commits a misdemeanor if the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently allows a customer under the age of eighteen (18) years on the
premises of a sexually oriented business during the hours of operation.
(b) It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually
oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any customer under the age
of eighteen (18) years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a customer was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished:
(1) A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's drivers license;
(2) A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state department of public safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/376
(3) Identification card issued by the state, the military or the United States or a foreign country.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-95; Ordinance 09-049, sec. 12, adopted 9/8/09)
Secs. 6.04.012–6.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Licenses
Sec. 6.04.051 Business license and employee license required; application
(a) It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to knowingly or intentionally operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city
pursuant to this article.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly employ a person to work for the sexually oriented
business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this article.
(3) For any person to be employed by a sexually oriented business unless that employee secures a sexually oriented business employee license on the next
business day after becoming employed.
(b) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license issued under this article for a location not previously licensed shall, not later than the sixtieth day before the
date the application is filed, prominently post an outdoor sign at the location stating that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises and
providing the name and business address of the applicant. The sign must be at least twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches in size, and must be written in lettering at
least two (2) inches in size and located within three (3) feet of the right-of-way of the street which is the main access to the property. The sign shall be in both English and
Spanish.
(c) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city and submitted to the chief of police or his designee. Each application submitted to the chief
of police must be accompanied by a copy of the receipt issued by the city establishing that the application and inspection fee have been paid.
(d) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article.
(e) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If an applicant who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a five (5) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant(s) must be qualified under the following section and each applicant(s) shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
(f) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain, at a minimum, the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(A) An individual, the individual shall state his/her full legal name and any aliases or other names they have ever used and submit proof that he/she is
eighteen (18) years of age;
(B) A corporation, partnership, joint venture, or other similar business entity, the applicant shall also include:
(i) A Texas corporation, specifically including a limited liability corporation or nonprofit corporation, shall provide a copy of the articles of
incorporation with amendments, names and residential addresses of all current officers and directors, and the name and address of each stockholder
holding more than five (5) percent of any class of stock of the corporation at the time of the application or thereafter;
(ii) A foreign corporation shall provide a copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state with all amendments, names and
residential addresses of current officers and directors; and names and addresses of each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of any class
of stock of the corporation at the time of the application;
(iii) A general or limited partnership shall provide the full legal name and residential address of each of the partners, including limited partners; if
the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the office of the
secretary of state, and amendments included; if one or more of the partners is a corporation, the information required of corporate applicants shall
be included in the application in addition to these requirements;
(iv) If the applicant is a joint venture or other similar entity, the full legal names and residential addresses of the participants and their valid
driver's license numbers or state department of public safety identification card numbers are required if the participants are individuals; if any
participant is a corporation or partnership, the applicable information required in subsection (i), (ii), or (iii) above shall be provided; and
(v) As to each person required to be identified in this section, the application shall also contain a statement as to any ownership interest that
person has in any other sexually oriented business in the city and/or the county; a description as to any management, supervisory, or oversight
responsibility that person will have in the sexually oriented business; a valid driver's license number or state department of public safety
identification card number; and a certification as to each officer, director, partner or participant that she/he has not been convicted of any of the
crimes listed as specified criminal activity.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under an assumed name, a copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance
with chapter 36 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code. If the sexually oriented business is licensed under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the
application shall be filed and the sexually oriented business shall conduct business under the name shown on the liquor license.
(3) If the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of, or had been released from jail for, a specified criminal activity as defined
in this article within the five-year period prior to the date of the application for a felony offense or within the two-year period prior to the date of the
application for a misdemeanor offense, the application shall include documentation stating the specific criminal activity involved, the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each activity.
(4) If the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, the application shall include documentation stating the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. If the applicant or a
person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or five (5) percent or larger stockholder of a corporation that is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/376
licensed under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, the
application shall include documentation stating the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked
as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) If the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance
from another city or county, then the applicant shall provide the names and locations of such other licensed business and copies of those licenses.
(6) A designation of which single classification of license the applicant is applying for. The classifications of licenses are:
(A) Adult arcade.
(B) Adult bookstore.
(C) Adult novelty store.
(D) Adult video store.
(E) Adult cabaret.
(F) Adult motel.
(G) Adult motion picture theater.
(H) Adult theater.
(I) Adult mini-theater.
(J) Nude model studio.
(K) Sexual encounter center.
A separate application, application fee, and license fee shall be submitted for each classification.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description and ownership of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any, and a copy of any lease or rental agreement.
(8) The mailing address and residential address of all applicants.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A reliable estimate of the number of employees, including a description of the capacities in which they will be employed; and a general description of
the management structure for the enterprise. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied
by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.
(12) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes, laser
disks, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply
with the application requirements set forth in section 6.04.092.
(13) A certification that the proposed sexually oriented business will be located:
(A) A minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any church, child care facility, school, hospital, public building, public park or singlefamily
dwelling zoning district boundary.
(B) Where not more than two (2) other sexually oriented businesses are located within a distance of two thousand (2,000) feet of the proposed location.
This restriction shall not apply to permitted sexually oriented businesses in existence on the effective date of these regulations.
(C) This subsection shall apply only to property uses in existence at that location at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of application.
(D) For the purposes of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line from the nearest portion of the building or appurtenance used by
the sexually oriented business to the nearest portion of the building or appurtenance that is used for the purposes identified in subsection (A) or (B)
above. These distance restrictions apply to an identified purpose whether or not the building or appurtenance used for an identified purpose is located
within the city or the unincorporated area of the county.
(E) The distance requirements set out in this subsection shall not apply to a business which holds a valid sexually oriented business license on the date
this ordinance becomes effective or the sale or subsequent sales of such business or transfer of such license, but shall apply to all other new applications.
(14) The applicant's complete business license or permit history, including any permit or license which has been issued to the applicant(s) by any agency,
board, city, county or state, and any professional or vocational license or permit. This shall include those which have expired or are currently in effect and shall
include any license or permit that has been denied, or was issued to the applicant and subsequently revoked or suspended. If there have been licenses or permits
which were denied, revoked or suspended, the permit history shall include the reason for that action.
(g) Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city the following
information, which shall be deemed confidential pursuant to Texas Government Code, section 552.101:
(1) The applicant's full legal name or any other names (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, and hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number, unless the applicant wishes the information to remain confidential. In such a case, the information must
be provided to the person managing the business for whom they work and it must be available at that location to any authorized employee of the city;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/376
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit, United States military identification or other state identification card information;
(7) Social security number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(h) Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
(1) Three (3) color photographs, including a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, on a form provided by the police
department. Any fees for the photographs shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the work history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application. The statement
must include whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, a sexually oriented business
and whether the applicant has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional, vocational or
sexually oriented business employee license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, the applicant
shall state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of
denial, revocation or suspension and, if applicable, any reinstatement shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of, or had been released from jail for, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, within
the five-year period prior to the date of the application for a felony offense or within the two-year period prior to the date of the application for a misdemeanor
offense and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each conviction.
(4) A statement as to whether the applicant has had or now has a sexually oriented business employee license. If the applicant had or has such a license, list
the agency which issued the license, date of issuance and license number.
(i) The application shall contain a statement by each applicant under oath that:
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith
is true and correct; and
(2) The applicant has read the provisions of this article.
(j) An applicant may be required to provide fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver
and authorization form authorizing the chief of police or his designee to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports from the state department of public
safety and any appropriate federal agency.
(k) A separate application and permit shall be required for each single classification of license at each sexually oriented business.
(l) The applicant/licensee shall be under a continuing affirmative duty while the application is pending and during the effective dates of any license to notify the chief of
police or his designee of any of the following events. Notice shall be provided in writing and delivered no later than seven (7) days after the occurrence of:
(1) Any address and/or name change of the individual applicant or licensee;
(2) Revocation or suspension of any permit or license listed in the application;
(3) A licensee being charged in a court of law with any specified criminal activity; or
(4) A sexually oriented business licensee becoming aware of any of their licensed employees being charged with any specified criminal activity.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-83; Ordinance 09-049, secs. 2–4, adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 6.04.052 Issuance or denial
(a) Within thirty (30) business days of receipt of an application, either original or renewal, for a sexually oriented business, if necessary the city (including its health,
fire, police, zoning and building codes and other city departments) shall inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business and the city shall grant or deny the requested
license and give written notice to the applicant as to the decision, unless such time period is extended at the request of the applicant. The applicant may request, in writing,
that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) business days. Written request must be delivered to the city clerk and chief of police.
(b) Upon receipt of any application, either original or renewal, for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall issue a ten-day temporary license and
shall grant or deny the requested license and give written notice to the applicant as to the decision within such time period. The time period may be extended for a
maximum of ten (10) additional business days based upon a need to conduct an additional investigation by the police department. The issuance of a temporary license
shall not create any property right in securing a license and shall not be any indication that the applicant will receive or is entitled to a license.
(c) Time periods noted in subsections (a) and (b) shall start to run the day the application is submitted and payment in full for the application and investigation is
received by the city as required in this article.
(d) The sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee license shall be denied upon a finding by the city of any of the following facts:
(1) The applicant failed to supply all the information requested on the application;
(2) The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untrue information on the application;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of, or had been released from jail for, a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, to wit: a felony within the
five-year period prior to the date of the application or a misdemeanor within the two-year period prior to the date of the application;
(4) The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
(5) The applicant's proposed sexually oriented business is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any church, child care facility, school,
dwelling, hospital, public building or public park;
(6) The proposed sexually oriented business would be located where more than two (2) other sexually oriented businesses would be located within the
distance of two thousand (2,000) feet of the proposed location;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/376
(7) The proposed sexually oriented business does not meet all the requirements of this article: or the sexually oriented business is otherwise prohibited by
city ordinance, state or federal law;
(8) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license or sexually oriented business license revoked by the city within two (2) years prior
to the current application;
(9) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or
prohibited by a particular provision of this article;
(10) The applicant is overdue in payment to any governmental agency of taxes, fees, fines or other penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in
relation to any business or property;
(11) The applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the
preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(12) The applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted, or had been released from jail for, of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this article within the five-year period prior to the date of the application for a felony offense or within the two-year period prior to the date of the
application for a misdemeanor offense; or
(13) The applicant failed to post the notice sign as required in section 6.04.051(b).
The distance requirements set out in subsections (e)(5) and (6) shall not apply to an application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license which was valid and the
business was in operation on the date this ordinance became effective.
(e) A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the applicant
has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this article or has not committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would
be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in section 6.04.053.
(f) A license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business,
and the single classification for which the license is issued pursuant to section 6.04.051. The license issued to the sexually oriented business shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. The license issued to the employee shall be available
for inspection by the police at any time the employee is present on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
(g) Any application for renewal of a license shall be filed not more than sixty (60) days nor less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the date of the license.
(h) The written notice provided by the city as to the denial of any application does not prohibit the city, in litigation on any appeal, from presenting evidence of
additional or alternative facts that support the denial of the license.
(i) Upon denial of a license, the applicant shall have the opportunity to appear before a hearings officer appointed by the city manager upon written request submitted to
the city manager within ten (10) business days of delivery of the notice of denial. The hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the request for
a hearing on the application and the applicant and the city attorney or his designee shall be provided an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
(j) Upon a finding from a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that cause exists for denial of the license, the hearings officer shall order the
application be denied. The hearings officer shall issue a written order to the applicant pursuant to this article.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-84; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 5, adopted 3/6/07; Ordinance 09-049, secs. 5–9, adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 6.04.053 Fees
(a) Every application for each classification of a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee.
(b) In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, for each classification of sexually oriented business license granted (new or renewal), the
licensee shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) at the time of issuance of license or renewal.
(c) Every original application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) nonrefundable application, investigation, and license fee. Thereafter the renewal fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year.
(d) All license and application fees shall be submitted to the central collections division of the city in the form of a certified check, cashier's check, money order, or
cash. If payment thereon is not honored, the city may suspend the license by written notice to the applicant until full payment is received.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-85)
Sec. 6.04.054 Inspection
(a) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, zoning division, or other city department or
agency to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with federal, state or city statutes, codes, ordinances, or regulations,
at any time it is occupied by the person managing the premises or open for business.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she intentionally or knowingly refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time the sexually oriented business is open.
(c) By accepting a sexually oriented business license under this article, the licensee gives consent to representative of the city as noted in subsection (a) above to inspect
the premises for compliance with federal, state or city statutes, codes, ordinances, or regulations.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-86; Ordinance 09-049, sec. 10, adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 6.04.055 Expiration
(a) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 6.04.051. Application for
renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and, when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license
will not be affected but the application will be considered an application for a new license and not as a renewal of an existing license and be subject to the fees and
regulations concerning issuance of a new license.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/376
(b) If subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least
forty-five (45) days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-87; Ordinance 09-049, sec. 11, adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 6.04.056 Suspension
(a) The police chief and the city attorney shall have the authority and power to initiate, by request to the city manager, a proceeding to suspend a license issued pursuant
to this article if there is probable cause to believe that a violation of this article has occurred.
(b) If the city manager finds that probable cause exists to believe that a violation of this article has occurred, the city manager shall forward to the license holder or the
holder's designated agent a written notice setting forth the reasons for the action. Subject to a request for a hearing pursuant to this article, the suspension shall become
final on the tenth day following notice to the licensee as provided in this article.
(c) The licensee shall have the opportunity to appeal pursuant to section 6.04.060 upon written request submitted to the city manager within ten (10) business days of
delivery of the notice of suspension. The hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the request for a hearing on the license, and the licensee and
the city attorney or his designee shall be provided an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
(d) Upon finding from a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that cause exists for suspending the license, the hearings officer shall suspend the
license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The hearings officer shall issue a written order suspending the license effective upon notice to the licensee pursuant to
this article.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-88; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 6, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.04.057 Revocation
(a) The police chief and the city attorney shall have the authority and power to initiate, by request to the city manager, a proceeding to revoke a license issued pursuant
to this article if there is probable cause to believe a violation of this article as set out herein has occurred:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee or an employee managing a sexually oriented business has knowingly or recklessly allowed the possession, use or sale of controlled
substances as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code, section 481.002, or dangerous drugs as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code, section 483.001 (or
their successor statutes) to occur on the licensed premises;
(3) A licensee or employee managing a sexually oriented business has knowingly or recklessly allowed any criminal activity to occur on the licensed
premises;
(4) A licensee or any employee managing the sexually oriented business has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when
the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee or any employee managing the sexually oriented business has knowingly or recklessly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises;
(6) A licensee or an employee managing the sexually oriented business has been convicted of any specified sexual activity during the time the license was
issued;
(7) The sexually oriented business license should not have been issued pursuant to this article;
(8) The sexually oriented business has been closed for business for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, unless the closure is due to circumstances
beyond the control of the licensee and the licensee is proceeding with due diligence to reopen the sexually oriented business;
(9) The sexually oriented business license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or
(10) A licensee or the employee managing the sexually oriented business is delinquent in payment to any governmental agency of any taxes or fees owed.
(b) When a license has been revoked, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee and anyone residing with him shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation becomes effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the licensee may be granted a license if at least forty-five (45) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(c) If the city manager finds that probable cause exists to believe that a violation of any of the violations set out in this section has occurred, the city manager shall
forward to the license holder or the holder's designated agent a written notice setting forth the reasons for the action. Subject to a request for a hearing pursuant to section
6.04.060, the revocation shall become final on the tenth day following notice to the licensee as provided in this article.
(d) The licensee shall have the opportunity to appear before a hearings officer appointed by the city manager upon written request submitted to the city manager within
ten (10) business days of delivery of the notice of revocation. The hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the request for a hearing on the
license and the licensee and the city attorney or his designee shall be provided an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
(e) Upon a finding from a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that cause exists for revocation of the license, the hearings officer shall order the
license to be revoked for a period of one (1) year. The hearings officer shall issue a written order revoking the license effective upon notice to the licensee pursuant to this
article.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-89; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 7, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.04.058 Transfer
A license issued under this article is personal to the licensee or licensees and may not be transferred to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-90)
Sec. 6.04.059 Judicial review
(a) Any licensee, operator or applicant of a sexually oriented business who is aggrieved by a decision that denies, suspends, or revokes a license and who has complied
fully and timely with all applicable provisions pertaining to appeals of decisions in this article may seek appropriate judicial relief by writ of mandamus or other available
remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/376
(b) The person aggrieved by the decision of the city may seek judicial review of such decision immediately following the decision.
(c) The decision of the hearings official suspending or revoking a license under this article shall be final as of the date written notice of the hearings official's decision is
given pursuant to section 6.04.006 to the licensee or operator of the sexually oriented business, but, in order to afford the license holder an opportunity to seek judicial
review, shall not be effective for purposes of enforcement of the decision by the hearings officer or city until the tenth day following such notice. If the license holder
initiates litigation for the purpose of seeking judicial review within the ten-day period, then the decision shall not be effective for purposes of enforcement prior to the
thirtieth day following such notice. This subsection shall apply only to a decision sustaining the suspension or revocation of a license for an existing sexually oriented
business and shall not apply to a decision sustaining the denial of an initial application for a proposed sexually oriented business.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-104; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 8, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.04.060 Hearing
(a) When the city manager receives a timely written request for a hearing concerning the denial of a license or the suspension or revocation of a license, the city
manager shall initiate the public hearing procedure, as follows:
(1) The city manager shall appoint a hearings officer and a date and location shall be set for the public hearing to be held within fourteen (14) business days
of the receipt of the written request for hearing.
(2) The city clerk or his/her designee shall send the person requesting the hearing and/or licensee a written notice at least ten (10) days in advance and shall
make a copy of the notice of hearing available to the public.
(3) The hearings officer may reschedule the hearing for good cause. If rescheduled, new notice of hearing shall be posted as provided herein.
(4) The person requesting the hearing may request that a court reporter make a record of the hearing. This request must be made at least two (2) days prior to
the hearing and all costs associated with the court reporter and the cost of making an official record and one (1) transcript for the city shall be borne by the
person requesting the hearing. The hearings officer shall arrange for a court reporter to make a record of the hearing, including exhibits and testimony.
(b) The hearing shall be conducted by the hearings officer under the following guidelines. The hearings officer shall liberally construe these guidelines.
(1) Parties may be assisted by counsel;
(2) Parties may expressly waive the right to counsel;
(3) The hearings official shall, upon proper request, provide for appropriate facilities for any disabled person to be able to participate in the hearing. This
shall include, but not be limited to: interpreters for deaf or hearing-impaired participants, wheelchair access and special seating arrangements;
(4) Participants in the proceeding may supply interpreters for language translation and the hearings officer shall accommodate the translation of proceedings;
(5) The hearings officer may exclude evidence that is irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious. Relevancy and materiality shall be evaluated by the
relation of the evidence to the nature of the hearing, i.e., initial application, renewal, or revocation, etc.;
(6) If no request is made for an official record, any person may record, videotape or transcribe the hearing providing there is no interference with the
proceeding. The hearings officer shall have the power to limit any interference with the proceeding.
(c) The hearings officer may continue a hearing to a date not later than ten (10) days after the initial hearing if:
(1) The hearing has lasted at least two and one-half (2-1/2) hours and it appears to the hearings officer that a significant amount of time is required to fully
present the public concerns and/or matters related to the issue before the hearings official; or
(2) The parties need additional time to develop a solution to issues identified at the hearing.
A continuation shall not be for the purpose of delay or developing new evidence.
(d) After the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearings officer shall, within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the hearing, produce a written statement
containing the hearings officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and/or recommendations as they would relate to the issue(s) pending before the hearings officer. This
written statement shall be forwarded to the city attorney, the applicant or licensee, and the party who requested the hearing (if appropriate). If no official record of the
hearing has been requested, the hearings officer's statement shall be the official record of the public hearing. The written decision of the hearings officer shall be final,
subject to judicial review.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-105; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 9, adopted 3/6/07; Ordinance 09-049, sec. 13, adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 6.04.061 Lost or stolen license
(a) If a sexually oriented business or business employee license is lost, stolen, or destroyed, a replacement may be obtained by filing a lost license application with the
police chief or his designee and paying a replacement fee.
(b) A replacement license shall be issued upon confirmation of the identity of the applicant and status of the license through the records of the city clerk and police
department.
(1) A replacement license will expire on the same date as the original license.
(2) A replacement license for a sexually oriented business employee will be assigned a new license number.
(c) The claim that a license was lost or stolen shall not be a defense to prosecution for conducting business or engaging in employment if the business operates or the
employee works without a valid license being displayed as required in this article.
(d) A license issued pursuant to this article which is found in the possession of any person other than the authorized license holder may be immediately seized by any
law enforcement officer, who shall then forward the license to the chief of police.
(e) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, other than the authorized licensee, to display or use any license issued pursuant to this article.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-106)
Secs. 6.04.062–6.04.090 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/376
Division 3. Additional Regulations for Specific Businesses
Sec. 6.04.091 Adult motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually
oriented business license, he/she rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or subrents the
same sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term “rent” or “subrent” means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-91)
Sec. 6.04.092 Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises films, motion pictures, slides,
videocassettes, live entertainment, or other video or visual reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing the location of the
manager's station(s), the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and the designation of any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager's station may not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet of floor space. The manager's station may not be less than four (4) feet wide in any one (1)
dimension. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The diagram shall also include all locations where live entertainment will occur noting the marked sixfoot
zone required in section 6.04.009. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant(s).
(3) If the sexually oriented business has one (1) manager's station designated pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section, then the interior of the sexually
oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of every area of the sexually oriented business to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, except designated restrooms, from that manager's station. If the sexually oriented business has two (2) or more manager's
stations designated pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, except for designated restrooms, from at least one (1)
of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(4) It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in a sexually oriented business, to
ensure that the view area specified in subsection (3) remains unobstructed by any doors, partitions, screens, merchandise, display racks, tinted glass or other
materials at all times that any patron is present in the sexually oriented business, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the plan filed pursuant to this section.
(5) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at
an illumination of not less than three (3.0) footcandles as measured three (3) feet above floor level.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator to ensure that the illumination described is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
(7) In addition to any other requirements of this article, no adult arcade or adult mini-theater shall be configured in such a manner as not [sic] to have any
opening in any partition, screen, wall or other barrier that separates viewing areas for arcade devices or adult mini-theater devices from other viewing areas for
arcade devices or adult mini-theater devices. This provision shall not apply to conduits for plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation or electrical service,
provided that such conduits shall be so screened or otherwise configured as to prevent their use as openings that would permit any portion of a human body to
penetrate the wall or barrier separating viewing areas.
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theater
to ensure that the premises are monitored to assure that no openings are allowed to exist in violation of subsection (7) above, and to ensure that no patron is
allowed access to any portion of the premises where any opening exists in violation of subsection (7) above, until the opening has been repaired.
(9) It shall be unlawful for a person to make or attempt to make an opening of any kind in the walls in an adult arcade or adult mini-theater.
(10) The licensee and operator shall, during each business day, ensure that the walls in an adult arcade or adult mini-theater are regularly inspected to
determine if any openings or holes exist.
(11) The licensee and operator shall cause all floor coverings in adult arcades or adult mini-theaters to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs
or carpeting.
(12) The licensee and operator shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in all adult arcades and adult mini-theaters to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight
(48) inches of the floor.
(13) The licensee and operator shall cause all areas open to patron use to be maintained in a clean manner, free from human waste products, semen, needles
and trash.
(14) Employees of the city shall have access to any part of the premises at any time the business is open.
(15) It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator of each sexually oriented business licensed and operated under this section to ensure that at least one (1)
person who is charged with the responsibility for the operation of the premises is on duty and situated in each manager's station designated pursuant to
subsection (a)(1) of this section at all times that any patron is present in the sexually oriented business or, in the instance of an adult cabaret, at all times that an
entertainer is present on the premises.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/376
(b) A person having a duty or responsibility under subsections (1) through (15) of subsection (a) above commits a misdemeanor if he or she intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly fails to fulfill that duty or responsibility.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-92)
Sec. 6.04.093 Escort agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits an offense if any person under the age of eighteen (18) years acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-93)
Sec. 6.04.094 Nude model studios
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item used for sleep or rest in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be
placed in a reception room open to the public.
(Ordinance 00-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/00; 1978 Code, sec. 7-94)
ARTICLE 6.05 DEALERS IN USED JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METALS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
Business. An activity carried on by any person who buys or exchanges for used jewelry, money, silverware, or precious metal, as defined in this section, for profit. The
term “business” shall not include occasional purchases, sales or exchanges made by a hobbyist, nor shall it include activities regulated by the Texas Pawnshop Act
(chapter 371, Texas Finance Code).
Dealer. Any person who buys or exchanges used jewelry, money, silverware, or precious metal in the course of business, but does not include persons regulated by the
Texas Pawnshop Act (chapter 371, Texas Finance Code).
Money. Money which has numismatic value.
Permittee. A dealer who has been issued a permit hereunder.
Person. Any individual, corporation, or partnership, and includes the plural.
Precious metal. Gold, silver, or platinum.
Semiprecious gems. Includes but is not limited to such gems as jade, tanzanite, tsavorite garnets and aquamarines.
Silverware. Silver or silver-plated flatware, trays, goblets, dishes or serving pieces.
Temporary location. Any place or premises which has not been hired, rented, or leased for at least thirty (30) days, in, upon or from which business is conducted.
Used jewelry. Previously owned articles made from precious and semiprecious metal, silver, gold, diamonds, sapphires, rubies, pearls, emeralds, and gems and includes
such personal ornaments as watches, rings, pendants, chains, fobs, brooches, and necklaces.
(Ordinance 81-8, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/81; 1978 Code, sec. 7-61; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 2, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.05.002 Permit required; application
(a) Any dealer who engages in the business of buying or exchanging used jewelry, money, silverware or precious metal shall possess a valid permit before engaging in
such business within the city issued in accordance with this article.
(b) Any person desiring such a permit shall make application in writing to the chief of police on a form provided for that purpose. Such form shall be sufficient if it
includes the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) Business address of the applicant;
(3) Time period or periods during which business will be conducted;
(4) Location or locations where business will be conducted;
(5) Whether or not the applicant, or any co-principal or employee, has been found guilty of any criminal offense defined in title 7 of the Texas Penal Code
(or their criminal equivalents) by any court of competent jurisdiction and, if so, the venue of such offense and penalty imposed;
(6) Whether or not the applicant has been or is currently a party to any civil litigation arising out of sales, purchases or exchanges of any goods or services
and, if so, the identity of other parties to the suit, the location of the suit, and the outcome of the suit;
(7) Whether the applicant has ever before engaged in business under an assumed name and, if so, the name assumed by such business.
(c) Any permittee who employs any person to engage in business and whose name does not appear on such permittee's current application on file with the police
department shall, within three (3) business days of such employment, amend said application in writing to reflect the addition of said employee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/376
(Ordinance 81-8, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/81; 1978 Code, sec. 7-62)
Sec. 6.05.003 Issuance of permit, fee
(a) Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall issue a permit upon the payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); provided, however, no permit shall be
issued to any applicant who has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction within the preceding ten (10) years of a criminal offense against property defined in
title 7 of the Texas Penal Code; provided further that violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for denial of such permit. Permits issued hereunder shall be
valid for a period of five (5) years.
(b) A permit issued hereunder may be summarily revoked or suspended for up to six (6) months by the chief of police for violation of any provision of this article or if a
permittee is found guilty of a criminal offense defined in title 7 of the Texas Penal Code or their criminal equivalents by a court of competent jurisdiction. Within ten (10)
days of such revocation or suspension by the chief of police, the permittee shall have the right of appeal to the city council, whose decision shall be final.
(c) Upon receipt of an application, the chief of police may, upon request, issue a temporary permit upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which
shall be issued upon the same terms and conditions as five-year permits, but which shall be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
(d) Any permit issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed at the place of business so as to be plainly visible by persons transacting business with a dealer.
(Ordinance 81-8, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/81; 1978 Code, sec. 7-63; Ordinance 07-019, sec. 3, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 6.05.004 Records of purchases
(a) Upon the purchase or exchange with any person or persons of any goods defined in section 6.05.001, permittees shall record in a well-bound book, kept exclusively
for such purpose, the following information:
(1) The name, address, and physical description and, if available, driver's license number of the person or persons selling or exchanging any used jewelry,
money, silverware, or precious metal;
(2) A description of the property purchased and property exchanged for, including the serial number, if available, and all other identifiable characteristics.
(b) No permittee shall purchase or exchange any used jewelry, coins, silverware, or precious metal from any person or persons under the age of eighteen (18) years
unless such seller presents a written statement from such seller's parent or legal guardian consenting to such sale, which statement shall be retained and recorded by the
permittee.
(c) Permittees purchasing or exchanging used jewelry, coins, silverware or precious metal shall obtain a signed warranty from the seller that the seller has the right or
authority to sell the property, which statement shall be retained and recorded by the permittee.
(d) All books and records required to be kept under the terms herein shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours by any bona fide peace officer.
(e) All books and records required to be kept under the terms herein shall be kept continuously for a minimum period of two (2) years.
(Ordinance 81-8, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/81; 1978 Code, sec. 7-64)
Sec. 6.05.005 Purchases at temporary locations
Any dealer who conducts business from a temporary location within the city and who does not maintain a permanent location within the city shall deliver the records of
purchases or exchanges to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours of terminating the temporary location. (Ordinance 81-8, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/81; 1978 Code,
sec. 7-65)
ARTICLE 6.06 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.06.001 Definitions
In this article:
Digital network means any online-enabled application, software, website, or system offered or used by a transportation network company that enables a prearranged ride
with a transportation network company driver.
Operating permit means the permission granted by the city to operate a TNC inside the city for a period of one year, renewable under the provisions of this chapter. The
permit term shall automatically renew for additional terms of one (1) year upon payment of fees, unless a party sends written notice of termination to the other party at
least thirty (30) days prior to the end of the then current term.
Prearranged ride means transportation provided by a transportation network company driver to a transportation network company rider or passenger, beginning at the
time a driver accepts a ride requested by a rider or passenger through a digital network controlled by a transportation network company and ending at the time the last
requesting rider departs from the driver's personal vehicle. The term does not include:
(1) A shared expense carpool or vanpool arrangement or service; or
(2) Transportation provided using a taxicab, limousine, or similar for-hire vehicle.
Transportation network company (TNC) means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity operating in this state that uses a digital network to connect a
transportation network company rider to a transportation network company driver for a prearranged ride. The term does not include an entity arranging non-emergency
medical transportation under a contract with the state or a managed care organization for individuals qualifying for Medicaid or Medicare.
Transportation network company (TNC) driver shall mean an individual who operates a motor vehicle that is:
(1) Owned, leased or otherwise authorized for use by the individual;
(2) Not a taxicab; and
(3) Used to provide transportation network company services.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/376
Transportation network company (TNC) rider/passenger means an individual who uses a transportation network company's digital network to connect with a
transportation network company driver who provides a prearranged ride to the individual in the driver's personal vehicle between points chosen by the individual.
Transportation network company (TNC) services shall mean transportation of a passenger between points chosen by the passenger and prearranged with a TNC driver
through the use of a TNC digital network or software application. TNC services shall begin when a TNC driver accepts a request for transportation received through the
TNC's digital network or software application, continues while the TNC driver transports the passenger in the TNC driver's vehicle, and ends when the passenger exits the
TNC driver's vehicle. TNC service is not a taxicab or street hail service.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.002 Fare charged for services
(a) A TNC or TNC driver may charge a fare for the services provided to passengers; provided that, if a fare is charged, the TNC shall disclose to passengers the fare
calculation method on its website or within the software application service. The TNC shall also provide passengers with the option to receive an estimated fare before the
passenger enters the TNC driver's vehicle.
(b) If a TNC utilizes dynamic pricing through its software application to incentivize drivers in an effort to maximize the supply of available vehicles on the network to
match the demand for rides and increase reliability, the software application must:
(1) Provide clear and visible indication that dynamic pricing is in effect prior to requesting a ride;
(2) Include a feature that requires riders to confirm that they understand that dynamic pricing will be applied in order for the ride request to be completed;
(3) Provide a fare estimator that enables the user to estimate the cost under dynamic pricing prior to requesting the ride; and [sic]
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.003 Agent required
The TNC must maintain an agent for service of process in the state. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.004 Identification of TNC vehicles and drivers
Before a TNC ride is accepted, the TNC's software application or website shall display the driver's first name, an accurate picture of the TNC driver, a picture or
description of the vehicle, and the license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing the TNC service. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.005 Electronic receipt required
Within a reasonable period of time following the completion of a trip, a TNC shall transmit an electronic receipt to the passenger that lists:
(1) The origin and destination of the trip;
(2) The total time and distance of the trip; and
(3) An itemization of the total fare paid, if any.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.006 Zero tolerance for alcohol or drug use
(a) The TNC shall implement a zero tolerance policy on the use of drugs or alcohol while a TNC driver is providing TNC services or is logged into the TNC's digital
network but is not providing TNC services, and shall provide notice of this policy on its website, as well as procedures to report a complaint about a driver with whom a
passenger was matched and whom the passenger reasonably suspects was under the influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the trip.
(b) Upon receipt of such passenger complaint alleging a violation of the zero tolerance policy, the TNC shall immediately suspend such TNC driver's access to the
TNC's digital platform, and shall conduct an investigation into the reported incident. The suspension shall last the duration of the investigation.
(c) The TNC shall maintain records relevant to the enforcement of this requirement for a period of at least two years from the date that a passenger complaint is
received by the TNC.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.007 No street hails
A TNC driver shall exclusively accept rides booked through a TNC's digital network or software application service and shall not solicit or accept street hails. (Ordinance
16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.008 No cash rides
The TNC shall adopt a policy prohibiting solicitation or acceptance of cash payments from passengers and notify TNC drivers of such policy. TNC drivers shall not solicit
or accept cash payments from passengers. Any payment for TNC services shall be made only electronically using the TNC's digital network or software application.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.009 No discrimination; accessibility
(a) The TNC shall adopt a policy of non-discrimination on the basis of destination, race, color, national origin, religious belief or affiliation, sex, disability, age, sexual
orientation, or gender identity with respect to passengers and potential passengers and notify TNC drivers of such policy.
(b) TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding non-discrimination against passengers or potential passengers on the basis of destination, race, color,
national origin, religious belief or affiliation, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, or gender identity.
(c) TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to accommodation of service animals.
(d) A TNC shall not impose additional charges for providing services to persons with physical disabilities because of those disabilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/376
(e) A TNC shall provide passengers an opportunity to indicate whether they require a wheelchair-accessible vehicle. If a TNC cannot arrange wheelchair-accessible
TNC service in any instance, it shall direct the passenger to an alternate provider of wheelchair-accessible service, if available.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.010 Records required
(a) A TNC shall maintain:
(1) Individual trip records which must include driver and passenger identity information for at least one year from the date each trip was provided; and
(2) TNC driver records at least until the one-year anniversary of the date on which a TNC driver's activation on the TNC digital network has ended.
(b) Within seven (7) business days of the receipt of a duly issued subpoena, court order or warrant relating to investigation of a criminal matter, or within a longer
period of time if agreed to by the parties, the TNC shall furnish the requested records to the chief of police. For any non-criminal investigations conducted by the chief of
police in his administrative capacity, a TNC will conduct an internal investigation and shall within ten (10) business days or within a longer period of time if agreed to by
the parties furnish records in response to a written request related to the underlying complaint, in accordance with its publicly posted privacy policies.
(c) Any record or information made available by a TNC to the city pursuant to this article may be confidential and proprietary. If the city is required to disclose such
confidential information under court order or other applicable law, the city shall promptly notify the TNC of such requirement, prior to disclosure in accordance with the
Texas Public Information Act or other applicable law.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.011 Personal identity information
A TNC shall not disclose a passenger's personal identity information to a third party unless: the passenger consents, disclosure is required by a legal obligation, or
disclosure is required to protect or defend the terms of use of the service or to investigate violations of those terms. In addition to the foregoing, a TNC shall be permitted
to share a passenger's name and/or anonymized telephone number with the TNC driver providing TNC services to such passenger in order to facilitate correct
identification of the passenger by the TNC driver, or to facilitate communication between the passenger and the TNC driver. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Secs. 6.06.012–6.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Operating Permit
Sec. 6.06.031 Required
No TNC shall operate upon the city streets without having first obtained an operating permit from the city. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.032 Application
An application for an operating permit required under this division shall be filed with the chief of police upon forms provided by the city. The application shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and business address of the TNC applicant;
(2) If a business entity, certified copies of the TNC applicant's organizational documents, e.g., certificate of organization, articles of incorporation or similar
documents as applicable, together with evidence of authorization from the Secretary of the State to conduct business in the state, and current franchise tax
account status with the Texas Comptroller;
(3) The experience or capabilities possessed by the TNC applicant with regard to using its digital network to connect TNC riders to TNC drivers for
prearranged rides; and
(4) Any relevant information the TNC applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of an operating permit.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.033 Fees
No operating permit required under this division shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee of $100.00. The fees
shall be paid to the city to compensate the city for its superintendence of the TNC business operated under this article and for the use of the city streets, alleys and public
ways. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.034 Issuance of operating permit
If the chief of police determines that the applicant is fit, willing and able to provide the public transportation and to conform to this article, he shall issue an operating
permit stating the name and address of the applicant; otherwise, the application shall be denied. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.035 Suspension and revocation
(a) Upon the filing of a written complaint alleging a violation of any of the provisions of this article by a TNC driver or a TNC filed by any person with the chief of
police, or upon the person's motion, the chief of police, after five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the TNC driver or owner or operators of the TNC
against whom complaint is made, shall conduct an investigation and, where appropriate, hear evidence with reference to such complaint, and after such hearing, the chief
of police may revoke or suspend the operating permit of such holder or require the TNC to revoke said TNC driver's access to its digital network or platform with good
cause shown.
(b) Due cause for the suspension or revocation of an operating permit will include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Failure of the operating permit holder to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit as set forth in
this title;
(2) Obtaining an operating permit by providing false information;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/376
(3) Violating any ordinance of the city, the laws of the United States or of the state, the violation of which adversely affects the ability of holder to operate as
a transportation network company (TNC); or
(4) Violating any part of this article.
(c) The holder shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the city council within ten business days of the notice of suspension or revocation. Such
appeal will be submitted by delivering said notice of appeal to the city clerk setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The city council shall either hear the appeal
or appoint a hearing officer to preside over the appeal hearing. Upon receiving such notice of appeal, the city council or hearing officer, as soon as practical thereafter,
shall conduct a hearing at which the appealing party will be given an opportunity to present evidence and make argument on the holder's behalf. It shall be the burden of
the appellant to establish that the decision of the chief of police is incorrect. The chief of police shall be entitled to present any information or evidence which would
support the chief's decision. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section. The city council or hearing officer shall make its ruling on
the basis of a preponderance of the evidence at the hearing.
(d) The city council or hearing officer shall assess the evidence presented at the hearing and shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police. The
decision of the city council or hearing officer is final.
(e) If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the chief of police in the time and manner as provided in this title, the ruling of the chief of police shall be final.
(f) Any person who continues to operate a TNC under a permit that has been suspended or revoked for any reason while the suspension or revocation is in effect shall
be considered guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be assessed a penalty accordingly. Every day's violation shall be considered to be a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Secs. 6.06.036–6.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Driver and Vehicle Requirements
Sec. 6.06.061 Driver background check required
(a) Prior to permitting an individual to act as a TNC driver on its digital platform, the TNC shall:
(1) Require the individual to submit an application to the TNC which includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license, driving history,
motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance, and other information required by the TNC;
(2) Conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local and national criminal background check for each TNC driver that shall include:
(A) Multi-state/multi-jurisdiction criminal records locator or other similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary source search);
and
(B) National Sex Offender Registry database; and
(3) Obtain and review a driving history research report for such individual.
(b) The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC driver on its digital platform who:
(1) Has had more than three moving violations in the prior three-year period, or one major violation in the prior three-year period (including, but not limited
to, attempting to evade the police, reckless driving, or driving on a suspended or revoked license);
(2) Has been convicted, within the past seven years, of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use of a motor vehicle to
commit a felony, a crime involving property damage, and/or class B misdemeanor or higher theft, acts of violence, or acts of terror;
(3) Is a match in the National Sex Offender Registry database;
(4) Does not possess a valid driver's license;
(5) Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services;
(6) Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services; or
(7) Is not at least 19 years of age.
(c) Notification. In the event that a TNC becomes aware of a driver being involved in criminal conduct or driving violations or otherwise becomes ineligible to operate
as a driver by virtue of no longer meeting the criteria listed above, the TNC shall immediately revoke the driver's ability to access the platform's application.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.062 Vehicle safety and emissions
The TNC shall require that any motor vehicle(s) that a TNC driver will use to provide TNC services meets the requirements set forth in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch.
547 for vehicle safety equipment and inspection. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Secs. 6.06.063–6.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. TNC and TNC Driver Insurance Requirements
Sec. 6.06.091 Insurance requirements
(a) A TNC and TNC drivers shall comply with the requirements of chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code, as amended.
(b) At the time a TNC driver is logged on to the transportation network company's digital network and is available to receive transportation network requests, as well as
between prearranged rides, the minimum amounts of liability insurance coverage required are:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/376
(1) $50,000.00 for bodily injury to or death for each person in an incident; $100,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of a person per incident; and,
$25,000.00 for damage to or destruction of property of others in an incident;
(2) Uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage where required by Texas Insurance Code section 1952.101; and
(3) Personal injury protection coverage where required by Texas Insurance Code section 1952.152.
(c) At the time a TNC driver is engaged in a prearranged ride, the automobile insurance policy must provide, at a minimum:
(1) Coverage with a total aggregate limit of liability of $1,000,000.00 for death, bodily injury and property damage for each incident;
(2) Uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage where required by Texas Insurance Code section 1952.101; and
(3) Personal and injury protection coverage where required by Texas Insurance Code section 1952.152.
(d) If an insurance policy maintained by a TNC driver has lapsed or does not provide the required coverage, the TNC shall provide the coverage required by this section
beginning with the first dollar of a claim against the driver.
(e) Insurance satisfying the requirements of this section satisfies the financial responsibility requirement for an automobile under chapter 601, Transportation Code.
(Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
Sec. 6.06.092 Disclosure requirements
A TNC shall disclose in writing to TNC drivers, as part of its agreement with those drivers, the insurance coverage and limits of liability that the TNC provides while the
driver uses a personal vehicle in connection with a TNC's online-enabled digital network. A TNC shall also disclose in writing to participating drivers, as part of its
agreement with those drivers, that the driver's own automobile insurance policy might not provide coverage while the TNC driver uses a vehicle in connection with a
TNC's digital network depending on its terms. (Ordinance 16-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/16)
ARTICLE 6.07 TAXICABS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.07.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Chief of police. The duly appointed chief of the police department or his/her designee.
Cruise, cruising. The movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire; except, however,
unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from an intended passenger, and taxicabs returning to a taxi stand, terminal or subterminal
by the most direct route, after having discharged a passenger, to the place where such taxicab is housed or to the place of discharge of the passenger, shall not be
considered to be cruising.
Driver, chauffeur. Any person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, whether as owner, or agent, servant or employee of the owner.
License to operate. Authority granted by the city authorizing such operator of a taxicab to engage in the business of transportation by taxicab.
Owner, operator. Any person who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs on or over the
streets of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except “driver” as herein defined.
Subterminal. Any place other than a terminal in which the drivers or chauffeurs of taxicabs shall receive calls from a dispatcher and such calls are relayed from a taxi
terminal or taxi stand, and which shall likewise mean and embrace the space and area used by taxicabs while waiting for passengers.
Taxicab. An automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city, and not over a defined or fixed route,
and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the city limits, at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per week or per
month, which such vehicle is routed to destinations under the direction of the passenger; provided, however, the term “taxicab” shall not apply to motor buses operated
within the city under a franchise from the city, over a fixed definite route, nor shall such term apply to motor buses regularly operated in the city along fixed routes to and
from points outside the city, nor shall such term apply to motor vehicles operated under a permit or certificate of the railroad commission of the state or the National
Surface Transportation Board.
Taximeter. A machine adapted to automatically calculate, at a predetermined rate or rates, and to register the charge for hire of a taxicab; and such charges shall be
indicated by means of figures.
Terminal. The taxi depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed or parked, and at which place the telephone calls and requests for service shall be made, and at which
place a dispatcher shall control the movements of the taxicabs to the points of request for taxicab service; this term shall likewise be synonymous with taxi terminal and
shall mean and embrace that space and area of land and buildings off the streets of the city, and upon private property, and shall be and constitute the main office of the
owner and taxicab operator.
Waiting time. Such time as may be consumed or lost at the special instance and request of a passenger after such passenger has first entered the taxicab to make a trip and
before reaching his final destination, and no charge shall be made against a passenger for any time lost on account of any other delay whatsoever.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 2, adopted 9/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 29-40)
Sec. 6.07.002 Withdrawing and substituting taxicabs
If at any time any taxicab, which has been regularly licensed under the provisions of this article, is to be withdrawn or replaced by another and different motor vehicle, the
same may be done after making written application to the chief of police and securing approval thereof. Such approval shall be based upon the chief of police having a
complete record of such substitution and being satisfied that all rules and regulations of this article have been complied with; provided, upon refusal of the chief of police
to approve said application, the applicant may, within ten (10) days thereafter, appeal in writing to the city manager (or his designee). (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted
10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-46)
Sec. 6.07.003 Insurance
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/376
(a) Before any permit shall be granted or renewed under this article, the operator shall obtain and file with the chief of police a public liability insurance policy in the
standard Texas form covering each automobile to be operated by such operator of a taxicab with minimum amounts of liability coverage thereunder as required pursuant
to Texas Transportation Code, section 601.072 (or succeeding statute).
(b) Such insurance policy shall be issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with an agent within the city, and shall be for the
protection of any member of the public who might be injured or whose property might be damaged by the operation of such taxicab. Such policy shall be maintained in
full force and effect by the operator of taxicabs covering each taxicab licensed by a permit under this article. A copy of such insurance or a certificate evidencing such
insurance shall be provided to the chief of police.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-47)
Sec. 6.07.004 Ad valorem taxes
(a) Payment required; delinquency causes revocation of permit. It shall be the duty of every owner of a taxicab that is operated in the city to pay all ad valorem taxes
assessed by the city against such vehicle and other equipment used in such business, and a failure to pay such ad valorem taxes before they become delinquent shall
operate as a reason for revocation of the permit issued in accordance with this article.
(b) Operation without payment unlawful. No owner or operator of a taxicab shall engage in the transportation of persons by taxicab at any time within the city when the
ad valorem taxes assessed against his taxi terminals, stands, taxicabs or taxicab equipment are delinquent.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, secs. 29-48, 29-49; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 6, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.07.005 Condition of vehicle; inspections
(a) Before any owner or operator of a taxicab allows any of his taxicabs to be operated upon any street within the city it shall be inspected to determine whether such
vehicle is in a safe condition to be operated as a taxicab.
(b) The inspection of such taxicab shall be made by the chief of police.
(c) No taxicab shall be given a permit unless that taxicab has a valid motor vehicle inspection sticker. Taxicab permits issued to taxicabs shall be valid only so long as
the vehicle has affixed to it a valid motor vehicle inspection sticker.
(d) Upon notifying the owner or operator of such taxicab that it is not in a safe condition, the same shall not be used as a taxicab until the defects found are corrected
and such taxicab is reinspected and found that it is in a safe condition by the chief of police, who shall paste a paper seal of a type and design approved by the chief of
police upon the windshield of such vehicle certifying that the taxicab was approved by such inspector. No taxicab shall be operated in the city without such a valid
approval seal attached thereto.
(e) At no time shall any taxicab that is found to be unsafe by the chief of police be operated over the streets of the city.
(f) Nothing herein, however, shall prevent the city from inspecting any taxicab at any time and if the city, through its agents or employees, should find that it is in a
defective condition, the chief of police shall order the use of such taxicab discontinued until the same is approved.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 5, adopted 9/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 29-50; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 7, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.07.006 Chauffeur's license
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or act as a chauffeur of a taxicab within the city, without having secured a chauffeur's license duly issued to such person
by the chief of police.
(b) Each applicant for a chauffeur's license shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age prior to the filing of his application for a chauffeur's license.
(c) Any person desiring to drive or act as chauffeur of a taxicab in the city shall file application for a chauffeur's license with the chief of police at the police station on
application forms to be furnished by the chief of police. Such forms shall provide for the applicant's name, age, present address, last place of employment, whether the
applicant has been convicted of a violation of a motor vehicle traffic or criminal law of the city or the state, with a space sufficient for particulars concerning such
violation, if any, and the length of time the applicant has driven a motor vehicle.
(d) After filling in the above-described form, the applicant shall sign same and shall swear to the truthfulness of the answers made in such application before a notary
public. After such application has been duly sworn to, the applicant shall present such application to the chief of police at the police station, together with an affidavit
from two (2) reputable citizens of the city, stating the applicant to be a trustworthy, sober and reliable person, of good moral character, and that such applicant is
competent to operate a taxicab.
(e) Upon receipt of any application for a chauffeur's license, the chief of police shall satisfy himself that such applicant is qualified to operate a taxicab in the city by
reviewing the applicant's driving record and criminal history. The chief of police will use the criteria established by sections 53.022 (factors in determining whether
conviction relates to occupation) and 53.023 (additional factors for licensing authority to consider) of the Texas Occupations Code, to determine the applicant's fitness or
ability to perform the duties and obligations of operating a taxi. After the chief of police has examined the application and has investigated the applicant for his ability to
properly operate a taxicab within the city, he shall either grant such application or refuse same. If the chief of police refuses any application, he shall notify the applicant
either personally or at the last address given in such application. The applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of police by giving notice in writing to the city
manager (or his designee) within ten (10) days after notification. In the event such applicant appeals to the city manager (or his designee) for a license, the city manager
(or his designee) shall notify the applicant of the date the hearing on his application will be heard, and shall hear the appeal of such applicant for a chauffeur's license.
After receiving the evidence in connection therewith, the city manager (or his designee) shall either refuse or approve such application. In the event the city manager (or
his designee) approves the application, the city manager (or his designee) shall order the chief of police to issue a license to such applicant.
(f) If the application of a person is granted either by the chief of police or by the city manager (or his designee), the chief of police shall immediately notify such
applicant by letter addressed to such applicant at the last address shown on the application. Within three (3) business days after the postmark date of such letter, the
applicant shall furnish the chief of police two (2) recent, true photographs of such applicant, such photographs to be not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) inches by one
and one-half (1-1/2) inches, nor greater than two (2) inches by two (2) inches, in size, one of which photographs shall be retained by the chief of police with the
application and affidavits, to be kept by the chief of police as a permanent record. The other picture shall be firmly affixed to the license to be issued to the applicant. The
license issued to such person shall be numbered, and shall state the year for which such license is issued. Such license shall further state the name, address, age, height,
weight and color of eyes and hair, and state that the party named on such license, whose picture is shown on the face thereof, is a duly licensed driver of a motor vehicle in
the city, and such license shall further provide a space for the signature of the licensee, which signature shall be affixed on the license in the presence of the chief of police
at the time such license is delivered to the licensee. All licenses shall be signed by the chief of police.
(g) The license shall be kept by the licensee under a celluloid cover, while such licensee is driving or acting as a chauffeur of a taxicab, so as to be easily seen by all
passengers in such vehicle.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/376
(h) It shall be a violation of this section for any person holding a chauffeur's license hereunder to fail to have same displayed in the manner stated in subsection (g) at all
times in the motor vehicle which he is driving and of which he is acting as chauffeur.
(i) All licenses issued by the chief of police under this section shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year in which same are issued. It shall be a
violation of this section to drive a taxicab with a chauffeur's license displayed which has expired.
(j) Any chauffeur's license issued by the city under the terms of this section may be either revoked or suspended by the chief of police for a violation of the ordinances
of the city or the traffic laws of the state by the holder of such license, and such license may also be revoked or suspended if the holder thereof is negligent or careless in
the operation of a taxicab. Upon revoking or suspending any license the chief of police shall notify in writing the licensee whose license is revoked or suspended, and the
chief of police shall immediately take up such license so revoked or suspended. Within ten (10) days after revocation or suspension of the license, the party whose license
has been revoked or suspended may appeal to the city manager (or his designee) for reinstatement. The city manager (or his designee) shall give the party so appealing a
hearing, and after a hearing, shall either sustain or reverse the action of the chief of police in revoking or suspending such license. If the action of the chief of police is
sustained by the city manager (or his designee), the revocation or suspension of such license shall stand. If the action of the chief of police is reversed, the license shall be
returned to such licensee immediately.
(k) It shall be a violation of this section for any person to employ or permit a person to drive a taxicab owned by such person, who does not have a valid chauffeur's
license issued by the chief of police for the current year, and such owner of such a vehicle shall require such driver to produce a chauffeur's license issued by the city for
the current year. Upon employing a driver for a taxicab, the person owning such vehicle, or the agent thereof so employing, shall immediately notify the chief of police of
the name of such driver and the license number of the license which such driver holds. If a driver of a taxicab is discharged or otherwise leaves the employ of the person
owning such vehicle, such person shall immediately notify in writing the chief of police of any dismissal. Upon receipt of such a notice, the chief of police shall
investigate the reasons for such dismissal, and after completing such investigation may, if he deems it advisable, revoke or suspend the license of the driver so dismissed.
Such licensee may appeal from the action of the chief of police to the city manager (or his designee), who shall either sustain or reverse the action of the chief of police.
(l) It shall be a violation of this section for any person owning one or more taxicabs to keep in his employment for the driving of such vehicle any person whose license
issued by the city has been either revoked or suspended.
(m) A licensee may renew his license upon expiration thereof by filing with the chief of police an application for renewal upon forms to be furnished by the chief of
police, and shall furnish two (2) recent photographs of himself of the dimensions heretofore set out in subsection (f), and shall furnish a certificate from a physician of the
city showing that he is physically capable to safely operate a motor vehicle for hire.
(n) A fifteen dollar ($15.00) application fee shall be charged for any chauffeur's license or a renewal thereof by the city.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 6, adopted 9/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 29-51; Ordinance 11-045, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/11)
Sec. 6.07.007 Terminals required
(a) Every operator of a taxicab shall maintain within the city an off-street terminal of sufficient size to accommodate all of the owner's taxicabs.
(b) The form and type of a terminal shall be of such a nature as best meets public convenience and necessity and affords a safe, sanitary and lawful operation of
transportation by taxicabs. The site, location, type of proposed buildings and the sanitary conditions of the taxi stand shall be reflected in an application to the chief of
police. The equipment, site and place of a terminal must be found by the chief of police or his designee to best meet public convenience and necessity prior to an
authorization to a permit holder to operate such terminal. An affirmative finding in favor of the applicant reflecting adequate sufficiency of the place of any off-street
terminal shall be considered as having an established prima facie case thereon, upon its appearing within the application that the operator of taxicabs is presently operating
for his own exclusive use such off-street terminal now being operated in the commercial areas of the city.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-56; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 8, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.07.008 Signs; numbering; lettering
Every taxicab shall have printed on each side and in the rear of such taxicab the name of the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates, together with
the company's telephone number and the cab number. All of the lettering mentioned in this section shall not be less than two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in height and not
less than five-sixteenths (5/16) of an inch in stroke and such paint shall be either enamel or oil paint that will weather the elements, and shall be kept legible at all times.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-57)
Sec. 6.07.009 Maximum load
No driver or owner of any taxicab, licensed under the provisions of this article, shall permit or allow more passengers than the vehicle is rated to carry in such taxicab; and
in no event shall more than two (2) persons, in addition to the driver, be permitted to ride in the front seat of such taxicab, and then only if the number of passengers
makes it necessary. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-58; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 9, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.07.010 Persons permitted to ride; picking up additional passengers
No taxicab driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab except a passenger for hire or an employee of the taxicab service by whom the driver is
employed. Unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent, no additional passengers shall be picked up or permitted to ride in a taxicab on the same trip.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-59)
Sec. 6.07.011 Maximum driving hours
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to be in charge of the same continuously for more than twelve (12) hours, and no owner of any taxicab shall permit any
driver of any taxicab to be on continuous duty, as a driver, for a greater period than twelve (12) hours. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-60)
Sec. 6.07.012 Cruising
No driver shall cruise at any time, and whenever a taxicab is unoccupied the driver shall proceed at once by the most direct route to the garage where the vehicle is housed
or to the nearest stand; or if dispatched by radio, it shall proceed at once by the most direct route to the place directed by the radio dispatcher. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1,
adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-61)
Sec. 6.07.013 Soliciting patrons
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to speak or to call out in a loud manner “taxicab,” “automobile for hire,” “hack,” “carriage,” “bus,” “baggage,” or “hotel,” or in
any manner attempt to solicit passengers at any passenger depot or upon any passenger depot platform, grounds or premises of any public carrier, or upon any sidewalk or
street in front of any passenger depot of any public carrier within the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/376
(b) It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab or for any other person to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such taxicab by word or by sign,
directly or indirectly, while driving any taxicab over, through, or on any public street or public place of the city, or while same is parked on any public street or alley of the
city, or to repeatedly or persistently drive any taxicab through, over, or on any public street or place of the city, except in response to calls by patrons for such taxicab or
while actually transporting passengers therein.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, secs. 29-62, 29-63)
Sec. 6.07.014 Property left in cabs
(a) All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department all property left in such vehicles by passengers.
(b) When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the office of the chief of police, he shall make an entry of the fact and shall keep all such articles until claimed
by the owner, or disposed of as authorized by statute.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-64)
Secs. 6.07.015–6.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.07.041 Required; contents of application
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any taxicab upon or over any street in the city, unless and until a permit
therefor has been issued by the city.
(b) No permit certificate shall be issued by the city until the owner or person in charge or control of such taxicab shall make application in writing to the city for such
permit, on blanks to be furnished by the chief of police, stating in such application the name of the owner, or person by whom such permit is desired, his street address,
the type of motor vehicle to be used as a taxicab, the cubic inch displacement of the engine, the VIN number and license plate number thereof, the seating capacity,
according to its trade rating, the owner thereof, and such other relevant information as may be deemed advisable and necessary by the city.
(c) Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.
(d) If the applicant for a permit is a corporation, such application shall be made by some duly authorized officer of the corporation, and shall state whether it is a foreign
or domestic corporation, its address and place of business, its officers and their addresses, its correct corporate name and a “certificate of good standing” issued by the
state agency which issued the corporation charter; if the applicant for a permit is a partnership or association, such application shall be made by some duly authorized
officer or agent of the partnership or association, and shall give the trade name, or partnership name or association name of the partnership or association, together with
the names and addresses of the partners.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-41)
Sec. 6.07.042 Issuance; denial; term; fee; transferability
(a) If the chief of police finds from investigation or hearing that such application shall be denied, the chief of police shall immediately give notice to the applicant of
such action.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to operate the same where a permit has not been issued therefor under the provisions of this article, and a violation
of this section shall be sufficient reason to revoke the permit of such owner or operator with respect to any other taxicab. After the application to operate a taxicab or
taxicabs upon or over the streets of the city has been granted, in accordance with this article, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to issue a permit therefor to such
applicant.
(c) All permits issued hereunder shall commence January 1 of each year and expire December 31 of such year. The annual company license permit fee shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). The annual fee for each permitted vehicle shall be $75.00.
(d) The permits issued under this article shall be deemed personal to the holder thereof and shall not be transferable or assignable.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 3, adopted 9/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 29-42)
Sec. 6.07.043 Bookkeeping; access to books
The permit holder shall be required to install and adequately maintain a system of bookkeeping which is subject to the approval of the finance officer of the city, which
books shall be subject to inspection of such person as the city manager may designate, to verify the accuracy of amounts that may be due the city. Any neglect, omission
or refusal by the permit holder to do so shall act as a forfeiture of such permit. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 4, adopted 9/20/05; 1978
Code, sec. 29-44)
Sec. 6.07.044 Cancellation unless taxicab operated for twenty days of each month
Every permit held under the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of a taxicab may be canceled, unless taxicabs are operated thereunder in accordance with
the provisions of this article on at least twenty (20) days out of each calendar month. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-45)
Secs. 6.07.045–6.07.070 Reserved
Division 3. Rates and Fares
Sec. 6.07.071 Taximeters
(a) Required. All holders of permits for taxicabs operating upon the streets in the city shall install and equip each taxicab with a taximeter, which taximeter shall be set
upon the rates established in this article, and such taximeters shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city or its employees.
(b) To be in operation while conveying passengers. No taxicab shall be operated at any time with a passenger unless the meter on the taxicab is correctly operating and
showing the rates that are being charged. If at any time the taximeter stops or fails to operate or is operating incorrectly, it shall be the duty of the operator of the taxicab to
immediately take such taxicab to its terminal and not operate the same until the meter has been fixed and adjusted.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, secs. 29-54, 29-55)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/376
Sec. 6.07.072 Amounts; regulations
(a) Authority to fix. The city council shall have the right to change or establish the rates and fares to be charged by taxicabs in the city at any time it deems necessary.
(b) Schedule. Unless otherwise changed by the city council, the following taxicab rates and fares shall be effective in the city:
(1) The rate or fare of either one or two (2) passengers shall be two dollars seventy-five cents ($2.75) for the first one-tenth (1/10) mile or fraction thereof
and twenty cents ($0.20) for each one-tenth (1/10) mile or fraction thereof traveled thereafter. The rate for additional passengers shall be one dollar ($1.00) per
passenger, not to exceed the vehicle's maximum seating capacity, according to trade rating.
(2) For each one minute of waiting time consumed by the taxicab at the instance of the passenger, the rate shall be thirty cents ($0.30).
(3) Whenever a taxicab is engaged on an hourly basis, whether for one or more passengers, the rate or fare shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each hour. For
each quarter hour in excess of each completed hour, the rate shall be three dollars seventy-five cents ($3.75) for each quarter hour the taxicab is so engaged.
(c) Posting. There shall be posted, in a conspicuous place in a frame with a transparent cover, on the inside of each taxicab, a card showing the rates herein prescribed;
such card shall be posted in a place easily discovered and read by any passenger riding in such taxicab.
(Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; Ordinance 05-073, sec. 7, adopted 9/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 29-52; Ordinance 11-045, sec. 2, adopted 7/12/11)
Sec. 6.07.073 Refusal of passenger to pay
It shall be unlawful for any passenger to refuse to pay the legal fare due by him for the use of any taxicab mentioned in this article, after having hired the same; and any
person who hires any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired and, after using the same, fails or refuses to pay any taxicab fare due by him shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ordinance 99-77, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/99; 1978 Code, sec. 29-53)
ARTICLE 6.08 TOW TRUCKS, TOWING COMPANIES AND TOW TRUCK OPERATORS*
Sec. 6.08.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them:
Consent tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term
does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle.
Drop fee. The fee charged for a nonconsent tow which is disengaged at the request of the vehicle's owner or operator while the towed vehicle is still at the location from
which it is being removed.
Missed call. The towing company was called and no contact made with a representative of the company or the towing company's tow truck did not respond to the scene
within thirty (30) minutes of notification.
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under Chapter 501, Texas Transportation Code or any other device designed to be self-propelled in, on or by which
a person or property may be transported on a public roadway.
Nonconsent tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow.
Operate. To drive or cause to be driven a tow truck on a public roadway.
Operator. Any person operating a tow truck on a public roadway of this state.
Owner. A person owning, leasing or otherwise using either directly or indirectly a tow truck on a public roadway of this state.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association or other legal entity.
Public roadway. A public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
Recovery. Actions taken to upright or otherwise move a vehicle to a position from which it can be towed.
Tow truck. A motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch or otherwise move another motor vehicle.
Towing company. An individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public
roadway in this state but does not include a political subdivision of the state.
Vehicle storage facility. A garage, parking lot or any other type of facility owned by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten (10) or more
vehicles a year.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-70; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 1, adopted 12/22/09)
Sec. 6.08.002 Operation of tow truck
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow truck in the city for the purpose of participation in or execution of any nonconsent tow, unless the tow truck is:
(1) Licensed and permitted as a tow truck pursuant to state statutes; and
(2) Owned by a towing company registered and permitted by the city.
(b) No person, operating a tow truck who performs a nonconsent tow, may tow any motor vehicle to any location other than:
(1) A vehicle storage facility located in the city operated under a permit for same issued by the state department of licensing and regulation; or
(2) With the consent of the towing company, a specific location in the city designated by the vehicle's owner.
(c) No person shall stop or park any tow truck within one thousand (1000) feet of the scene or site of any vehicle accident or collision while any vehicle disabled,
damaged or wrecked in such accident or collision remains at such scene or site unless:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/376
(1) It is licensed and permitted as a tow truck pursuant to state statutes and has been directed by or received the consent of a police officer at the scene to
stop or park the tow truck within the one thousand-foot area; or
(2) It is a tow truck which has been summoned to the scene or site of a vehicle accident by the owner of a vehicle involved in the accident and does not, in
the opinion of any police officer investigating the accident, constitute a safety hazard to vehicles or persons at the scene or obstruct or interfere with the
activities of the officers investigating the accident or scene.
(d) No person, while on any public roadway or public property, may solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, the business of towing, removing, repairing, storing,
wrecking or buying any vehicle which is wrecked or disabled and on a public roadway.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-71; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 2, adopted 12/22/09)
Sec. 6.08.003 Permit required; application; fee; placement on rotation list
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any towing company in the city, without having first obtained a towing company
permit from the city issued under this article to such person to operate a towing company within the city.
(b) Application generally. The chief of police shall develop necessary forms to enact these provisions. Any person desiring to operate a towing company in the city
shall make application with the police department for the issuance of a towing company permit. The applicants shall furnish all required information and supporting
documents noted on the application form. A towing company permit shall not be issued by the chief of police unless the applicant meets all required provisions of this
article, including but not limited to:
(1) All information on the submitted application is true and accurate and all required supplemental documents or information has been furnished.
(2) The towing company operates a vehicle storage facility in the city which is, at all times, licensed pursuant to the Texas Vehicle Storage Act, as it may be
amended, and which is in compliance with all provisions of the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act and any provisions of the Texas Occupations Code relevant
to operation of a vehicle storage facility.
(3) The physical facility to be operated by the towing company meets the following requirements:
(A) The facility is in compliance with all zoning requirements of the city;
(B) The physical facility to be operated by the towing company is not a part of any other business which performs towing services and is not located at
the same physical location as any other towing company;
(C) The physical location of the towing company has an office of not less than two hundred (200) square feet;
(D) The towing company has an active, published telephone number that is different from any other towing company and is not answered by an
electronic answering device; and
(E) The towing company has a sign on the business premises identifying the towing company by the name as it appears on the license application,
street address, telephone number, hours of business, and any vehicle storage facility license number issued for that location. Said sign shall be of a size
that may be read from a distance of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
(c) Denial/suspension/revocation. An individual identified as an owner of a towing company on the application who has a felony conviction within the previous five (5)
years that, in any fashion, relates to the duties and responsibilities involved in the operation of a towing company or which directly affects such person's fitness to perform
as a towing company owner may have their application for permit denied or have any permit suspended or revoked by the chief of police. In determining whether an
individual's criminal conviction (which includes the entry of a deferred judgment) relates to the performance of a towing company owner, the chief may consider the
following factors:
(1) The nature, seriousness and frequency of a crime;
(2) The relation of the crime to the purpose for requiring the permit;
(3) The extent to which a permit may offer an opportunity for the individual to engage in further criminal activity of the same or similar type as that in which
the individual has previously been involved; and
(4) The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of a towing company
owner.
(d) Fee. The permit fee to operate a towing company under the terms and conditions of this article shall be payable as follows:
At the time of the original or renewal application for a towing company permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a nonrefundable
application fee. If the application is approved by the chief of police, the applicant will be issued a permit to operate a towing company in the city.
(e) Term. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued.
(f) Rotation. The chief of police shall devise a rotation system for towing companies that wish to be used in nonconsent tows. A tow truck company may be placed into
the system by paying a fifty dollar ($50.00) annual fee. To participate in this program, the owner must agree to the regulations promulgated by the chief for such.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; Ordinance 00-104, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/00; 1978 Code, sec. 29-72; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 3, adopted 12/22/09)
State law reference–Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2303.
Sec. 6.08.004 Nonconsent towing fees
(a) The maximum fees which may be charged by a towing company which performs nonconsent tows pursuant to this article are as follows:
(1) Vehicles 10,000 pounds or less: $165.00.
(2) “Drop” fee to release a vehicle which has been “hooked up” by a tow truck: $60.00.
(3) Towing surcharges and fuel adjustment fees are not allowed.
(4) Reasonable recovery charges are allowed. Disputes are resolved by the chief.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/376
(5) A daily storage fee of not more than that allowed by state law.
(b) All towing companies performing tows pursuant to this article must accept major credit cards as payment for the fees provided for services rendered.
(c) The chief of police will undertake a general review and survey of towing fees every two (2) years.
(d) A towing company may request that a rate study be performed by requesting same in writing to the city manager accompanied by a payment of $2,500. A towing
company may submit any documentation or rate-related information along with that request. The findings of said study will be considered in the rates adopted by the city
council.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-73; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 4, adopted 12/22/09)
Sec. 6.08.005 Denial, suspension or revocation of permit or license
(a) Investigation. The police department shall investigate all complaints arising from reported violations of this article. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief
of police shall determine if a violation occurred. If the chief of police determines that a significant violation of this article occurred, the chief may suspend or revoke the
permit or license according to the following standards:
(1) Violation of any provision of this article, the Texas Transportation Code, Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act, or section of the Texas Occupations Code
regarding operation of tow trucks, towing companies or vehicle storage facilities by owners, agents or employees of a towing company shall subject the towing
company to the following administrative action regarding their towing company permit:
(A) First offense: Suspension of towing company permit for thirty (30) days.
(B) Second offense: Suspension of towing company permit for sixty (60) days.
(C) Third offense: Revocation of towing company permit for two (2) years.
(b) Penalties independent and may be in addition to other penalties. The administrative penalty set forth in this section shall be independent of and may be in addition to
any other penalties assessed pursuant to any violation of any ordinance of the city or statute or administrative code of the state. The determination of whether a violation is
significant shall be within the sole discretion of the chief of police.
(c) Time. Time limitations for computation of penalties regarding suspension or revocation of permits or licenses for repeat offense shall be calculated based on a twoyear
period from the date of the first offense for which a permit is suspended or revoked. The holder of a permit that was revoked may not, for a period of two years from
the date of the revocation, apply for any new permits of the type that was revoked.
(d) Notice. The chief shall provide written notice of any suspension, revocation or denial setting out the basis for the decision, giving the effective date for the
suspension, revocation or denial and providing the appeal procedure. A suspension, revocation or denial shall become effective seven (7) days from the date that the chief
of police notifies the permit holder of the suspension, revocation or denial unless an appeal is filed as provided herein.
(e) Appeal procedure. Any appeal of a decision by the chief of police regarding a towing company permit must be in writing and must be submitted to the city
manager's office prior to the effective date of the suspension, revocation, denial or decision. The written request for appeal must set forth the basis for the appeal and
specifically identify any error or misapplication of information or of this article by the chief of police regarding the. The city manager shall submit the appeal to the city
council and city council may either hear the appeal or select a hearing officer to preside at any appeal hearing and the decision of the city council or such hearing officer
shall be final. The appellant may appear at any hearing and it shall be the burden of the appellant to establish that the decision by the chief of police is incorrect. The chief
of police shall be entitled to present any information or evidence which would support the chief's decision. The city council or hearing officer shall assess the evidence
presented at the hearing and affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the chief by a suspension of the towing permit for up to thirty (30) days for a first offense, up to
sixty (60) days for a second offense or revocation of the permit for up to two (2) years for a third offense. The city council or hearings officer shall affirm, reverse or
modify any other decisions of the chief after assessing the evidence presented at the hearing.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-74; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 5, adopted 12/22/09)
Sec. 6.08.006 Responsibilities
(a) Tow truck operator. All tow truck operators shall:
(1) Obey all lawful orders given by any police officer and not in any manner interfere with any police officer in the performance of his/her duty.
(2) Not remove any wrecked, disabled or illegally parked vehicle from any public roadway without authorization from a police officer; provided, however,
that the driver of a stalled or disabled vehicle not involved in an accident may authorize a tow truck operator to remove his/her vehicle when no police officer
is present.
(3) Prior to performing any nonconsent tow or related service or on request of the owner or operator, furnish in writing to the owner or operator of the
vehicle to be towed, a list of all charges that pertain to any towing services to be performed, including but not limited to:
(A) The fee schedule to be charged for the towing of a vehicle within the city limits. Fees related to towing of a vehicle outside of the city limits shall
be by agreement between the tow company and the owner or operator of the vehicle to be towed.
(B) The method of payment of the fee.
(C) The name of the tow company picking up the vehicle.
(D) The telephone number(s) at which the tow company may be contacted.
(E) The location to which the vehicle will be towed, if not specified by the owner, operator or agent of the owner of the vehicle.
(4) Remove from the site from which any vehicle is removed all resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. “Resulting wreckage or debris” does not include the towed vehicle's load or cargo.
(b) Towing company. The towing company shall:
(1) Ensure that their tow truck arrives at the requested scene within thirty (30) minutes of notification.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/376
(2) Keep full and complete books or records in accordance with sound business practices related to each and every nonconsent vehicle tow pursuant to this
article.
(3) Permit any inspector or officer designated by the chief of police to, during normal business hours, inspect the premises, tow equipment, storage facilities,
records of vehicles towed and records of fees and charges of each nonconsent tow.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-75; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 6, adopted 12/22/09)
Sec. 6.08.007 Penalties
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is permitted or continued to exist shall be and is deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
(b) Any violation charged pursuant to this section shall be independent of and may be in addition to any administrative penalties which may be imposed regarding the
suspension, revocation or denial of any permit or license granted under this article.
(c) Missed call penalties.
(1) Two (2) missed calls in a calendar month will result in a seven-day suspension from the rotation list.
(2) Three (3) missed calls in a calendar month will result in a fifteen-day suspension from the rotation list.
(3) Four (4) missed calls in a calendar month will result in a thirty-day suspension from the rotation list.
(4) Five (5) missed calls in a calendar month will result in a one-year suspension from the rotation list.
(Ordinance 98-64, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/98; 1978 Code, sec. 29-76; Ordinance 09-072, sec. 7, adopted 12/22/09)
ARTICLE 6.09 OIL AND GAS DRILLING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.09.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, all technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily
attributed to them by the oil and gas industry. The following words and terms, wherever and whenever used or appearing in this article, shall have the scope and meaning
hereinafter defined and set out in connection with each:
Applicant. Any person who applies for a drilling or seismic testing permit hereunder.
Approved, approved type, or approved design. Improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the building official.
Building code. The portion of this code or any ordinance of the city known by that title and all amendments thereto.
Building permit. The permit required by the building code.
Completion of drilling. A well is completed, for the purpose of these regulations, thirty (30) days after the drilling crew has been released. The drilling crew is released
within the meaning of this subsection when work at the well site for drilling or completing the well is suspended, either temporarily or permanently.
Derrick. Any structure, improvement, equipment, or facility, and each and every part thereof, whether completed or not, and which is required, or used or useful, for or in
connection with drilling, operating, or maintaining a well for the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth, together with all parts of and appurtenances
to such structure, improvement, equipment, or facility, including, but not limited to, foundations and sills therefor, pumphouses, engine houses or housings, pipe-racks,
postings, walkways, mud-ditches, and crown blocks.
Designated agent. The designated agent of the applicant or permittee.
Diligence. That the drilling derrick is in its operating position over the well, properly anchored and supported, and that an operating crew is on duty at the drill site at all
reasonable times.
Drilling. Entry onto the site with equipment and/or personnel for the specific purpose of actually opening a well hole intended to produce oil or gas.
Drill site. The premises used during the drilling and subsequent life of a well or wells, which is necessary for the safe operations thereof.
Erect. To build, construct, install, assemble, put together, improve, alter, move, reconstruct, restore, renovate, renew or repair any building, structure, improvement or
facility, or any part or portion thereof or foundations therefor, or appurtenance thereto, whether or not such building, structure, improvement or facility is completed, or to
work upon, or in any way assist in such erection.
Flammable liquids. Oil and other fluid hydrocarbons, including liquefied gases or other flammable liquids, having a flash point below two hundred (200) degrees
Fahrenheit. The flash point of all commodities shall be determined by the Elliot, Abel, Abel-Pensky, or Tag closed cap testers, but the Tag closed cap tester, standardized
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, shall be authoritative in case of dispute. All tests shall be in accordance with the methods adopted by the American
Society for Testing Materials, and approved by the American National Standards Institute, or their successors.
Gas. The gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
Lessee. The possessor of the right to explore and recover minerals from the premises.
Lessor. The owner of mineral rights.
Maintain. To repair, or otherwise keep or place in working condition, and also to permit, or authorize to exist, regardless of whether any actual maintenance work is done.
For the purposes of this article, an oil well, well hole, derrick and production equipment shall be deemed to be “maintained” upon the premises in and upon which the
same were or are being drilled, erected or installed, until the following tasks are accomplished:
(1) Every part of such derrick and production equipment shall be removed from the drill site.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/376
(2) All requirements for abandonment established by the state and any other regulatory authority having jurisdiction must be met.
(3) All sumps, cellars, rotary mud, concrete, oil and rubbish must be removed and the drill site cleaned and all ditches must be leveled.
(4) All property of the city which may have been disturbed or damaged by the operations at the drill site shall be repaired and cleaned as needed and restored
to substantially the same condition as existed at the time of the issuance of the permit.
Maintenance. The repair and replacement of parts of a structure when the repair or replacement does not alter or lessen the strength or stability of the structure.
Nonurbanized drilling site. A drill site shall be considered nonurbanized if no occupied commercial, residential or industrial structure exists in use within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the proposed well hole.
Occupied structure. Only those structures that are regularly occupied by persons at least twenty (20) hours per week.
Oil. Petroleum and other fluid hydrocarbons obtained from the earth.
Operate. To work or act upon or to cause or permit natural or artificial forces to function in connection with any structure, plant, equipment, machinery, or facility with the
purpose of utilizing the same for the purpose for which it was or is erected or maintained, or for any other purpose, and, when used with reference to a well, well hole,
derrick or production equipment, means and includes any acts or functions performed or permitted to occur in connection with such well, well hole, derrick or production
equipment from and after the completion of the drilling of the well, for the purpose of producing or obtaining oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the ground, and for the
purpose of collecting and handling the same and making deliveries thereof at the well or from the shipping tanks or lease tanks in the vicinity of the well. “Operate”
includes all functions performed or permitted to occur in connection with such production, collection, handling and delivery, including the repair, reconditioning,
restoration, perforating, redrilling or deepening of said well or well hole, and the dehydration or cleaning of said oil prior to making such deliveries as aforesaid.
Operator. The person, whether owner, lessee, or independent contractor, actually in charge and in control of the drilling, maintenance, operation or pumping of a well or
lease.
Owner. A person who has legal or equitable title to the surface of the drill site.
Peak particle velocity. The maximum rate of ground movement measured by any of the 3 mutually perpendicular components of ground motion.
Permit or drilling permit. The written, typed or printed permission issued to an applicant by the building official under the authority of this article.
Permittee. Any person to whom a permit has been granted and issued under and pursuant to the terms of this article by the building official.
Person. An individual; a receiver; a trustee; a partnership; a joint adventure; a firm; an unincorporated association; a syndicate; a club; a society; a trust; a private
corporation; a public corporation; a municipal corporation; a county, a state, or national government; a commission; a water district; a utility district; a political
subdivision; and a drainage, irrigation, levee, reclamation, flood control, or water conservation district, whether acting for himself or itself or in any representative
capacity.
Point of impulse. The location of the source of energy used in seismic testing. This definition shall include energy caused by detonation of explosive charges or through
the use of mechanical devices such as vibratory trucks, if approved by the city.
Production equipment. Pumping equipment, tubing, pipes, gauges, meters, valves, oil and gas separators, sumps, flow tanks, production tanks, shipping tanks, lease tanks,
shipping pumps, loading racks and all other structures, machinery, equipment and facilities, and each and every part thereof, whether completed or not, required for or
used or useful in connection with the operation, repair, reconditioning, redrilling or maintenance of a well or well hole, and the collection, handling and delivery of oil, gas
or other hydrocarbons therefrom, and which structures, machinery, equipment and facilities are not included in the “derrick,” “well,” or “well hole,” as heretofore defined.
“Production equipment” also includes any wash tanks, dehydration plant or other equipment or facility operated or maintained by or in behalf of the operator of said well
for the purpose of separating sand, water and other foreign substances from the oil, gas or other hydrocarbons produced or obtained by said operator, prior to shipping or
delivering said oil from the shipping tanks or lease tanks at the well, or in the vicinity thereof.
Redrilling. The deepening of an existing oil well or otherwise drilling beyond the extremities (to the side) of the existing well casing. The provisions of this article relating
to drilling shall be equally applicable to redrilling.
Structure. That which is built or constructed for the purpose of human habitation and occupancy.
Suspended operations. The approved temporary suspension of drilling or redrilling operations pending a resumption of operations or abandonment.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of an oil well, for holding or storing liquids at or near atmospheric pressure.
Urbanized drilling site. A drill site shall be considered urbanized where an occupied commercial, residential or industrial structure exists within one thousand (1,000) feet
of the proposed well hole.
Well head. A well head is composed of the casinghead, Christmas tree and all well connections.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-1; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-1; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 1, adopted
4/29/08; Ordinance 08-045, sec. 1, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.09.002 Bond required; amount; conditions
Prior to the issuance of drilling or redrilling permit hereunder, the applicant shall furnish the building official with a bond in the principal sum of seventy-five thousand
dollars ($75,000.00) per drill site. Such bond shall be executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as
principal, naming the city for the benefit of the city conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this article. In addition, the bond will be
conditioned that the applicant will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the applicant by reason of the breach of any of the terms, provisions
and conditions of this article; and that the applicant will promptly restore to their former condition streets, sidewalks, and other public property which may be damaged in
drilling operations; and that the applicant will comply with all fencing, screening and site restoration requirements of this article. If at any time the building official should
find the applicant's bond to be insufficient for any reason, he may require the applicant to file a new bond. (1958 Code, sec. 24-6; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted
3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-6; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 6, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 4, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.003 Reduction of amount of bond
Upon written request from a permittee who has complied with all provisions of this article, the building official may permit a reduction of the permittee's bond to a sum of
not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per drill site for the remainder of the time such well produces. (1958 Code, sec. 24-7; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted
3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-7; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 7, adopted 4/17/07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/376
Sec. 6.09.004 Insurance required; types; amounts
Prior to issuance of a drilling or redrilling permit hereunder, the applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of insurance showing a valid policy or
policies of public liability insurance, covering bodily injuries and property damage. Said insurance shall be written by a company authorized to do business in this state.
Such policies shall provide for the following minimum coverage:
(1) Bodily injuries and general liability one occurrence: $5,000,000.00 in an urbanized area.
(2) Property damage: $2,500,000.00 in an urbanized area.
(3) Bodily injuries and general liability one occurrence: $2,500,000.00 in a nonurbanized area.
(4) Property damage: $1,000,000.00 in a nonurbanized area.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-8; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-8; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 8, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 5, adopted
4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.005 Waiver of bond and insurance for financially responsible person
The building official may waive the requirements for surety bond and policies of insurance as required herein as to any drilling or redrilling permittee who is financially
responsible and capable of meeting obligations for amounts in excess of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) upon the permittee filing with the building official in lieu of
any such surety bond or insurance policies a letter of acceptance and indemnity approved by the city attorney, binding and obligating such permittee to abide by the
conditions for which surety bond and insurance policies are required as prescribed herein, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability
growing out of or attributable to the granting of any and all permits to such permittee, including acts or omissions of the city, its officers, agents, and employees in
connection with said drilling permit. (1958 Code, sec. 24-9; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-9; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 9, adopted 4/17/07;
Ordinance 08-027, sec. 6, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.006 Indemnification of city for damages
The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims, causes of action and damages of every kind, for
injury to or death to any person and damages to property arising out of the operation under any drilling permit and including acts or omissions of the city, its officers,
agents, and employees in connection with said drilling permit. (1958 Code, sec. 24-19; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-20)
Sec. 6.09.007 Filing of “Potential” or “Plug and Abandon” report
A copy of the “Potential” or “Plug and Abandon” report of any well furnished to the state railroad commission shall be concurrently filed by the permittee with the
building official. (1958 Code, sec. 24-21; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-21; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 17, adopted 4/17/07)
Secs. 6.09.008–6.09.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.09.041 Required (drilling or seismographic testing); location restrictions
(a) No person shall conduct any drilling, redrilling or seismic testing within the corporate limits of the city without having obtained a permit for said drilling, redrilling
or seismic testing under this article.
(b) It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to conduct any drilling operations within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school of the
Beaumont Independent School District without the prior written consent of the board of trustees of said district, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of
any parochial or charter school without the prior written consent of the board of trustees or other governing body of said schools. It is hereby declared a nuisance for any
person to conduct any drilling operations within one thousand (1,000) feet of a property line of any hospital, convalescent home, orphanage or nursing home located
within the city limits without the prior written consent of the owner or owners thereof. It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to conduct any drilling or redrilling
operation outside the city limits closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any occupied structure other than a school, hospital, convalescent home, orphanage, or nursing
home located within the city limits without obtaining a permit for said drilling or redrilling under this article.
(c) It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to construct any storage tank or tanks within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school of the
Beaumont Independent School District without the prior written consent of its board of trustees, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any parochial
or charter school without the prior written consent of the board of trustees or the governing body of said schools, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any hospital,
convalescent home, orphanage or nursing home located either within or outside the city limits without the prior written consent of the owner or owners thereof.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-2; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; Ordinance 78-78, sec. 1, adopted 7/18/78; 1978 Code, sec. 19-2; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 2, adopted
4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 2, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.042 Review and action on drilling permit application; approval or disapproval of operations
(a) For all drilling and redrilling permit applications where the well hole is within a distance of three hundred feet (300') to five hundred feet (500') of a structure it shall
be the responsibility of the building official to review impartially and to recommend to the city council the approval or disapproval of said application. The city council,
based on the criteria established herein, may require the applicant for a permit hereunder to do those things necessary to insure the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city. The city council shall review the applications according to the following criteria:
(1) That the proposed drilling operation will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or
impair property values within the immediate vicinity;
(2) That the drilling operation will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property;
(3) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided;
(4) The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provided for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments;
(5) That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odors, fumes, dust, noise and vibration;
(6) That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/376
(7) That there is sufficient landscaping and screening to insure harmony and compatibility with adjacent property.
In authorizing a drilling operation, the city council may impose additional reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community.
(b) For all drilling and redrilling permit applications where the well hole is at a distance that is greater than five hundred feet (500') from any structure, it shall be the
responsibility of the building official to review impartially and to approve or disapprove said applications. The building official, based upon the criteria established herein,
may require the applicant for a permit hereunder to do those things necessary to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Items required shall be
clearly stated in the permit issued hereunder.
(c) The building official is hereby authorized to approve or disapprove the actions of the permittee not otherwise covered by the permit application during the drilling
and post-drilling operations in accordance with the terms of this article only.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-3; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-3; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 3, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 3, adopted
4/29/08; Ordinance 09-014, sec. 1, adopted 3/31/09)
Sec. 6.09.043 Form of drilling permit application; permit fee
(a) Applications for permits to drill or redrill any oil or gas well shall be made in writing to the building official and shall include the following:
(1) The legal description of the proposed drill site and the legal description of the real property in the city which the applicant proposes to explore for oil and
gas purposes. A map shall be attached to the application, which map shall clearly show and outline the proposed drill site with reference to existing city streets
or city limits.
(2) A statement of what property the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or permission of the owner, to pass through and enter for drilling
purposes and a further statement that the applicant agrees, in finally locating the well, not to pass through or enter any property where he does not have such
right.
(3) The proposed location, type, kinds, size, and amount of major equipment and a general description and the method of operation of the proposed well.
(4) The proposed method of handling and using any product proposed to be developed at the well site and the proposed method of disposing of all waste
products anticipated.
(5) A statement from a licensed surveyor or registered professional engineer verifying the drill site as being either an urbanized or a nonurbanized drilling
site as defined herein.
(b) Each application shall state the maximum depth to which the applicant desires to drill, and each application shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten cents
($0.10) per foot of depth. The maximum fee for any one well shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Should the applicant drill to a greater depth than that stated in his
application, a supplemental fee shall be required based upon the increased depth.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-4; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-4; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 4, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 3, adopted
4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.044 Notification and public hearing requirements for drilling permits
(a) (1) No application for a drilling or redrilling permit where the well hole distance is between three hundred feet (300') to five hundred feet (500') of a
structure shall be approved or disapproved until after a public hearing in relation thereto is held by the city council at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. At least seven (7) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of
general circulation in the city.
(2) Written notice of all public hearings before the city council on drilling and redrilling permits shall be sent to owners of real property lying within five
hundred feet (500') of the proposed well hole, such notice to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have
rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
(b) The permittee shall publish notices in the local newspaper in the manner and order set forth below:
(1) 1st notice - to be published at least three (3) days prior to the start of any drilling, blasting, and/or vibratory testing. Running time - one (1) day.
(2) 2nd notice - to be published on the day which drilling, blasting, and/or vibratory [testing] first begins. Running time - one (1) day.
(3) Such work may continue no more than three (3) consecutive working days of nonproduction. If drilling, blasting, and/or vibratory testing does not occur
during this time, another notice must be published on the day such work will restart. Additional notices must be republished to coincide with intermittent work.
Running time - one (1) day each occurrence.
(4) Final notice - to be published when any such drilling, blasting, and/or vibratory testing is approximately fifty percent (50%) complete. Running time -
one (1) day.
Aforementioned notices shall appear in the classified section under legal notices. The notice shall indicate the scope of operations to be performed and will detail the
approximate dates and time (starting and ending) and general location of work to be performed. The city building official shall be notified when the notice has been placed
with the newspaper and what dates it will be published.
(c) (1) The permittee is required to notify the following entities twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of any drilling, blasting, or vibrancy [vibratory]
testing:
Fire department - Fire marshal (409-880-3905)
Blasting work only:
Engineering division (409-880-3725); and
All residents abutting test route.
(2) If more than three (3) consecutive working days of nonproduction occur, the permittee must contact the fire department twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of any blasting to be done after a period of intermittent work.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/376
(3) In addition, the permittee is required to notify any and all other entities, directly or indirectly, involved through other permits or agreements.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-5; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-5; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 5, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027, sec. 3, adopted
4/29/08; Ordinance 09-014, sec. 2, adopted 3/31/09)
Sec. 6.09.045 Transfer
All permits granted under this article shall be transferable upon approval of the building official, after a determination that all requirements of this article are met by the
transferee. (1958 Code, sec. 24-17; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-17; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 14, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.046 Lapse of permit
(a) Time; work without permit prohibited. The drilling permit shall become null and void unless the permit is accepted by the applicant in its entirety in writing, filed
with the building official within thirty (30) days from the effective date thereof, and no work on such drill site shall be commenced until such permit is issued and
accepted. The drilling permit shall become null and void unless drilling is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of the permit.
(b) Extension of time.
(1) Whenever a person holding a drilling, redrilling or seismic testing permit pursuant to the provisions of this article wishes to request an extension of the
time within which drilling, redrilling or seismic testing operations are required to be commenced to a period beyond one hundred eighty (180) days after the
effective date of the permit, a request for such extension shall be filed with the building official in writing and be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each location for which an extension is requested.
(2) Such request for an extension shall set forth facts showing good cause for the building official to allow additional time for the commencement of the
operation. When good cause is shown, the building official shall grant an extension not to exceed an additional one hundred eighty (180) days.
(1958 Code, secs. 24-18, 24-20; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, secs. 19-18, 19-19; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 16, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 08-027,
sec. 7, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 08-045, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.09.047 Violations; suspension or revocation of permit; appeals
Any permit may be suspended or revoked for any material violation of the conditions of the permit by the permittee or for persistent violation of any law by the permittee
in the operation of any such well. The building official shall not revoke any permit without first giving the permittee ten (10) days' written notice of the nature of the
violations and of the intention to revoke such permit. The permittee shall at once cease drilling or seismic testing operations after receipt of notice of intent to revoke this
permit. If, within such ten (10) day period, the permittee requests a hearing before the building official, the building official shall grant such hearing within fifteen (15)
days after the date of such request. At such hearing, evidence shall be presented to establish to the satisfaction of the building official the extent and nature of the violation
which constitutes grounds for the revocation, and the permittee shall be given an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying at such hearing. The permittee shall
thereafter be permitted at that hearing, or at a continued hearing, if a continuance is requested by the permittee, to present evidence to disprove or explain such alleged
violations. The building official shall thereupon, after hearing all the evidence, determine whether or not the permit should be revoked, and his determination thereon shall
be final. If the building official determines that the permit should be revoked, the permittee may appeal the decision of the building official to the city council. (Ordinance
08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 09-014, sec. 5, adopted 3/31/09)
Secs. 6.09.048–6.09.080 Reserved
Division 3. Standards and Practices
Sec. 6.09.081 Minimum distance of well hole from occupied structure
In each case of drilling or redrilling, the distance from any well hole to any occupied structure shall be a minimum of three hundred feet (300'), unless the permittee
obtains written consent from the owners and tenants of said occupied structure and furnishes said written consent to the building official prior to issuance of said permit.
All applicants for drilling or redrilling permits with a well hole distance between three hundred feet (300') to five hundred feet (500') to any occupied structure shall be
reviewed in accordance with section 6.09.042 herein. (1958 Code, sec. 24-10; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-10; Ordinance 07-049, sec.
10, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 09-014, sec. 3, adopted 3/31/09)
Sec. 6.09.082 Minimum distance of storage tank in conjunction with well from occupied structure
In each case the distance from any storage tank or tanks in conjunction with any well to any occupied structure shall be a minimum of three hundred feet (300'). Tanks
located at a distance between three hundred feet (300') to five hundred feet (500') to any occupied structure shall be reviewed in accordance with section 6.09.042 herein.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-11; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-11; Ordinance 09-014, sec. 4, adopted 3/31/09)
Sec. 6.09.083 Minimum distance of well hole and tanks from streets
In each case the distance from the center of a well hole drilled under a permit issued under this article and from all storage tanks installed after the effective date of
Ordinance 76-38 (from which this article is derived) to the nearest traveled public or private street right-of-way shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet. (1958
Code, sec. 24-12; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-12)
Sec. 6.09.084 Vehicular access route to site
A vehicular access route to the site may be established at the discretion of the building official after consideration of all of the circumstances including but not limited to
the existing width, load-bearing capability, and composition of all streets proposed to be included in the access route; residential densities; potential interference with
pedestrian and bicycle traffic; the presence of effective traffic control; and the general character of the areas through which the proposed access route would pass. (1958
Code, sec. 24-13; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-13; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 11, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.085 Compliance with permit as to drilling location and as to operations
(a) The oil or gas well drilled pursuant to any drilling permit shall be drilled only within the properties which the permittee set forth in its application as the properties
through which such well was proposed to pass unless the permittee secures approval of the building official to cause such well to pass through other properties.
(b) No permittee shall drill, operate, or maintain any oil or gas well except in conformity with the terms and conditions of a permit issued under this article.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-14; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-14; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 12, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.086 Representative operations supervisor
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/376
The applicant or permittee shall designate a competent representative who shall be responsible for the supervision of drilling operations and the carrying out of the
conditions of any permit. Such representative shall be available at all times during drilling operations and shall be the responsible contact agent of the applicant or the
permittee whom the building official may require to carry out the provisions of the permit. (1958 Code, sec. 24-15; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code,
sec. 19-15; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 13, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.087 Marking well location; road and ground surfacing
(a) The well location shall be clearly marked by staking or other suitable means and identified as the “drill site.”
(b) Prior to commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the drill site itself shall be surfaced so as to prevent excessive
dust and mud and in a manner adequate to support the weight of mobile firefighting equipment. Surfacing may be by boards, rock, gravel, shell, or any other material that
is oiled and maintained so as to prevent excessive dust and mud.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-16; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-16)
Sec. 6.09.088 Storage of equipment and materials restricted
(a) No equipment shall be stored on the site which is not essential to the everyday operation of the oil well located thereon.
(b) Lumber, pipes, and casing shall not be left on the site, except when drilling operations are being conducted on the site.
(c) No equipment shall be stored except within the fenced areas of the site.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-22; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-22)
Sec. 6.09.089 Compliance with regulations as to slush pits
The slush pit or pits at each drilling site shall at all times be in compliance with all state and federal requirements. (1958 Code, sec. 24-23; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1,
adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-23)
Sec. 6.09.090 Fencing of site
(a) Within thirty (30) days after production has been established, the permittee shall enclose the well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks, by a
substantial, smooth eleven (11) gauge or heavier galvanized steel net wire fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height and provided with barbed wired supporting arms and a
minimum of three (3) strands of barbed wire installed at the top of each post and properly built so as ordinarily to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons into the
enclosure, with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure. This applies also to each existing producing drill site
in the city together with its surface facilities and storage tanks.
(b) Wells which when in operation have no externally moving parts are excepted from the fencing requirements of this section; however, all storage tanks and surface
facilities must be fenced as required herein.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-24; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-24)
Sec. 6.09.091 Landscaping or screening of site
(a) Within ninety (90) days after production has been established on an urbanized drill site containing a well which when in operation has externally moving parts, the
permittee shall have completed either adequate landscaping or screening composed of shrubbery a minimum of six (6) feet in height, but in any event tall and thick
enough to shield the drilling site from public view, or physical fencing and screening which effectively shields the drilling site from public view. Such required
landscaping or screening is subject to the approval of the enforcement administrator concerning its adequacy in meeting the requirements of this section. Said landscaping
or screening must be maintained so as to shield the drill site from public view so long as production continues on the drill site. This applies also to each existing producing
urbanized drill site in the city containing a well which when in operation has externally moving parts.
(b) Wells which when in operation have no externally moving parts are excepted from the fencing requirements of this section; however, all storage tanks and surface
facilities must be fenced as required herein.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-25; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-25)
Sec. 6.09.092 Noise, vibration, odor, etc., restricted
(a) All drilling and production equipment installed or operated upon any drill site shall be so constructed, operated, and maintained that no noise, vibration, odor, or
other harmful or annoying substances or effects therefrom which can be eliminated or diminished by the use of modern and approved types of equipment, silencers, or
greater care shall ever be permitted to result from operations on any drill site to the injury or annoyance of persons in the vicinity of such drill site. Proven technological
and mechanical improvements in methods of drilling and production and in the type of equipment used therefor shall be adopted from time to time, as the same become
available, if the use of such equipment, improvements, and methods will reduce noise, vibration, odors, or the harmful effects of annoying substances.
(b) The engines used in connection with the drilling of any oil well or any production equipment shall be equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers, or an exhaust
muffler box, sufficient to suppress noise and to prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes, sparks, ignited carbon, or soot. The type and design of any muffler or
muffler box shall be approved by the building official and by the fire chief or his authorized representative.
(c) At an urbanized drilling site, the operation of oil field production equipment shall not increase the ambient noise level at any given time by more than three (3)
decibels in any octave band, when measured at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the oil field production equipment in question. The ambient noise level, for
the purpose of this section, shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions
within an area of not more than five hundred (500) feet nor less than two hundred (200) feet from the oil field production equipment in question, all such readings to be
taken at a distance and in such a manner so as to obtain the surrounding noise level as distinguished from the noise level produced by the oil field production equipment.
However, if the ambient noise level is less than seventy (70) decibels, the production equipment shall not generate a noise level in excess of seventy (70) decibels
measured at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from such equipment.
(d) At a nonurbanized drilling site, the operation of oil field production equipment shall not generate a noise level in excess of eighty (80) decibels at a distance of one
hundred fifty (150) feet from said production equipment.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-26; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-26; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 18, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.093 Neatness, cleanliness and order; firefighting equipment
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/376
(a) All of the operations at the drill site shall be conducted in a careful and orderly manner, and the premises shall at all times be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly
manner.
(b) All firefighting equipment as required and approved by federal statutes shall be installed and maintained on the drill site at all times during drilling operations. In
addition, each drill site shall, during drilling operations, be equipped with two (2) one hundred fifty (150) pound dry chemical fire extinguishers equipped with wheels and
also equipped with fifty (50) feet of hose on each unit.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-27; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-27)
Sec. 6.09.094 Watchmen
At all times during the drilling process until the well is abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as herein provided, the permittee
shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises; provided, however, it shall not be necessary to keep a watchman on duty on the premises when other workmen of the
permittee are on such premises. (1958 Code, sec. 24-28; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-28)
Sec. 6.09.095 Casing quality
(a) All casing, including surface protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel or equivalent quality oil well casing. Each production string of casing
must meet or exceed the minimum internal pressure yield strength established under American Petroleum Institute standards.
(b) Each joint and length of each particular casing string shall have prior to setting unconditionally passed a complete cold water test and the building official shall be
furnished a copy of said test results.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-29; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-29; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 19, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.096 Minimum depth of surface casing; cementing of casing
No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly setting surface casing to a minimum depth of eight hundred (800) feet. No well shall be drilled within the
city limits without cementing the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the
surface of the ground, and without cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind
the production string to at least five hundred (500) feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. In the event a protection string of casing be required under the
terms of this article, said protection string shall not be installed without cementing the protection string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely
fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least five hundred (500) feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. (1958 Code, sec. 24-30;
Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-30)
Sec. 6.09.097 Master valves; valve cocks; blow-out preventers
No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at least one master valve, and without property equipping the
protection casing when set with at least one master valve and one fluid-operated ram type blow-out preventer, and without properly equipping the production casing
during completion operations and workover operations with at least one master valve and at least one fluid-operated ram type blow-out preventer. On each well drilled, a
valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blow-out preventer shall test a minimum of three thousand (3,000) pounds and its mechanical operation
shall be tested at least once every twenty-four (24) hour period. All control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. (1958 Code, sec. 24-31;
Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-31)
Sec. 6.09.098 Drilling fluid
No well shall be drilled within the city limits without using mud as the drilling fluid after the setting of surface casing as provided in section 6.09.096 hereof. Prior to the
time the well reaches a total depth of five thousand (5,000) feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the
weight of the mud-laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at a weight sufficient to contain the formation pressure. After the well reaches a total depth of five
thousand (5,000) feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the drilling fluid shall be
maintained to provide a hydrostatic head necessary to contain the formation pressure. In reworking a well the drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at a weight that
will provide a hydrostatic head necessary to contain the formation pressure. (1958 Code, sec. 24-32; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-32)
Sec. 6.09.099 Testing restrictions
It shall be unlawful for any person in connection with the drilling or reworking operations of any well within the city limits to complete any drill stem test or tests except
during daylight hours and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in
the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. (1958 Code, sec. 24-33; Ordinance
76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-33)
Sec. 6.09.100 Tubing quality
All tubing used in any well within the city limits shall be seamless steel tubing meeting American Petroleum Institute standards for minimum internal pressure yield
strength. (1958 Code, sec. 24-34; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-34)
Sec. 6.09.101 Casingheads
Each well drilled within the city limits shall be equipped with a casinghead with a working pressure sufficient to contain the formation pressure. Casingheads shall not be
welded. The casinghead pressure shall be checked at two (2) or more times each calendar year and, if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be
immediately taken to eliminate the source and the existence of the pressure. (1958 Code, sec. 24-35; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-35;
Ordinance 07-049, sec. 20, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.102 Christmas tree and well head connection maintenance; safety valve
The Christmas tree and all well head connections on each well existing within the city limits and on each well drilled pursuant to a permit under this article shall be
maintained so as to operate safely. If a Christmas tree or a well connection is found to be leaking or otherwise defective, the building official may immediately revoke the
permit. In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city limits exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch, the flow wing of the Christmas tree
shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. (1958 Code, sec. 24-36; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978
Code, sec. 19-36; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 21, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.103 Compressor station shutdown devices and other precautionary measures
The compressor station on each well existing within the city limits and on each well drilled pursuant to a permit under this section shall be equipped with an automatic
shutdown device which shall be clearly marked and visible at all times. The compressor station and all pipes and valves connected thereto must meet or exceed the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/376
minimum internal pressure yield strength established under American Petroleum Institute standards and shall have prior to installation unconditionally passed a complete
cold water test. All compressor stations shall be checked a minimum of once each three (3) months and the result of said check shall be sent to the building official upon
request. Failure to comply with this section shall result in immediate cancellation of the drilling permit issued hereunder. (1958 Code, sec. 24-37; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1,
adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-37; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 22, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.104 Tank restrictions and requirements
Except as provided in section 6.09.082 herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any occupied structure a maximum of two (2) five hundred (500) barrel tanks for crude
oil storage may be constructed in connection with any one producing well within the city limits. There shall be no limitation on the size or number of storage tanks that
may be constructed in the area more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any occupied structure. Each tank shall be equipped with flame arrestors and shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be vaportight. Each tank or tank battery shall also be surrounded with an earthen fire wall which shall at all times be free of vegetation
and which shall be at such distance from the tank as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least one and one-half (1-1/2) times the maximum capacity of such
tank. The area outside each tank but contained within the earthen fire wall shall be properly drained at all times. A permittee may use, construct, and operate a steel
conventional separator, and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil, with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to
be vaportight. Each oil gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. (1958 Code, sec. 24-38; Ordinance 76-38,
sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-38)
Sec. 6.09.105 Plugging of abandoned wells
When a well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to plug said well in accordance with the requirements of the state railroad
commission. (1958 Code, sec. 24-39; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-39)
Sec. 6.09.106 Disposal of salt water
The permittee shall make adequate provision for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface. Disposal shall be made in a manner
that will not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or injure surface vegetation. (1958 Code, sec. 24-40; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978
Code, sec. 19-40)
Sec. 6.09.107 Time restriction on delivery of equipment and supplies
Whenever practicable on an urbanized drilling site all delivery of equipment and supplies to the drill site shall be made only on Monday through Saturday between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. This requirement shall not apply to drilling operations being conducted in a nonurbanized area. (1958 Code, sec. 24-42; Ordinance 76-
38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-42)
Sec. 6.09.108 Transportation of oil and gas restricted
When production has been established in any new well, the construction of a pipeline shall be started as soon as practical and economically feasible and thereon diligently
prosecuted until such pipeline is completed in order to eliminate the trucking of oil. All oil and gas shall be shipped and transported through pipelines after those pipelines
have been completed, except in cases in which such a method of transportation is found by the building official to be unfeasible. In such cases the shipping and
transportation of oil by truck may be permitted at the discretion of the building official after consideration of all the circumstances, including but not limited to the
proximity of the well to existing and available pipelines, the availability of acceptable access routes to the drill site, and the frequency and size of transportation vehicles
required to serve the well. In the instance of an oil spill, the permittee may bring in a vacuum truck to clean said spill without the necessity of obtaining permission from
the building official. (1958 Code, sec. 24-43; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-43; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 24, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.109 Producing or nonproducing status of well
If a well is placed in production, it shall be inspected periodically by the building official in accordance with the requirements of this article. A notification of status
change from producing well to abandoned well shall become necessary for any well which has not produced or which has not been used for subsurface injection into the
earth of oil, gas, salt water, or oil field waste for a period of nine (9) months, unless permission to hold said well for a longer period of time is obtained from the state
railroad commission. The operator shall upon request of the building official furnish verification of production for the purposes of this section. (1958 Code, sec. 24-44;
Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-44; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 25, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 6.09.110 Well abandonment requirements; removal of derricks when production started
If a well is to be abandoned, the following requirements are applicable:
(1) Within ninety (90) days after the completion of drilling operations or abandonment of further drilling, the derrick and all drilling equipment, including
temporary tanks, shall be removed from the drill site. Well abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements of all applicable laws and ordinances.
Upon such well abandonment, the permittee shall restore the property as nearly as possible to its original condition and shall remove all concrete foundations,
oil-soaked soil, and debris. All holes or depressions shall be filled to the natural surface.
(2) Drilling operations shall be prosecuted in a workmanlike manner until the well is completed or abandoned. Once a well is a producing well, it shall not
be serviced with a permanent derrick.
(3) The building official shall determine that the drill site and all facilities pertinent thereto have been restored to their original condition as nearly as
practicable and that all requirements of this section have been satisfied.
(4) After abandonment of a well by the operator, the drilling permit will be terminated if, to the satisfaction of the building official, all the conditions stated
in this article have been fulfilled.
(1958 Code, sec. 24-45; Ordinance 76-38, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/76; 1978 Code, sec. 19-45; Ordinance 07-049, sec. 26, adopted 4/17/07)
Secs. 6.09.111–6.09.140 Reserved
Division 4. Seismic Testing
Sec. 6.09.141 Permit required; fees
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct seismographic testing within the city without a permit, as set out below:
Seismographic permits (within the city): $50.00 plus $100.00 per shot hole on city property where allowed.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/376
Sec. 6.09.142 Review and action on permit application; approval or disapproval of operations
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the building official to review impartially and to approve or disapprove all applications for seismic testing permits. The building
official, based upon the criteria established herein, may require the applicant for a permit hereunder to do those things necessary to insure the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the city. Items required shall be clearly stated in the permit issued hereunder. The building official is hereby authorized to approve or disapprove the actions
of the permittee not otherwise covered by the permit application during the seismic testing and post-testing operations in accordance with the terms of this article only.
The building official shall issue or deny a permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of a properly completed application for seismic testing.
(b) If the building official denies a seismic testing permit, he shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial and the reasons therefor.
(c) If the building official grants a seismic testing permit, the permit, in a form as determined by the building official, shall be mailed to the applicant.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.143 Form of permit application
Each application for a seismic testing permit shall be made in writing to the building official and shall include the following:
(1) A map at a scale of 1:200 showing the location of the proposed seismic survey, including cable routes and points of impulse, when applicable. This map
shall clearly show city limits, streets and parcel boundaries.
(2) A statement of what property the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or permission of the owner, to pass through and enter for seismic testing
purposes.
(3) The proposed location, type, kinds, size, and amount of major equipment and a general description and the method of operation of the proposed testing.
(4) A statement from a licensed professional engineer who will act as the third-party engineer, stating that they will be on the job site during the entire period
of testing to monitor peak particle velocity levels and to mitigate any potential damage to public or private property.
(5) Each application shall state the depth to which the applicant desires to drill and the size and type of charges that will be used during the course of testing.
(6) All required explosive permits issued by the city fire marshal.
(7) Any other permits required by any other governmental entity.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.144 Testing requirements and restrictions
Each seismic testing operation shall be limited to the following restrictions:
(1) No point of impulse using an explosive charge shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of any above-ground or below-ground structure.
(2) No point of impulse using an explosive charge shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of any pipeline without written consent of the pipeline or
facility owner.
(3) No point of impulse using mechanical vibration (vibratory trucks) shall occur within thirty-five (35) feet of any structure and shall occur only on private
property with the expressed written consent of the property owner of the property containing the mechanical point of impulse.
(4) Mechanical vibration (vibratory trucks) may be used on the city streets with the consent of the city engineer in addition to or in place of mechanical
vibration on private property in accordance with subsection (3) of this section and only if the distance, peak particle velocity of ground motion and time of
operation requirements in this section are adhered to. No mechanical vibration (vibratory trucks) shall be allowed on concrete city streets.
(5) No point of impulse shall be used on city property without written permission from the director of public works and only if the distance requirements
outlined in this section are adhered to.
(6) The applicant shall obtain written permission from property owners before entering upon or crossing their property.
(7) Utilizing third-party engineers for monitoring, no structure shall be subject to any peak particle velocity of ground motion in excess of 0.25 inches per
second.
(8) Testing and associated drilling shall occur on weekdays (Monday through Friday) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Emergency line
maintenance is allowed to occur on any day only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Testing and associated drilling may occur in non-urbanized
areas of the city on any day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. as approved by the building official. No testing, drilling or hauling of equipment
shall be allowed on holidays recognized as such by the city.
(9) The permittee shall immediately notify the city of any and all complaints of damage.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 12-066, sec. 1, adopted 9/4/12)
Sec. 6.09.145 Representative operations supervisor
The applicant or permittee shall designate a competent representative who shall be responsible for the supervision of seismic testing operations and the carrying out of the
conditions of any permit. Such representative shall be available at all times during seismic testing operations and shall be the responsible contact agent of the applicant or
the permittee whom the building official may require to carry out the provisions of the permit. (Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.146 Notification requirements
(a) The permittee shall publish notices in the local newspaper in the manner and order set forth below:
(1) 1st notice - to be published at least three (3) days prior to the start of any seismic testing. Running time - one (1) day.
(2) 2nd notice - to be published on the day which seismic testing first begins. Running time - one (1) day.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/376
(3) Such work may continue no more than three (3) consecutive working days of nonproduction. If seismic testing does not occur during this time, another
notice must be published on the day such work will restart. Additional notices must be republished to coincide with intermittent work. Running time - one (1)
day each occurrence.
(4) Final notice - to be published when any such seismic testing is approximately fifty percent (50%) complete. Running time - one (1) day.
Aforementioned notices shall appear in the classified section under legal notices. The notice shall indicate the scope of operations to be performed and will detail the
approximate dates and time (starting and ending) and general location of work to be performed. The city building official shall be notified when the notice has been placed
with the newspaper and what dates it will be published.
(b) The permittee is required to notify the following entities twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of seismic testing:
Fire department - Fire marshal (409-880-3905)
Blasting work only:
Engineering division (409-880-3725); and
All residents abutting test route.
If more than three (3) consecutive working days of nonproduction occur, the permittee must contact the fire department twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any blasting
to be done after a period of intermittent work. In addition, the permittee is required to notify any and all other entities, directly or indirectly, involved through other
permits or agreements.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.147 Bond required; amount; conditions
Prior to the issuance of any seismic permit hereunder, the applicant shall furnish the building official with a performance bond in the principal sum of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The bond shall be payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto and conditioned that the principal and bond will
pay all damages to any person caused by, or arising from, or growing out of any violation of the terms of this permit. Such bond shall be executed by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, naming the city for the benefit of the city conditioned that the permittee will
comply with the terms and conditions of this article. In addition, the bond will be conditioned that the applicant will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments
imposed upon the applicant by reason of the breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this article, and that the applicant will promptly restore to their
former condition streets, sidewalks, and other public property which may be damaged in seismic operations. If at any time the building official should find the applicant's
bond to be insufficient for any reason, he may require the applicant to file a new bond. (Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.148 Insurance required; types; amounts
Prior to issuance of any seismic permit hereunder, the applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of insurance showing a valid policy or policies of
public liability insurance, covering bodily injuries and property damage. Said insurance shall be written by a company authorized to do business in this state. The
applicant shall provide at least fifteen (15) days' written notice of any cancellation or modification of such insurance. Such policies shall provide for the following
minimum coverage:
(1) Bodily injuries: $300,000.00 per person, $1,000,000.00 per incident.
(2) Property damage: $1,000,000.00.
(Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 08-045, sec. 3, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.09.149 Transfer of permit
All seismic permits granted under this article shall be transferable upon approval of the building official, after a determination that all requirements of this article are met
by the transferee. (Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 08-045, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 6.09.150 Lapse of permit
The seismic permit shall become null and void unless the permit is accepted by the applicant in its entirety in writing, filed with the building official within thirty (30)
days from the effective date thereof, and no work on such drill site shall be commenced until such permit is issued and accepted. The seismic permit shall become null and
void unless seismic testing is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of the permit. (Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
Sec. 6.09.151 Indemnification of city for damages
The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims, causes of action and damages of every kind, for
injury to or death to any person and damages to property arising out of the operation under any seismic testing permit and including acts or omissions of the city, its
officers, agents, and employees in connection with said seismic permit. (Ordinance 08-027, sec. 8, adopted 4/29/08)
ARTICLE 6.10 GAMING SITES AND GAMING MACHINES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.10.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Applicant. The applicant is the intended operator, occupant or owner of the gaming site and/or gaming machines.
Chief building official. The chief building official for the city or the designated representative of the chief building official.
Church. A building, in possession of a certificate of occupancy, in which persons regularly assemble for purposes of religious worship, intended primarily for purposes
connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
City manager. The city manager or the designated representative of the city manager.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/376
Coin-operated machine. Any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card, or check including a
skill or pleasure coin-operated machine.
Fire chief. The chief of the city fire department or the designated representative of the chief of the fire department.
Gaming machine. Any coin-operated machine or electronic, electromechanical or mechanical contrivance designed, made, and adopted solely for bona fide amusement
purposes if the contrivance rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items,
that have a wholesale value available from a single play of the game or device of not more than ten (10) times the amount charged to play the game or device once or
$5.00, whichever is less. Not included in this definition is a machine used only for entertainment purposes, as entertainment is defined in section 372.1701 of the Texas
Administrative Code.
Gaming site. Any location that displays, exhibits, or maintains for public patronage - through general admission or membership - any game machine.
Hospital. A building, in possession of a certificate of occupancy, where the primary function is to provide medical and/or surgical treatment to sick or injured people and
as defined by the Texas Occupations Code chapter 241.
Occupant. An individual who occupies or exercises direct control of the premises where a gaming site is located.
Operator. The manager or other natural person principally in charge of the gaming site.
Owner. An individual who has an ownership interest in the premises of the gaming site or receives an economic or monetary benefit from the gaming site.
Permit. A current, valid permit issued by the city manager pursuant to the terms of this article to an operator of a gaming site.
Permit holder. A person who has been issued a valid permit pursuant to this article.
Police chief. The chief of police of the city police department or the designated representative of the chief of police.
School. A building, in possession of a certificate of occupancy, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the
playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to:
(1) Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades 1 through 12 classes are taught; and
(2) Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular
classes in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12.
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. Any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill,
or pleasure, or is operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. This includes:
(1) A marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature football machine, miniature golf machine,
miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in
addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and
(2) Does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.002 Declaration of findings
The necessity of the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public
policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained in this article are in the furtherance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. (Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Secs. 6.10.003–3.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
Sec. 6.10.031 Permit
(a) It shall be unlawful for any operator, occupant or owner of the gaming site to display, exhibit, or maintain for public patronage, or otherwise keep for operation by
the public, any gaming machine without first obtaining a permit issued under the terms and conditions of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any operator, occupant or owner of the gaming site to operate any gaming site located within the city unless the permit issued for that site is
posted at or near the principal public entrance to the gaming site in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the gaming site.
(c) In any prosecution under subsection (a) above, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then and there
posted as provided in subsection (b).
(d) A machine that provides the possibility, probability and/or certainty of dispensing a non-cash prize, toy or novelty with a value of not more than ten (10) times the
amount charged to play the game or device once, or $5.00, whichever is less at the time of play, but does not allow the player to amass or accumulate points, tokens or any
other method to accumulate credits towards larger or greater value non-cash merchandise prizes, toys or novelties is exempt from the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.032 Signage
(a) Notwithstanding section 28.04.003 of this code or any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator, occupant or
owner of a gaming site not to clearly identify the site with a sign as required by this article.
(b) The sign displayed should be one provided by the city with a white background with black Arial font lettering of 1.5 inches.
(c) The sign must clearly read “GAMING SITE” and may not include any advertisements.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/376
Sec. 6.10.033 Machine registration requirements
Gaming machines, as defined in this article, shall be registered as follows:
(1) The permit holder, owner, or operator is required to maintain on its gaming site a complete inventory, along with serial numbers or equivalent
identification, as set forth in subsections (4) and (5) below at all times. The initial application for permit shall include a certificate of the inventory, along with
serial numbers or equivalent identification, as set forth in subsections (4) and (5) below, of the machines that the permit holder intends to put into operation
when the gaming site begins its business activities.
(2) Each renewal permit application shall contain a certificate of inspection of updated inventory, along with serial numbers or equivalent identification, as
set forth in subsections (4) and (5) below, of the gaming machines that the permit holder intends to put into operation when the gaming site begins its business
activities under the renewal license.
(3) Before a new gaming machine is put into operation at the gaming site, the permit holder shall notify the chief of police of the addition of the machine to
the inventory and update its inventory accordingly.
(4) Upon review of the inventory of machines under subsections (1), (2) and (3) above, the chief of police shall enter each machine into the gaming machine
registry that the city shall create. For each machine registered, the city manager shall cause to be issued and delivered to permit holder for each machine within
seven (7) days of the notification required under subsection (3) a numbered metal or plastic decal. The registration decal for each machine shall be permanently
affixed thereto and in plain view at all times. Registration decals are not transferable. The failure of any machine to display a current registration decal shall be
a violation of this section and subject to enforcement action by the city.
(5) The inventory of machines under subsections (1), (2) and (3) above shall provide the following information: the manufacturer(s); the serial number(s);
common name, type or description of the game played on the machine. The registration decal shall contain the inventory number of the machine.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.034 Application; term
(a) A permit issued under this article does not vest any property rights in the applicant or permit holder; except to display, exhibit, or maintain for public patronage the
use of any gaming machines in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article.
(b) A gaming permit is non-transferable and non-refundable.
(c) A permit shall be issued for a twelve (12) month term beginning on the date of issuance.
(d) Any false statement made by an applicant on the application shall subject the permit to immediate suspension pending revocation and the applicant may be
prosecuted as a violation of section 37.10 of the Texas Penal Code (tampering with governmental records), a third degree felony.
(e) An application for permit shall be made by the intended owner or operator of the gaming site.
(f) The application shall be submitted with a fifty dollar ($50.00) processing fee for a site with 5 or fewer machines to the city manager on a form provided by the city
for such purpose. For a site with more than 5 machines, the application shall be submitted with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) processing fee to the city manager on a
form provided by the city for such purpose. The application must be completed for each location sought to be permitted. The following information is required in the
application:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, including the trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of the proposed
gaming site, and, if incorporated, the name registered with the Secretary of State;
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the operator of the gaming site to be permitted;
(3) Number of gaming machines on the gaming site and serial number of each machine;
(4) Whether a previous permit of the applicant, or, if applicable, a corporate officer of the applicant, has been revoked within two (2) years of filing of the
application; and
(5) A statement that all the facts contained in the application are true and correct.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.035 Renewal
(a) An application for renewal must be submitted thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the existing permit to the city manager on a form provided by the city for
such purpose with a fifty dollar ($50.00) processing fee for a site with 5 or fewer machines. For a site with more than 5 machines, the application for renewal shall be
submitted with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) processing fee to the city manager on a form provided by the city for such purpose.
(b) Applications for existing gaming sites submitted after the expiration date of the previous permit will be considered and processed as a new applicant.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.036 Grounds for denial or revocation
(a) The city manager shall refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of a permit or shall revoke a permit for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a permit;
(2) Revocation of a permit, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or corporate officer of the applicant within two (2) years preceding the filing of the
application;
(3) The applicant or a co-owner for such permit has, within the past ten (10) years, been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or gambling.
(b) The city manager shall not issue or renew a permit under this article and shall suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that the applicant or permit holder is
indebted to the city for any fee, costs, penalties, or delinquent taxes at the time of application or renewal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/376
(c) The city manager shall have the authority to deny or revoke all permits issued under this provision for any violation of this article by giving written notice, stating
the reason for denial or revocation, and same shall be cancelled ten (10) days from the date of receipt of such notice.
(d) No permit shall be issued within a period of one (1) year to anyone whose permit has been revoked, except at the discretion of the city council.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.037 Appeal from denial or revocation
If the city manager denies, refuses to approve the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit to an applicant, or revokes a permit issued under this article, this action is
final unless the applicant or permit holder, within ten (10) days after the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal to the city council by delivering said
notice to the city clerk setting forth specific grounds for the appeal. The city council shall either hear the appeal or select a hearing officer to preside over the appeal
hearing. The city council or hearing officer shall within fourteen (14) days of the notice of appeal grant a hearing to consider the action. The city council and hearing
officer have the authority to sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The decision of either the city council or hearing officer is final. (Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1,
adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.038 Transfer of permit
A permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be specific to the site and personal to the holder thereof and shall not be transferable or assignable. (Ordinance
14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.039 Replacement permits or decals
(a) A replacement permit shall be issued to the original applicant for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated after a written application is submitted with a fee of fifteen dollars
($15.00) to the city manager on a form provided by the city for such purpose.
(b) A replacement permit shall bear the same expiration date as the one it replaces.
(c) A new or replacement decal issued to a permit holder shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00).
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.040 Occupation tax
(a) Every permit holder who controls, possesses, exhibits, or displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city for public patronage or operation by the
public, any gaming machine shall pay, and is hereby levied on each such gaming machine, except those exempt under this article, an annual occupation tax in the amount
equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the current state occupation tax. All occupation taxes for gaming machines are payable annually in advance. The fee for issuing a replacement
occupation tax receipt for one lost, destroyed or mutilated shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00).
(b) Since the tax is payable in advance on an annual calendar year basis, the following pro rata tax rate schedule will be applicable to a gaming machine which is first
exhibited or displayed for commercial use within the city during any quarter of the calendar year:
(1) First quarter: January 1 to March 31 - an amount equal to the applicable local annual occupation tax;
(2) Second quarter: April 1 to June 30 - an amount equal to three-quarters (3/4) of the applicable local annual occupation tax;
(3) Third quarter: July 1 to September 30 - an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the applicable local annual occupation tax; and
(4) Fourth quarter: October 1 to December 31 - an amount equal to one-quarter (1/4) of the applicable local annual occupation tax.
In computing any tax payable under the aforesaid pro rata tax rate schedule, amounts calculated thereunder shall be rounded to the next higher full cent amount
as required.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Secs. 6.10.041–6.10.070 Reserved
Division 3. Inspections
Sec. 6.10.071 Inspections; compliance
(a) The gaming site shall conform to all zoning ordinances, building codes and fire prevention codes of the city and comply with all federal, state and local ordinances
and regulations relevant to the operations of a gaming site or gaming machine.
(b) The fire chief, the chief building official, all law enforcement, or code enforcement officials shall have the right to immediate access to the area of the gaming site
where such machines are located at any time during normal business hours or when the site is occupied for the purpose of inspecting said gaming site and enforcement of
the terms of this article and state law.
(c) An owner, operator, occupant, or any person who does not allow immediate access to the area of the gaming site where such machines are located to officials for the
purpose of inspection or enforcement commits an offense.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.072 Prohibited locations
(a) No gaming sites shall be permitted to be placed within three hundred (300) feet of any church, hospital or school.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business and the church, hospital or school shall be determined by measurements made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the applicant's property line to the nearest point of the church, hospital or school property
line.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.073 Responsibility of permit holder
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/376
A permit holder hereunder shall not permit any of the following activities within the permitted gaming site:
(1) The sale, purchase, possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverages as the same is permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, unless the
gaming site is licensed under the provisions of said code and the ordinances of the city for the sale, purchase, possession, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
(2) The operation of any gaming machine by a person younger than twelve (12) years of age except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(3) The operation of any gaming machine by any person twelve (12) years of age or older and under seventeen (17) years of age except between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight), Friday and Saturday.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Secs. 6.10.074–6.10.090 Reserved
Division 4. Enforcement
Sec. 6.10.091 Violations of existing laws not authorized
Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table, or gaming machine, the keeping, exhibition,
operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the city, any section of the Penal Code of this state, or the Constitution of this
state. (Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.092 Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or permit holder to exhibit or display, or permit to be exhibited or displayed for commercial use, any gaming machine
which:
(1) Does not have properly attached thereto a decal evidencing payment of applicable occupation tax and machine registration;
(2) Is located at any address or location other than the location listed for such machine as shown in the records of the city; or
(3) Has affixed to it a decal other than the decal issued for such as shown in the records of the city.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by this section, if it be shown that a person has violated this article, upon conviction, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Upon second conviction for a violation of this article, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(d) Any violation charged pursuant to this section shall be independent of and may be in addition to any administrative penalties which may be imposed regarding the
suspension, revocation or denial of any permit or license granted under this article.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.093 Sealing machine for nonpayment; hearings
(a) The chief of police shall seal, in a manner that will prevent further operation, any gaming machine upon which the tax required by this article has not been paid or
upon which the decal is not properly displayed. The owner or operator of any machine subject to this article shall be required to pay a fee equal to the maximum amount
permitted under section 2153.453 of the Texas Occupations Code for the release of any machine sealed, as provided herein, for nonpayment of the tax or for failure to
properly display the decal evidencing the payment of the tax and proper registration of the machine. The current fee amount shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each sealed
machine. Upon proof of payment of the occupation tax provided for in section 6.10.040 of this article, and the release fee, the chief will remove the seal.
(b) Any owner desiring to contest the tax, fee, or penalty owed to the city to secure the release of a sealed machine may request a hearing by delivering written notice to
the city clerk setting forth the specifics of the challenge. The city council shall either hear the challenge or select a hearing officer to preside over the hearing. The city
council or hearing officer shall within fourteen (14) days of the notice of challenge grant a hearing to consider the action. The decision of either the city council or hearing
officer is final.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.094 Penalty for removal of sealed machine
It shall be unlawful to remove from the permitted site any machine that has been sealed pursuant to section 6.10.093 of this article. Whoever removes or causes to be
removed a machine that is sealed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.095 Injunctions
(a) In addition to the fines and penalties provided in this article, if it appears that a person has violated or is violating or is threatening to violate any provisions of this
article, the city attorney may institute a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain the person from continuing the violation or threat of
violation.
(b) On application for injunctive relief and a finding that a person is violating or threatening to violate any provision of this article, the court shall grant such injunctive
relief as the facts may warrant.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
Sec. 6.10.096 Strict enforcement; exemptions
(a) All law enforcement personnel, inspectors, and other designated personnel shall carry out the provisions of this article and may issue citations for violations of this
article. All law enforcement officers and representatives shall strictly enforce and prosecute the provisions of this article, and court officials shall see that this article
receives strict interpretation and adjudication in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) A person in possession or control of a gaming machine is exempt from this article if:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/376
(1) The gaming machine is maintained exclusively in a personal residence and solely for personal use; or
(2) The gaming machine has been altered in such a way that it no longer functions as a coin-operated machine and is not patronized for the purpose of
winning cash or cash value prizes; or
(3) The gaming machine is owned by, leased or rented to organizations operated exclusively for charitable, educational, religious or benevolent purposes. An
organization with social or fraternal activities does not qualify;
(4) The gaming machines designed for and utilized exclusively by children are expressly exempt from the tax levied in division 2 hereof.
(Ordinance 14-023, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/14)
ARTICLE 6.11 PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS*
Sec. 6.11.001 Electronic recordkeeping required
(a) Any and all pawnshops and pawnbrokers doing business within the city shall, beginning on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derived,
register with leadsonline at www.leadsonline.com and shall upload, on at least a daily basis, all information relating to personal property purchased, received or otherwise
acquired by such pawnshop or pawnbroker to the database maintained by leadsonline.
(b) There shall be no direct cost to the pawnshop or pawnbroker associated with registration with leadsonline or with the uploading of the information required by this
section, other than the cost of computers and internet service.
(c) All costs charged for the use of the leadsonline service shall be borne by the police department of the city from its current budget.
(d) (1) It shall be a defense to compliance with this section if the pawnshop or pawnbroker is able to prove that a power failure or a computer system
malfunction prohibited timely entry of the required data into leadsonline and the pawnshop or pawnbroker promptly uploaded the required data within 24 hours
of computer system restoration.
(2) Should a pawnshop or pawnbroker fail to maintain an operable computer system so as to prohibit the pawnshop or pawnbroker from complying with this
section, then the pawnshop or pawnbroker may be cited for failure to comply with this section.
(e) The failure of any pawnshop or pawnbroker to strictly comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ordinance 06-027, secs. 1–5, adopted 5/9/06; 1978 Code, sec. 7-121)
CHAPTER 7
RESERVED
CHAPTER 8
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 8.01.001 Fire service fees
(a) The fire chief is hereby authorized to calculate fees for the following hazardous material instances and other fire related services based on the equipment, materials,
and labor utilized by all responding city departments in each instance. Fees will be assessed using equipment, material and labor rates set forth by city policy and includes
a 15% administrative fee on the total cost of the response. The person in control of the property or the person owning the property, real or personal, involved shall be
responsible to pay the amount charged for such services upon receipt of a bill.
(1) Response to and mitigation of a spill or release into the environment of a hazardous material as defined in chapter 27 of the International Fire Code.
(2) Response to and standby exceeding one (1) hour at the scene of a potential release of a hazardous material as defined in chapter 27 of the International
Fire Code.
(3) Response to and mitigation of an unauthorized open burning associated with land clearing or demolition activities.
(b) The following fees are hereby set for the following fire services or occurrence:
(1) Annual inspection fee required for target hazards including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living centers, and other such properties
which require multiple inspections within the year: $250.00.
(2) Annual inspection fee required for state licensed properties which require a single inspection per year: $50.00.
(3) Fee schedule for installation and/or removal of fuel storage tanks and dispensing units:
(A) First tank: $200.00.
(B) Each additional tank: $75.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/376
(C) Each dispensing unit: $50.00.
(4) Failure to immediately notify the fire official of any disconnection and/or interruption of any fire protection system. This shall also include any fire
protection system found to be unsafe, impaired, or inoperable: $500.00.
(Ordinance 00-68, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/00; Ordinance 03-078, sec. 3, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 03-099, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 10-3; Ordinance 10-
042, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/10; Ordinance 10-058, sec. 3, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 8.01.002 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-009, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 8.02 FIRE CODE
Sec. 8.02.001 Adopted
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, including
appendix chapters A through M, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8.02.002 of this article. (Ordinance
96-66, sec. 2, adopted 11/5/96; Ordinance 98-68, sec. 1, adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 03-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/03; 1978 Code, sec. 10-1; Ordinance 10-058, sec. 1,
adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-009, sec. 2, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 8.02.002 Amendments
Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the City of Beaumont, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Section 108.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 108.1 In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official or the fire marshal relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable
governing authority and shall office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. The board shall consist of seven (7)
members, such board shall be composed of one architect, one engineer, one member at-large from the building industry, one building contractor, one member
at-large from the public and two members from the fire service and fire safety professions.
Section 109.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 109.3 Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter,
repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directives of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions
of this code, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Section 111.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $2,000.00.
Section 202 is hereby amended by adding the following definitions:
Registered child-care home. The primary caregiver provides regular care in the caregiver's own residence for not more than six (6) children from birth through
thirteen (13) years for less than twenty-four (24) hours; and may provide care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional elementary school
children. The total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). These registered
child-care homes shall be classified as R-3 residential occupancies.
Licensed child-care home. The primary caregiver provides care in the caregiver's own residence for children from birth through thirteen (13) years on a twentyfour
(24) hour basis. The total number of children in care varies with the ages of the children, but the total number of children in care at any given time,
including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). These licensed child-care homes shall be classed as R-3 residential occupancies.
Section 901.5.2 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 901.5.2 Reinspection fee. Any company installing a fire detection and alarm system, a fire-extinguishing system, a fire sprinkler system, a fire
standpipe system, or any other fire protection system, shall test the installation for proper operation and code compliance prior to scheduling an acceptance test
with the fire marshal's office. Failure to meet these requirements will result in a reinspection fee of $100.00.
Section 903.2.8 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R
fire area.
Exception: Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code and shall not be required to have an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section 903.2.8.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.8.1 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in group R-3 occupancies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/376
Exception: Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code and shall not be required to have an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section 903.2.8.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.8.4 Care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family
dwelling.
Section 903.4.1.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 903.4.1.1 Monitoring systems. The sprinkler system shall be supervised by a fire alarm panel separate from any other fire alarm panel unless otherwise
approved by the fire official.
Sections 907.1.4, 907.1.5 and 907.1.6 are hereby added to read as follows:
907.1.4 System required. A total coverage, NFPA 72 compliant fire alarm system shall be installed in all nonsprinkled structures which are 2,000 square feet or
greater in size.
907.1.5 Tenant spaces. Individual spaces shall have an independent fire alarm system.
907.1.6 Code requirements. All systems shall meet all federal, state and local codes.
Section 1004.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1004.3 Posting of occupant load. All assembly occupancies shall post an occupant load. Every room or space shall have the occupant load of the room
or space posted in a conspicuous place, near the main entrance access doorway to the room or space. Posted sign shall be of an approved legible permanent
design and shall be maintained by the owner or authorized agent. Any occupancy that derives 51 percent or more of its income from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, any assembly occupancy that sells or provides setups for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic
beverages and, any assembly occupancy that rents or leases rooms or spaces for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages as determined by chapter
3, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, shall keep an accurate count of the number of occupants, in the rooms or spaces with the posted occupant load, during
business hours. The building official, fire marshal, or any other official authorized to enforce section 1004.3 may require the owner or authorized agent to
conduct an immediate recount of the occupants, when the accurateness of the count is in question, in order to determine the actual number. Should the actual
count of occupants exceed the posted occupant load, the occupancy owner or authorized agent will be ordered to immediately reduce occupant load to within
the posted limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state law imposes a fine,
the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation of any provision of
this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 27.02.01 of the International Fire Code is hereby repealed.
Section 3301.1.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 3301.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in section 3308.
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
(A) Storage of flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gas and propane in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be
established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(B) Bulk storage of flammable and combustible liquids, petroleum gas and propane in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk
storage in which the materials are distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy
Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial (L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and
in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Multiple-Family Dwelling (GC-MD) Districts providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e.: gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/376
(D) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids for use in emergency power systems can be located in all zoning districts providing that the
following conditions are met:
(1) The tanks are attached to and part of the power system.
(2) The tanks are of double wall construction.
(3) The tanks are labeled by a nationally recognized testing lab.
(4) The tanks shall have a capacity of no greater than 72 hours of operation.
(5) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(6) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e. gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(7) There will be no more than one tank on any tract of property.
(8) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Section 3404.2.11.3 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 3404.2.11.3.1 Foundation required. Underground storage tanks with a capacity of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more shall be installed on a twelveinch
thick, firm concrete foundation and attached by means of not less than three (3) steel anchor straps, each of which having a minimum dimension of onequarter
(1/4) inch thickness and two (2) inches width, or by means of other approved straps and strapping methods, and fastened taut around the tank by
turnbuckles or other adjustable fittings which are capable of withstanding at least as much stress as the straps.
Exception:
(1) Dead man anchors may be used provided that:
a) The anchors are manufactured and distributed by the manufacturer of the tank being installed;
b) Plans and documents for the proper size and length of the anchors shall be provided along with the tank installation plans; and
c) Anchors shall be installed per manufacturer's recommended installation procedures.
(2) Dead man anchors may be manufactured on location provided that:
a) Sealed, engineered plans shall be submitted to the fire marshal's office for approval prior to manufacture or installation of the anchors;
b) Construction of the anchors shall not deviate from the engineered documents;
c) Installation of the anchors shall comply with nationally recognized standards; and
d) Prior to installation, the dead man anchors shall be inspected by an inspector with the Beaumont Fire Rescue, fire marshal's office.
Section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 3406.2.4.4. Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
(A) Storage of flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gas and propane in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be
established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(B) Bulk storage of flammable and combustible liquids, petroleum gas and propane in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk
storage in which the materials are distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy
Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial (L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and
in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Multiple-Family Dwelling (GC-MD) Districts providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/376
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e. gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
(D) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids for use in emergency power systems can be located in all zoning districts providing that the
following conditions are met:
(1) The tanks are attached to and part of the power system.
(2) The tanks are of double wall construction.
(3) The tanks are labeled by a nationally recognized testing lab.
(4) The tanks shall have a capacity of no greater than 72 hours of operation.
(5) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(6) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e. gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(7) There will be no more than one tank on any tract of property.
(8) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Section 3506.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 3506.2 Limitations.
(A) Storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts designated
Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances and as found in
the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(B) Bulk storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk storage in which the materials are
distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial
(L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Multiple-Family Dwelling (GC-MD) Districts providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e. gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 3804.2. Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons and may
only be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
Chapter 50, Section 5002.1 “Definitions” of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding definitions to read as follows:
Beaumont terminal - A freight terminal of a porter or motor carrier that handles shipments of materials destined to or from the City of Beaumont so long as the
terminal is within the city limits.
Requiring placards - Any vehicle transporting hazardous materials in sufficient quantity to require placarding as set forth in the Department of Transportation
Hazardous Materials Regulations.
Hazardous materials route - The following streets and highways and segments of streets and highways:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/376
(1) Cardinal Drive (US Hwys. 69, 96, 287) from IH-10 to east city limits.
(2) IH-10 from west city limits to east city limits.
(3) Eastex Freeway (US Hwys. 69, 96, 287) from IH-10 to north city limits.
(4) Martin Luther King Parkway (Spur 380) from Cardinal Drive to IH-10 East.
(5) State Highway 105 from Eastex Freeway to west city limits.
(6) College Street (Hwy 90) from IH-10 to west city limits.
(7) From city limits west to Hwy 124 to Cardinal Drive.
(8) Major Dr. (Hwy 364) from Hwy 124 to Hwy 105.
(9) In other areas specifically designated by the fire official.
Chapter 50 shall be amended to add a new section 5004.14, to read as follows:
Section 5004.14 Storage of plastic and rubber material. The storage of plastic and rubber material within the city limits shall meet the following conditions:
(1) Such storage shall be accordance with the zoning laws of the city.
(2) The location of such storage shall be equipped with a fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of NFPA 13 for hazardous occupancy.
(3) The location of such storage shall be equipped with an automatic fire alarm system meeting the requirements of NFPA 72.
(4) All offices, mechanical, maintenance and electrical rooms shall be separated from the location of such storage by at least a one-hour fire separation.
(5) A one-hour fire and smoke partition shall be in place dividing all open areas of such storage into sections no larger than twenty-five thousand
(25,000) square feet.
(6) Such storage shall only be allowed in type I, II, III, or IV structures as the same are defined by the International Building Code.
Section 5006 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 5006
Transporting Hazardous Materials
Section 5006.1 Hazardous material route. No person shall haul or transport any hazardous materials as defined in this chapter in a tank vehicle as defined in
this chapter, except upon the streets or highways designated in the hazardous materials route as defined in this chapter.
(1) When it becomes necessary to leave the hazardous material route for the purpose of going directly to or from a commercial or industrial
establishment, said vehicle shall:
(a) Take the shortest route between the hazardous material route and the point of pickup and/or delivery.
(b) Use the established “truck routes” as defined in section 20.01.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont to the maximum extent
possible.
Section 5006.2 Placards required. The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards shall:
(1) Apply and display appropriate placards meeting Department of Transportation specifications on each end and each side of the vehicle; and
(2) Before operation, inspect the vehicle and determine that:
(a) The brakes are in good working condition;
(b) The steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(c) The electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured; and
(d) The vehicle is in a condition adequate to safely transport hazardous materials.
Section 5006.3 Prohibited hazardous materials area. No operator of a motor vehicle transporting hazardous materials as defined in the chapter shall transport
those materials on any street or highway, or segment of a street or highway, now or hereafter designated as a “prohibited hazardous materials area.”
Chapter 56, section 5601.1.3 shall be amended to read;
Fireworks, The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in section 5608.
Chapter 57, Section 5704.2.9.6.1, “Location where above ground tanks are prohibited,” shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 5704.2.9.6.1. Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
(A) Storage of flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gas and propane in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be
established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 30 [chapter 28] of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/376
(B) Bulk storage of flammable and combustible liquids, petroleum gas and propane in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk
storage in which the materials are distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy
Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial (L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and
in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Manufacturing Districts (GC-MD) providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e.: gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Chapter 57, Flammable and combustible liquids. A new section 5704.2.11.2.1 shall added to read as follows:
Section 5704.2.11.2.1. Foundation required. Underground storage tanks with a capacity of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more shall be installed on a twelveinch
thick, firm concrete foundation and attached by means of not less than three (3) steel anchor straps, each of which having a minimum dimensions of onequarter
(1/4) inch thickness and two (2) inches width, or by means of other approved straps and strapping methods, and fastened taut around the tank by
turnbuckles or other adjustable fittings which are capable of withstanding at least as much stress as the straps.
Exception:
(1) Dead man anchors may be used provided that:
a) The anchors are manufactured and distributed by the manufacturer of the tank being installed;
b) Plans and documents for the proper size and length of the anchors shall be provided along with the tank installation plans; and
c) Anchors shall be installed per manufacturer's recommended installation procedures.
(2) Dead man anchors may be manufactured on location provided that:
a) Sealed, engineered plans shall be submitted to the fire marshal's office for approval prior to manufacture or installation of the anchors;
b) Construction of the anchors shall not deviate from the engineered documents;
c) Installation of the anchors shall comply with nationally recognized standards; and
d) Prior to installation, the dead man anchors shall be inspected by an inspector with the Beaumont Fire Rescue, fire marshal's office.
Chapter 57, section 5706.2.4.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 5706.2.4.4. Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
(A) Storage of flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gas and propane in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be
established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 30 [chapter 28] of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(B) Bulk storage of flammable and combustible liquids, petroleum gas and propane in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk
storage in which the materials are distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy
Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial (L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and
in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Manufacturing Districts (GC-MD) providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/376
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e.: gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
(D) The storage of flammable and combustible liquids for use in emergency power systems can be located in all zoning districts providing that the
following conditions are met;
(1) The tanks are attached to and part of the power system.
(2) The tanks are of double wall construction.
(3) The tanks are labeled by a nationally recognized testing lab.
(4) The tanks shall have a capacity of no greater than 72 hours of operation.
(5) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(6) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e.: gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(7) There will be no more than one tank on any tract of property.
(8) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Chapter 58, Flammable gasses and cryogenic fluids, section 5806.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 5806.2 Limitations.
(A) Storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts designated
Heavy Industrial (H-I), Light Industrial (L-I) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) as defined in chapter 30 [chapter 28] of the Code of Ordinances and
as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(B) Bulk storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks larger than ten thousand (10,000) gallons or as bulk storage in which the materials are
distributed either at wholesale or retail to customers may be established within the zoning districts designated Heavy Industrial (H-I) and Light Industrial
(L-I) only after the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Beaumont and in accordance with NFPA 30.
(C) The storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in tanks of six hundred sixty (660) gallons or less may be established within the zoning districts
designated General Commercial – Manufacturing Districts (GC-MD) providing that the following requirements are met:
(1) All tanks must be labeled.
(2) Tanks shall be double walled, installed at grade level.
(3) Tanks shall not be installed within 100 feet of the property line of any established school, hospital, nursing home, day-care center, nursery
school, or residential property.
(4) Guard posts or other approved means must be provided to protect tanks from motor vehicle damage.
(a) Posts must be at least 4 inches in diameter and filled with concrete.
(b) Posts must be at least 3 feet from the tank and spaced not more than 4 feet apart.
(c) Posts must be at least 30 inches above grade and 33 inches below grade.
(5) Tanks must be enclosed in a chainlink fence at least 6 feet high. The enclosed area must be secured, i.e.: gates locked. (Exception: Tanks in
vaults or located on property with a perimeter security fence.)
(6) Tanks, accessories and installation shall comply with the fire prevention code including amendments, NFPA codes, ANSI publications,
ASTM and other applicable codes.
Chapter 61, “Liquid petroleum gas” section 6104.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 6104.2. Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons and may
only be established within the zoning districts designated heavy industrial (H-I), light industrial (L-I) and commercial manufacturing (C-M) as defined in
chapter 30 [chapter 28] of the Code of Ordinances and as found in the zoning map of the City of Beaumont, and in accordance with NFPA 30.
Appendix D “Fire apparatus access roads,” section D, shall be amended to include:
Section D103.6.3, approved signs are to be spaced at twenty-five foot intervals.
Section D103.6.4. Curb markings. As an alternative to signs, where the premises have curbs, the words “fire lane, no parking” may be painted:
(a) in four inch white letters;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/376
(b) on a red background;
(c) at twenty-five foot intervals.
Section 3. Fire service fees.
(1) The fire chief is hereby authorized to calculate fees for the following fire related services based on the equipment, materials and labor necessary in
each instance to provide the fire service. The person in control of the property or the person owning the property, real or personal, involved shall be
responsible to pay the amount charged for such services upon receipt of a bill.
(a) Response to and mitigation of a spill or release into the environment of a hazardous material as defined in chapter 50 of the International Fire
Code.
(b) Response to and standby exceeding one (1) hour at the scene of a potential release of a hazardous material as defined in chapter 50 of the
International Fire Code.
(c) Response to and mitigation of an unauthorized open burning associated with land clearing or demolition activities.
(2) The following fees are hereby set for the following fire services or occurrence:
Service Fees
(a) Annual inspection fee required for target hazards including but not
limited to hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living centers, and other
such properties which require multiple inspections within the year
$250.00
(b) Annual inspection fee required for state licensed properties which
require a single inspection per year
$50.00
(c) Fee schedule for installation and/or removal of fuel storage tanks and
dispensing units:
First tank $200.00
Each additional tank $75.00
Each dispensing unit $50.00
(d) Failure to immediately notify the fire official of any disconnection
and/or interruption of any fire protection system. This shall also include
any fire protection system found to be unsafe, impaired, or inoperable
$500.00
Section D103.6 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
D103.6 Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE LANE signs
complying with figure D103.6. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) wide by 18 inches (457 mm) high and have red letters on a
white reflective background. Signs shall be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by section D103.6.1 or D103.6.2. Approved signs
are to be spaced at twenty-five foot intervals.
Section D103.6.3 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section D103.6.3 Curb markings. As an alternative to signs, where the premises have curbs, the words “FIRE LANE, NO PARKING” may be painted:
(a) In four-inch white letters;
(b) On a red background;
(c) At twenty-five foot intervals .
(Ordinance 96-66, sec. 2, adopted 11/5/96; Ordinance 98-68, sec. 2, adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 00-66, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/00; Ordinance 00-66, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/00;
Ordinance 00-67, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/00; Ordinance 03-078, sec. 2, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 04-002, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/04; 1978 Code, sec. 10-2; Ordinance 07-
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/376
020, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/07; Ordinance 10-058, sec. 2, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 10-075, sec. 2, adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance 12-098, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/12; Ordinance
17-009, sec. 2, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 8.03 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Prohibited generally
It shall be unlawful for any person to give away, sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in possession with intent to give away, sell or to use, discharge or cause to be
discharged, ignited, fired or otherwise set in action, or to possess with the intent to discharge or cause to be discharged, ignited, fired or otherwise set in action, within the
limits of the city, any fireworks, firecrackers, rockets, sparklers, torpedoes, Roman candles, fire-balloons or other fireworks or substances of any combination whatsoever
designed or intended for pyrotechnic display, except as hereinafter provided. (1958 Code, sec. 23-10; 1978 Code, sec. 18-1)
Sec. 8.03.002 Exceptions from prohibition
Section 8.03.001 shall not apply to the sale of any such article or articles by wholesalers to each other, or to the sale of any such article or articles at wholesale to
merchants conducting business entirely outside the city, or to the sale by wholesalers for private or public demonstrations as hereinafter provided, or to the storage of any
such article or articles by such wholesalers for any of such purposes, or to the sale, storage or use of colored flares or railroad track torpedoes or other transportation
signaling devices, or to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies, or to the sale, storage or use of blank
cartridges for theatrical purposes or for signal purposes in athletic contests or sports events, or for the use of any police organization or federal or state militia. (1958
Code, sec. 23-11; 1978 Code, sec. 18-2; Ordinance 07-048, sec. 1, adopted 4/10/07; Ordinance 17-009, sec. 3, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 8.03.003 Supervised displays; permit required, contents of application
Permits for the public or private display of fireworks may be issued by the fire chief; provided, a person desiring to display any fireworks shall apply in writing to the fire
chief for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the proposed display and shall set forth:
(1) The name of the organization sponsoring the display together with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display.
(2) The date and time of day at which the display is to be held.
(3) The exact location planned for the display.
(4) A description setting forth the age, and experience in the display of fireworks, of the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks.
(5) The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged.
(6) The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display.
(7) A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings,
highways, telegraph, telephone or other overhead obstructions and trees located within two hundred (200) yards from the point at which the fireworks are to be
discharged and the lines behind which the audience will be restrained. Such permit shall not be granted unless such display shall be of such a character and so
located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the fire chief, after proper study of the application and proper inspection of the proposed premises, shall not be
hazardous to property or endangering to any person.
(1958 Code, sec. 23-12; 1978 Code, sec. 18-3)
Sec. 8.03.004 Presence of fire chief at demonstration
The fire chief or his designee shall have the right to be present at the discharge of any public or private display of fireworks for which a permit has been issued hereunder
and shall have the right to cause the same to be stopped unless it is conducted in strict accordance with the statements made in the application for the permit. (1958 Code,
sec. 23-13; 1978 Code, sec. 18-4; Ordinance 07-048, sec. 2, adopted 4/10/07)
CHAPTER 9
RESERVED
CHAPTER 10
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 10.01.001 Nuisances
(a) Definition. Whatever is dangerous to human health or welfare, or whatever renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or an injury to human health, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Abatement of conditions generally.
(1) The director of health shall abate or cause to be abated all nuisances which may impair or affect the health or comfort of the community or individuals in
the community, and shall do all acts and make regulations which may be necessary or expedient, in his opinion, for the promotion of health or the prevention or
suppression of disease. The director of health is further empowered and required, whenever any premises, lots or blocks or parts thereof, in this city, whether
the same are occupied or not, are in such condition as to constitute a nuisance as defined in this code, either specifically or generally, or likely to become so, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/376
to seriously affect the comfort of the community, to officially declare the same a nuisance, and shall issue such orders and notices and make such rules and
regulations regarding such nuisance as, in his opinion, the public health or sanitary conditions may require, and all persons are required to strictly observe and
obey such orders, notices, rules and regulations of the director of health.
(2) In order to abate nuisances and remove filth and other substances, the director of health shall have the power, whenever any premises, lots or blocks,
whether occupied or not, are in such condition, either from accumulation of substances thereon or from any other cause, which is, or is likely to become,
detrimental to public health, in violation of this code, after being officially so declared by the director of health, to notify in writing, through the proper officer,
owner, agent occupant, tenant or lessee thereof, to abate and remove the same, either by filling up, draining, cleansing, purifying or removing the same, as the
case may be.
(c) Abatement as to business, trade or occupation. Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the director of health, by personal observation or information, that there
is carried on any business, trade or occupation that is or may become a nuisance, affecting or liable to affect the persons residing or pursuing any occupation in the
neighborhood, it shall be his duty to give notice to the persons creating such nuisance, or to the owner or occupant of the premises, to abate the same, and if such nuisance
is not abated within forty-eight (48) hours after such notice has been given, the persons to whom it has been given shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(d) Interference with nuisance abatement. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to interfere with or prevent the director of health or anyone
acting under his direction or authority from removing, clearing or abating any nuisance or condition declared unlawful in this chapter.
(1958 Code, secs. 22-1, 22-3, 22-4; Ordinance 85-41, sec. 1, adopted 4/9/85; 1978 Code, secs. 13-1–13-4; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/07)
State law reference–Local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 342.
Sec. 10.01.002 Wells, cisterns; required to be covered
It shall be unlawful, and shall constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance, for any person to permit, on premises owned or occupied by him, any well,
cistern or other excavation to remain open or uncovered, to the danger of others. (1958 Code, sec. 23-40; 1978 Code, sec. 13-5)
State law reference–Covering of wells, cisterns and holes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.001 et seq.
Sec. 10.01.003 Stagnant or offensive water on private premises
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to keep on any lot or piece of ground within the city any pool or
pond of unwholesome, impure, stagnated or offensive water. (1958 Code, sec. 22-2(8); 1978 Code, sec. 13-6)
Sec. 10.01.004 Discharge of offensive liquids onto streets, etc.
It shall be unlawful and/or constitute a public nuisance for any person to cast, drain or throw or cause to be cast, drained, thrown or distributed into any public street or
highway, gutter, alley or other public grounds within the city any kitchen water, water from exhaust pipes, laundry water, water from service stations and garages, water
from air conditioners or other waste water, slops, swill or liquid filth. (1958 Code, sec. 22-2(4); 1978 Code, sec. 13-7)
Sec. 10.01.005 Discharge from septic tanks, etc.
(a) Overflowing. It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to allow to exist any full or overflowing privy,
vault, cesspool, septic tank or other receptacle for filth or sewage upon any premises owned or controlled by such person. All water and sanitary sewer services to any
premises must be drained in a manner that does not create an unsanitary or unwholesome condition.
(b) Pumping contents onto ground. It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to allow to be pumped, or the
contents of a septic tank or cesspool to flow, over any premises owned or controlled by him, for fertilizing or other purposes.
(1958 Code, sec. 22-2(1), (2); 1978 Code, secs. 13-8, 13-9; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/07)
State law reference–Municipal power concerning sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, secs. 342.002, 342.005 et seq.
Sec. 10.01.006 Faulty traps, sinks, etc.
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to allow any imperfect or faulty trap, or any trap in disrepair, sink
or water closet, or any other drainage appliance or fixture, to exist within any house or building owned or controlled by him within the city from which there shall arise
any foul or offensive gas or odors. (1958 Code, sec. 22-2(3); 1978 Code, sec. 13-10)
Sec. 10.01.007 Unsanitary public restrooms
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to keep or maintain a public restroom in an unsanitary condition.
(1958 Code, sec. 22-2(12); 1978 Code, sec. 13-11)
Sec. 10.01.008 Health fees
The city is hereby authorized to charge fees for services in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) STD treatment: $20.00.
(2) Flu shots: $20.00.
(3) Birth and death certificate fees:
(A) Issuing a certified copy of a birth certificate: $23.00.
(B) Issuing a certified copy of a death certificate: $21.00. Note: The fee for the first certified copy of a certificate of death is $21.00, and the fee for
each additional copy of the same certificate requested at the same time is $4.00.
(4) Immunizations, per person, per visit:
(A) Childhood: $10.00.
(B) Adult: $15.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/376
(C) Record replacement: $5.00.
(5) Computer resource charge: $1.83.
(6) Search of vital records: $11.00.
(7) Expedited service fee: $10.00.
(8) Assistance with applications: $10.00.
(9) Medical records and billing search: $50.00.
(10) Notarized affidavit: $6.00.
Additional signature: $1.00.
(Ordinance 77-53, sec. 2, adopted 5/17/77; Ordinance 84-130, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/84; Ordinance 85-06, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/85; Ordinance 85-103, sec. 1, adopted
10/1/85; Ordinance 86-86, sec. 1, adopted 8/12/86; Ordinance 87-13, sec. 2, adopted 3/10/87; Ordinance 87-62, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/87; Ordinance 91-38, sec. 1, adopted
4/30/91; Ordinance 91-88, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/91; Ordinance 91-93, sec. 1, adopted 10/22/91; Ordinance 00-05, sec. 2, adopted 1/4/00; Ordinance 00-94, sec. 1, adopted
11/21/00; Ordinance 01-057, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 03-052, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/03; Ordinance 05-091, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 13-16;
Ordinance 07-028, sec. 3, adopted 3/27/07; Ordinance 10-020, sec. 1, adopted 3/30/10; Ordinance 10-043, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/10; Ordinance 17-007, sec. 1, adopted
1/31/17)
Sec. 10.01.009 Waiver of STD treatment fee
The STD treatment fees established in section 10.01.008 herein may be discounted or fully waived by the director of the department of health upon proof by the patient
that such patient is unable to pay such fee. (Ordinance 84-130, sec. 2, adopted 10/2/84; Ordinance 87-13, sec. 2, adopted 3/10/87; 1978 Code, sec. 13-17; Ordinance 07-
028, sec. 4, adopted 3/27/07; Ordinance 10-020, sec. 1, adopted 3/30/10)
ARTICLE 10.02 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Rules on food service sanitation
(a) Adopted by reference. The department of state health services, Texas Food Establishment Rules, sections 229.161 to 229.171 and 229.173 to 229.175, are hereby
adopted by reference as if copied verbatim herein, and a copy of said food establishment rules is available in the city clerk's office.
(b) Amendments. The department of state health services, Texas Food Establishment Rules, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 229.162, Definitions, is hereby amended by adding the following definitions to read as follows:
Central preparation facility. A catering establishment, restaurant, or other permitted place in which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled,
prepared, packaged, or stored.
Food sale permit. A permit issued to a mobile food unit owner allowing operation of the unit for a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours and limited to two (2) permits per
month except that vendors selling nonpotentially hazardous foods will not be required to secure this permit.
Seasonal food establishment. A food service establishment which operates more than fifteen (15) consecutive days but less than one hundred twenty-one
(121) consecutive days within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period beginning January 1 of each calendar year.
Special event food service establishment. The term “special event food service establishment” shall mean a temporary food service establishment which
consists of more than five (5) booths and is sponsored by an organization in connection with a single group event. This includes, but is not limited to
fairs, carnivals, food festivals and similar events.
Section 229.162, Definitions, is further amended by changing the definitions of item (8), child care center, item (33), food service establishment, and item (75), regulatory
authority, to read as follows:
(8) Child care center. Any facility licensed by the regulatory authority to receive 6 or more children for child care which prepares food for on-site
consumption, excluding in-home day cares.
(33) Food establishment. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, or otherwise provides food for human consumption, such as a food service
establishment; retail food store; satellite or catered feeding location; catering operation, if the operation provides food directly to a customer or to a conveyance
used to transport people; market; remote catered operations; conveyance used to transport people; institution; or food bank; and that relinquishes possession of
food to a consumer directly, or indirectly thorough a service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is
provided by common carriers.
(A) The term includes an element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or
satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the regulatory authority; a restaurant; a grocery store; an operation that is
conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or location; group residence; outdoor outfitters; bed and breakfast extended and bed
and breakfast food establishments; where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
(B) The term does not include: an establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not potentially hazardous; a produce stand that only offers
whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables, a food processing plant; a kitchen in a private home or a nonprofit organization if only food that is not
potentially hazardous is prepared for sale or service at a function, such as a religious or charitable organization's bake sale; a bed and breakfast limited
facility as defined in these rules; or a private home. The term also does not include the location where food is served and has been prepared by a catering
operation which is licensed by the city.
(75) Regulatory authority. The term “regulatory authority” shall mean the City of Beaumont's public health director or his/her designee.
Section 229.163, Management and personnel, subsection (a), is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/376
(a) Responsibility, assignment. The permit holder shall be the person in charge or shall designate a person in charge and shall ensure that a person in charge
is present at the food establishment during all hours of operation. This would require more than one certified food manager at each food establishment to allow
for adequate coverage. A certified food manager cannot be the person in charge of more than one food establishment.
Section 229.163, Management and personnel, subsection (b)(2), is hereby amended to read as follows:
(b) Knowledge, demonstration.
(2) Being a certified food protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information through passing a department approved examination
prior to opening of food establishment; and
Section 229.166(j)(3), Grease trap, is amended to read as follows:
Section 229.166(j)(3) Grease trap. If used, a grease trap or grease interceptor shall be located to be easily cleanable and shall be located outside the
building of a food establishment.
Section 229.169, Mobile food establishments, subsection (a)(1), is hereby amended by adding subparagraphs (A) through (G) to read as follows:
(a) Mobile food establishment provisions.
(1) General. Mobile food establishments shall comply with the requirements of these rules except as otherwise provided in this paragraph and in
paragraph (2) of this subsection. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of
the food establishment as a mobile operation, may prohibit the sale of some or all potentially hazardous food, and when no health hazard will result, may
waive or modify requirements of this rule relating to physical facilities, except those requirements as specified in paragraphs (5) and (6) of this
subsection; subsection (b)(1) of this section; subsection (c)(1)(A)–(E) of this section and section 229.164(k)–(n) of this title (relating to food).
(A) Mobile food units are required to purchase a yearly mobile food permit in order to assure that all compliance requirements are met.
(B) An additional “food sale permit” is not required of a mobile food unit operating as an extension of a restaurant that is permitted within the
city limits.
(C) Mobile food units are required to be easily identified to every passerby by having the name of the business prominently painted on at least
two sides of the unit, in letters no smaller than 12" in height.
(D) Reserved.
(E) Vehicle registration must be provided with application.
(F) Federal tax ID certificate must be provided with application.
(G) Mobile food unit food choices are limited to those that can be served or prepared in compliance with the Texas Food Establishment Rules
adopted by the city. Also, all food to be prepared must be on the unit at the time of inspection accompanied by the receipts.
Section 229.169, Mobile food establishments, subsection (b), is hereby amended to read as follows:
(b) Central preparation facility.
(1) The central preparation facility, commissary, licensed food establishment or home of operations, is an essential part of a mobile food unit operation.
All mobile food units must operate from a central preparation facility, commissary/ licensed food establishment where food and supplies are received.
(2) Once a food establishment agrees to become a central preparation facility/commissary for a mobile food unit, the food establishment will receive an
inspection by the health department.
(3) An overall score of 90 with no demerits in items 1–5 and 13–14 of the inspection report will be required for approval to become a central
preparation facility/commissary for a mobile food unit.
(4) All mobile food units must return to the central preparation facility/commissary at least once per day of operation for one performance of all
servicing operations. Servicing operations include:
(A) Cleaning of the mobile food unit
(B) Restocking supplies as necessary
(C) Thorough flushing and draining of the waste retention tank
(5) Upon request the operator of a mobile food unit must be able to provide written proof that the mobile food unit has been servicing at a central
preparation facility/commissary on a daily basis. These servicing records must be maintained in duplicate, with one copy in the mobile food unit at all
times and the other copy kept at the central preparation facility/commissary. Each servicing record must be kept and maintained for two years from the
date of servicing. Failure to obtain servicing on a daily basis or failure to maintain servicing records will result in the immediate closure of the mobile
food unit operations and the issuance of a citation to the central preparation facility/commissary. The central preparation facility/commissary for any
mobile food unit must be constructed and operated in compliance with the requirements of the Texas Food Establishment rules as amended.
(6) The central preparation facility/commissary will be required to provide the following services to mobile food unit(s):
(A) Adequate facility for storage of food utensils and other supplies.
(B) Adequate facility for the disposal of garbage and liquid wastes.
(C) Potable water for filling water tanks.
(D) Hot and cold water under pressure for cleaning and sanitizing.
(E) Approved janitorial sink, toilet, utensil washing, and handwashing facilities with single service soap and paper towels in dispensers.
(F) Maintenance of a daily log sheet signed by central preparation facility/commissary owner to verify mobile food unit's daily use of facility.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/376
(7) As a part of the central preparation facility's/commissary's inspection, the health inspector will review the assigned mobile food unit's servicing log.
Failure to maintain this log accurately will result in immediate closure of the mobile food unit and a court citation of the central preparation
facility/commissary.
(8) This central preparation agreement will not be required of a mobile food unit operating as an extension of a permitted restaurant in the city limits of
Beaumont.
(9) An affidavit from the owner of the central preparation facility must be provided as proof that the mobile food unit is servicing at the central
preparation facility as required.
Section 229.169, Mobile food establishments, subsection (c)(1), is hereby amended by adding subparagraphs (F) through (K) to read as follows:
(c) Servicing area and operations.
(1) Protection.
(F) Mobile food units may erect a tent, or attach a tent-like awning to the side of their unit, but are not allowed to utilize any adjacent building as
a dining or working area.
(G) Mobile food units are barred from the preparation of any food that requires extensive rinsing, such as crawfish, because their wastewater tank
is limited in size.
(H) Mobile food unit operators are required to dump their wastewater within a 24 hour period or more frequently as necessary. If at any time the
wastewater tank becomes full, the operation shall be closed to allow for the transport and dumping of the wastewater at the central preparation
facility or commissary.
(I) Mobile food units must be located on a paved surface and located within 500 feet of an available public restroom facility for use during hours
of operation.
(J) An affidavit showing proof of consent to locate on premises where the unit will operate must be provided.
(K) All mobile food establishments shall move and vacate the premise of the business location on a daily basis; overnight parking at the business
location is prohibited. At the end of each business day, the mobile food establishment shall return to the central preparation facility/commissary for
servicing and storage. If storage is not allowed at the central preparation facility/commissary, the mobile food unit must be stored in a secured
storage facility.
Section 229.171, Compliance and enforcement. This section is hereby changed to add a new section 229.171, subsections (f)(1) and (2), and 229.171, subsection (g), to
read as follows:
Section 229.171(f) Permit requirement, prerequisite for operation.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a food establishment within the City of Beaumont who does not possess a valid permit
or license issued by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this ordinance shall be entitled to receive or retain such a
permit or license. Permits or licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another person or place. A valid permit or license shall be posted in every
food establishment in a place conspicuous to customers. The City of Beaumont will require the following types of food establishments to obtain a separate
permit or license: retail food establishments, food service establishments. This includes a food service establishment co-located with a retail food
establishment. Permits or licenses for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days. A temporary
food establishment permit may only be issued to a person, firm or corporation four (4) times per calendar year. There shall be a thirty (30) day time period
between each consecutive issuance of such a permit. If the name of the applicant changes but a previous permit holder is working at the site, such applicant
will be considered to be the same person, firm or corporation who had previously been issued a temporary food establishment permit hereunder. The purpose
of this regulation is to limit a person, firm or corporation to four (4) permits per year notwithstanding in whose name the permits are issued. There is no limit
on the number of times that a permit may be issued for temporary food events operating in connection with a festival involving organized public assembly for
entertainment purposes. A festival is defined, for the purposes of this policy, as a public celebration, entertainment or series of performances of a certain kind,
often held periodically.
(2) Issuance of permit or license.
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit or license on forms provided by the regulatory
authority. Such application shall include the applicant's full name and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, or
corporation, and, if a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses shall be included; the location and type of the proposed food
establishment; and the signature of the applicant or applicants. If the application is for a temporary food service establishment, it shall also include the
inclusive dates of the proposed operations. If the application is for a special event food service establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of
the proposed operation, a complete list of food booths which will be operating, the name of a responsible individual for each food booth, and the type of
food being prepared and sold or distributed.
(b) Upon receipt of such an application, the regulatory authority shall make an inspection of the proposed food establishment to determine compliance
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(c) When inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this ordinance have been met, a permit or license shall be issued to the applicant by the
regulatory authority.
Section 229.171(g) Conditions of permit retention. This section is amended to add items (11) through (15) as follows:
(11) Suspension of permit or license.
(a) A permit or license may be suspended temporarily by the regulatory authority for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this
ordinance. Whenever a permit or license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of section 229.171, the
permit or license holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the permit or license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permit or license holder.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this ordinance, whenever the regulatory authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food
establishment which, in his/her judgment, constitute an imminent health hazard (such as, but not limited to, complete lack of sanitation, refrigeration, or
sewage backup into the establishment), he/she may, without warning, notice, or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit or license holder or operator
citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken; and, if deemed
necessary, such order shall state that the permit or license is immediately suspended, and the establishment shall immediately cease food service
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/376
operations. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the regulatory authority shall be
afforded a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of request for a hearing. If any one food booth operating under a special event food service
establishment permit is in noncompliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance, that booth and any such booth which violates the ordinance may,
at the option of the regulatory authority, be closed without suspending the permit of the special event food service establishment. The applicant for the
special event food service establishment will be responsible to enforce the closing of the food booth under the permit which is in violation of this
ordinance. Any failure or refusal of the food booth to comply with the order of the health department may result in the suspension of the permit issued to
the special event food service establishment.
(b) Any person whose permit or license has been suspended for any reason other than for imminent health hazards may, at any time, make application
for a reinspection for the purpose or reinstatement of the permit or license. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request, including a
statement signed by the applicant that in his/her opinion the conditions causing suspension of the permit or license have been corrected, the regulatory
authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this ordinance, the permit or license shall be reinstated. If no
written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained.
(12) Revocation of permit or license. For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this ordinance, or for interference with the regulatory
authority in the performance of its duties, the permit or license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the
regulatory authority. Prior to such action, the regulatory authority shall notify the permit or license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit or
license is subject to revocation and advising that the permit or license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice,
unless a request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority, by the permit or license holder, within such a five-day period. A permit or license may be
suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. If no request for hearing is filed within the five-day period, the revocation of the
permit or license becomes final.
(13) Service of notices. Notices provided for in this ordinance shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form
or other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the permit or license holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the regulatory authority.
(14) Hearings. The hearings provided for in this ordinance shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon
the record of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the
hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit or license holder by the regulatory authority.
(15) Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit or license has become final, the holder of the revoked permit or license may make
written application for a new permit or license.
Section 229.171(j) Report of findings. This section is amended to add item (7) to read as follows:
(7) Grading of food service establishments. Every food service establishment in the City of Beaumont shall display, in a place designated by the regulatory
authority, a placard approved by the regulatory authority stating the sanitary condition received at the time of the most recent inspection of the establishment;
provided that temporary food service establishments and retail food establishments shall not be subject to grading. Immediately following each inspection of a
food service establishment, the regulatory authority shall post the appropriate sanitary condition based upon the inspection findings, and shall issue an
appropriate notice in accordance with section 229.171(j). Sanitary conditions of establishments shall be as follows:
Superior rating: An establishment whose rating scores were no more than twenty (20) demerits on two consecutive prior inspections and
whose rating score on the third inspection is no more than twenty (20) demerits.
Above average rating: An establishment having a rating score of no more than twenty (20) demerits.
Average rating: An establishment having a rating score of more than twenty (20) demerits but no more than thirty (30) demerits.
Section 229.171(l)(2)(C). This subsection shall be amended to read as follows:
(C) When the total cumulative demerit value of an establishment exceeds 30 demerits, the establishment shall initiate immediate corrective action on all
identified critical violations and shall initiate corrective action on all other violations within 48 hours. Failure to initiate immediate corrective action by the
establishment may result in immediate suspension of the permit or license by the regulatory authority. One or more reinspections shall be conducted at
reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
Section 229.171(n), Examination and detention of food. This subsection shall be deleted to add new subsections (n)(1) and (2) to read as follows:
(n) Examination and condemnation of food.
(1) Food supplied under the provisions of this ordinance may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for
enforcement of these rules. A receipt for samples shall be issued by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall, upon written notice to the
owner or person in charge specifying the reason thereof, place under detention any food which he/she determines or has probable cause to believe is
adulterated or misbranded in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 431. The
regulatory authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to detention. No food subject to detention shall be used, served, sold or moved
from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in a hold order. The hold order shall specify
with particularity the reasons therefor and shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days, and that, if no hearing is requested, the
food shall be destroyed, a hearing shall be held if so requested, and, on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or
the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with applicable
laws. Such order of the regulatory authority to denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three (3) days.
(2) Wherever the regulatory authority shall find in any food service establishment or operations any food which is unsound, or contains any filthy,
decomposed or putrid substance, or that may be poisonous or deleterious to health or otherwise unsafe, the same being hereby declared to be a nuisance,
the regulatory authority shall forthwith condemn or in any manner render the same unsalable as human food.
Section 229.171 shall be further amended to add a subsection (r)(1) and (2):
(r) Review of plans.
(1) Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted for use
as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/376
regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of all applicable laws. No food establishment shall be
constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority.
(2) Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (229.171)(r) of this section to be submitted to the
regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with
the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of all applicable laws.
(1958 Code, sec. 14-1; Ordinance 83-120, sec. 2, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 84-32, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-146, secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/13/84; Ordinance
87-65, sec. 1, adopted 8/18/87; Ordinance 88-48, sec. 1, adopted 5/10/88; Ordinance 91-6, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/91; Ordinance 00-89, secs. 1, 2, adopted 10/10/00; 1978
Code, secs. 11-1, 11-1.1; Ordinance 07-025, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/20/07; Ordinance 07-025, sec. 2, adopted 3/20/07; Ordinance 09-006, sec. 1, adopted 2/10/09; Ordinance
09-064, sec. 1, adopted 11/3/09; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 10-075, sec. 3, adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance 12-076, secs. 1–7, adopted 10/9/12; Ordinance 14-061,
secs. 1–8, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 10.02.002 Adoption of U.S. Public Health Service Machine Vending Ordinance
The definitions, the requiring of permits for the installation and operation of vending machines, the prohibition of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink, and
the enforcement of this section shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of the unabridged form of “The Vending of Food and Beverages–1978 Recommended
Sanitation Ordinance of the Food and Drug Administration,” a copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk; provided that the words “municipality of
____________” in said unabridged form shall be understood to refer to the City of Beaumont and provided further that sections 6-601 and 6-602 of said unabridged
ordinance shall be deemed deleted. (1958 Code, sec. 14-19; Ordinance 84-32, sec. 3, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-2)
Sec. 10.02.003 Peddling, selling of certain items in public places prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell or offer for sale beverages served by the glass, hot tamales, enchiladas, red hots, wieners, sausages, hamburgers,
fresh and salt water fish and all other marine life, sandwiches or any other similar food products easily contaminated by dust, dirt or flies, along or upon any public street,
sidewalk, alley or any other such public easements or rights-of-way in the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale ice cream, sherbet, flavored ices or other frozen dairy products along or upon any public streets,
sidewalks, alleys or other public easements or rights-of-way within the city unless said products are individually packaged frozen dairy products sold from vehicles
equipped with refrigeration facilities adequate to maintain temperatures sufficient to ensure that the products remain frozen. The products shall be prepackaged frozen
dairy products manufactured, frozen and packaged by a frozen dairy foods products plant licensed by the department of state health services. Any person who sells or
offers for sale packaged frozen dairy products from refrigerated vehicles shall first obtain a permit as provided for in this chapter. Following the issuance of a permit, each
vehicle operating under said permit shall be inspected once every six (6) months on the premises of the health department. Revocation of permits shall be in accordance
with this chapter
(1958 Code, sec. 14-2; Ordinance 82-30, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/82; 1978 Code, sec. 11-18; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 10.02.004–10.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Licenses*
Sec. 10.02.031 Issuance; standard fees
(a) Upon approval of the application of all applicants, as filed with the health department, the health department shall issue to the applicant a license or permit.
(b) The amount of the license fees for applicants for each location, other than as otherwise provided in this article, shall be determined as follows:
(1) Establishments having from zero to ten (10) stools or chairs: $192.50.
(2) Establishments having from eleven (11) to twenty (20) stools or chairs: $203.50.
(3) Establishments having from twenty-one (21) to thirty (30) stools or chairs: $214.50.
(4) Establishments having from thirty-one (31) to fifty (50) stools or chairs: $225.50.
(5) Establishments having from fifty-one (51) to seventy-five (75) stools or chairs: $236.50.
(6) Establishments having from seventy-six (76) to one hundred (100) stools or chairs: $247.50.
(7) Establishments having one hundred one (101) to one hundred fifty (150) stools or chairs: $258.50.
(8) Establishments having one hundred fifty-one (151) to two hundred (200) stools or chairs: $269.50.
(9) Establishments having over two hundred (200) stools or chairs: $280.50.
(10) Special food service establishments (per day): $220.00.
(11) Establishments needing temporary permits: $33.00.
(12) Establishments needing vending machine licenses: $55.00.
(13) Establishments needing seafood/wholesale licenses: $44.00.
(14) Establishments needing seafood/retail licenses: $22.00.
(15) Establishments needing produce/wholesale licenses: $55.00.
(16) School cafeterias, public or parochial: $55.00.
(17) Seasonal food service establishments: $82.50.
(18) Retail food stores with zero (0) to two (2) checkout counters: $192.50.
(19) Retail food stores with three (3) to five (5) checkout counters: $247.50.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/376
(20) Retail food stores with six (6) to nine (9) checkout counters: $302.50.
(21) Retail food stores with ten (10) or more checkout counters: $357.50.
(c) Nonprofit organizations which are youth oriented or elderly oriented shall pay a license fee which is fifty (50) percent of the fees established above in subsections
(b)(1) through (15) inclusive. The term “youth oriented” shall mean nonprofit organizations which provide services to persons more than fifty (50) percent of whom are
less than eighteen (18) years of age. The term “elderly oriented” shall mean nonprofit organizations which provide services to persons more than fifty (50) percent of
whom are sixty-five (65) years of age or older. The term “nonprofit organizations” shall mean those organizations which have been granted an exemption or are exempt
from the payment of federal income taxes.
(d) Retail food stores that have an existing city-licensed food service facility shall pay a license fee which is fifty (50) percent of the fees established above in
subsections (b)(18) through (b)(21) of this section.
(1958 Code, secs. 14-9, 14-20; Ordinance 83-120, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 84-15, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 84-32, sec. 7, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance
84-146, sec. 3, adopted 11/13/84; Ordinance 85-57, sec. 1, adopted 5/28/85; Ordinance 00-05, sec. 1, adopted 1/4/00; Ordinance 03-104, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978
Code, sec. 11-4; Ordinance 07-025, sec. 3, adopted 3/20/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 10.02.032 When fees chargeable; proration of fees; expiration
The annual license fee shall be chargeable on all licenses issued after the first day of January up to and including the thirty-first (31st) day of July of each year, and onehalf
the annual fee for all licenses issued after the thirty-first day of July and through the thirty-first day of December of each year except for seasonal, special event and
temporary food service establishments. All licenses shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of each year. Annual renewal fees for established businesses that are
not received by January 31 are considered late. Late payments are subject to an additional 25 percent penalty on February 1 and an additional 5 percent penalty will be
charged for each subsequent month, until payment is received. (1958 Code, secs. 14-10, 14-21; Ordinance 84-146, sec. 4, adopted 11/13/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-5;
Ordinance 07-025, sec. 4, adopted 3/20/07)
Sec. 10.02.033 Display
Each person required to pay for a license hereunder shall keep such license displayed in a conspicuous place in each establishment operated. (1958 Code, sec. 14-14; 1978
Code, sec. 11-6)
Secs. 10.02.034–10.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Fruit and Vegetable Wholesalers
Sec. 10.02.061 License required; application
Every person, before opening, maintaining or operating an establishment for sale at wholesale of fruits and vegetables, or for the wholesale distribution thereof, shall
make application for license for such business upon a blank to be furnished by the health authority of this city, in which application the applicant shall give the following
information:
(1) Residence and business addresses of the applicant.
(2) Number of establishments to be maintained and operated.
(3) Nature of business and location thereof.
(4) Method of distribution to be used.
(1958 Code, sec. 14-11; 1978 Code, sec. 11-7)
Sec. 10.02.062 Inspection of premises prior to issuance of license
After filing such application for a license, it shall be the duty of the health authority of the city to make an inspection of the premises in which the applicant desires to
conduct his establishment, and no license shall be issued to such person unless the building in which the business is to be conducted is constructed in accordance with the
building code of the city and contains floors of concrete connected with floor drains so that the same may be easily cleaned. Such premises shall be properly ventilated,
and the walls of such premises, and the benches, tables and other furniture therein, shall be built and constructed in such manner that they can be easily kept clean. Such
premises shall contain sufficient and adequate refrigeration, and all plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall comply with the plumbing code of the city, and such premises
shall be equipped with sanitary toilets as required by the laws of the state. Such premises shall be equipped with washbasins, with individual or paper towels available in
such toilets, and dirty unused clothing shall not be permitted to be stored or kept in any room in such premises where such fruit and vegetable products are cleaned, stored,
packed, prepared for or offered for sale. (1958 Code, sec. 14-12; 1978 Code, sec. 11-8)
Sec. 10.02.063 Issuance; fee; transfer
Upon filing of such application to sell fruits or vegetables at wholesale, satisfactory inspection of the premises and paying the health authority a license fee of fifty dollars
($50.00), the health authority shall issue a license to the applicant to operate such establishment for and during the current year for which such license is issued, which
license shall not be transferred. In case such license is issued for only a remaining portion of such year, the fee charged shall be proportionately reduced; provided,
however, the minimum fee to be paid hereunder shall be the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (1958 Code, sec. 14-13; 1978 Code, sec. 11-9)
Sec. 10.02.064 Construction of delivery vehicles
All vehicles or conveyances used for distributing or delivering fruit or vegetables must be so constructed as to protect such fruit or vegetables from flies, dirt, dust or other
filth. (1958 Code, sec. 14-3; 1978 Code, sec. 11-10)
Secs. 10.02.065–10.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. Seafood Businesses
Sec. 10.02.091 License required
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or distribute, at wholesale or retail, from a fixed place of business within the city any fish, oysters, shrimp,
lobsters, crabs, crayfish, turtles, terrapins and clams, in any manner, without first obtaining a license for the sale thereof; provided, however, that said license shall not be
required of any person selling such marine life outlined above for on-premises consumption. (1958 Code, sec. 14-15; 1978 Code, sec. 11-11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/376
Sec. 10.02.092 Application for license
Every person, before opening, maintaining or operating such an establishment for any of the purposes stated in section 10.02.091, or in any manner selling or distributing
or offering for sale or distribution, personally or otherwise, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs, crayfish, turtles, terrapins and clams at wholesale or retail, shall make
application for each establishment to be so maintained and operated by the applicant, upon a blank to be furnished by the health authority, and in which application the
applicant shall give the following information:
(1) Residence and business addresses of the applicant;
(2) Number of establishments to be maintained and operated;
(3) Nature of business;
(4) Whether wholesale or retail;
(5) Name of the owner of such establishment;
(6) Name under which it is to be operated.
(1958 Code, sec. 14-16; Ordinance 84-32, sec. 4, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-12)
Sec. 10.02.093 Classes of licenses; fees; term
(a) There shall be two (2) classes of licenses for establishments named in section 10.02.091, issued by the regulatory authority, said classes of licenses as follows:
(1) Upon proper application, and after the applicant has complied with the provisions contained in section 10.02.094 hereof, the regulatory authority shall
issue to any person a fish wholesaler's license, upon payment by the person to the regulatory authority of the fee established by section 10.02.031 herein;
provided, however, under the terms of such license, the person shall not be allowed to peddle from store to store but his sales must be made directly either by
delivery upon a previously executed order or directly from his place of business. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from making delivery to any
retail store in the city, provided such delivery is made in pursuance of a previously executed order from the merchant or retail establishment.
(2) Upon proper application, and after the applicant has complied with the provisions contained in section 10.02.094, the regulatory authority shall issue to
any person a fish retailer's license upon payment by the person to the regulatory authority of the fee established by section 10.02.031 herein; provided,
however, under the terms of such license, the person shall not be allowed to peddle from store to store or from house to house or upon the streets of the city,
but his sales must be made directly, either by delivery upon a previously executed order, or directly from his place of business.
(b) The licenses provided in section 10.02.091 shall be for the period of the calendar year, regardless of the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(1958 Code, sec. 14-17; Ordinance 84-32, sec. 5, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-13)
Sec. 10.02.094 Inspection prior to issuance of license
After filing such application for a license, it shall be the duty of the health authority of the city to make an inspection of the premises in which the applicant desires to
conduct his establishment, and no license shall be issued to such person unless the building in which the business is to be conducted is constructed in accordance with the
building code of the city and contains floors of concrete connected with floor drains so that the same may be easily cleaned. Such premises shall be properly ventilated,
and the walls of such premises, and the benches, tables and other furniture therein, shall be built and constructed in such manner that they can be easily kept clean. Such
premises shall contain sufficient and adequate refrigeration, and all plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall comply with the plumbing code of the city, and such premises
shall be equipped with sanitary toilets as required by the laws of the state. Such premises shall be equipped with washbasins, with individual or paper towels available in
such toilets, and dirty unused clothing shall not be permitted to be stored or kept in any room in such premises where such marine products are cleaned, stored, packed,
prepared for or offered for sale. (1958 Code, sec. 14-18; 1978 Code, sec. 11-14)
Sec. 10.02.095 Regulations generally
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, within the city, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs, terrapins, turtles, crayfish and clams, which, if taken from the waters
under the jurisdiction of the state, have not been approved by the department of state health services under the regulations and permit of such department, both as to
preparation and packing for shipment and shipment; or, if such marine products are taken from the waters under the jurisdiction of any other state, it shall be unlawful to
sell or offer for sale, within the limits of the city, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs, turtles, terrapins, crayfish and clams which have not been taken from the waters
under the jurisdiction of the state and approved by the proper authorities of the state, and under the regulations and permit of the state authorities, and of the United States
Public Health Service, both as to preparation and packing for shipment and shipment, and, in so selling and offering for sale such marine products, it must be indicated
either by certificate or otherwise from such state authorities that such marine products were taken from the waters and packed and shipped as approved and required by
such regulations. (1958 Code, sec. 14-5; 1978 Code, sec. 11-15)
Sec. 10.02.096 Refrigeration
The food commodities named in section 10.02.095 shall be kept in adequate refrigeration equipment at not greater than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit; and when such
commodities are sold, either at wholesale or retail, and the delivery thereof not made at the time of sale, the same shall be delivered in a sanitary manner, and shall be at a
temperature not greater than fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit at the point of delivery. (1958 Code, sec. 14-6; 1978 Code, sec. 11-16)
Sec. 10.02.097 Adulteration of oysters
It shall be unlawful for any person to adulterate oysters, by adding thereto ice, water, sodium sulphate or any other preservative for the purpose of increasing the quantity
of or preserving such oysters. (1958 Code, sec. 14-7; 1978 Code, sec. 11-17)
Secs. 10.02.098–10.02.130 Reserved
Division 5. Food Service Manager's Certificate*
Sec. 10.02.131 Purpose
There shall be a program of food service manager's certification conducted under the direction of the regulatory authority. Such a program shall have as its primary goal
the training of persons in managerial positions (person in charge) within the food service industry in safe food handling practices, including knowledge of the city's food
service sanitation ordinance. Training shall be accomplished by means of a special course which will be made available at regular intervals to those persons seeking
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/376
certification. Certification shall be accomplished after all course requirements have been met and the applicant has demonstrated by means of an examination that such
person possesses the required minimum essential knowledge as determined by the regulatory authority. (Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-81)
Sec. 10.02.132 Certification required
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, directing, or managing any food service establishment, catering operation, or any place or vehicle regulated by the
city food service sanitation ordinance where food or drink is manufactured, produced, processed, prepared, or otherwise manipulated, within the city, to fail to keep in his
employ a manager, assistant manager, supervisor, or other person in charge of said establishment who has a valid and current food service manager's certification issued
by the regulatory authority. Whenever a food service manager certificate has expired or the holder of the certificate is no longer employed in the food service
establishment, ninety (90) days shall be allowed for the food service establishment to comply with this division. (Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code,
sec. 11-82)
Sec. 10.02.133 Exemptions
(a) Food manager certificates will not be required for the following:
(1) Food service establishments providing only beverages, popcorn, prepackaged foods, or commercially prepared candy or nuts;
(2) Nonprofit organizations except those operating schools, day cares, nursing homes, halfway houses or boarding homes;
(3) Food service establishments inspected at least once in each week by state or federal food sanitation inspectors;
(4) Temporary or special event food service establishments; and
(5) Persons operating a mobile food unit or supplying food to vending machines.
(b) For the purposes of this division, a nonprofit organization shall mean an organization which has been granted an exemption or is exempt from the payment of
federal income taxes.
(Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-146, sec. 5, adopted 11/13/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-83)
Sec. 10.02.134 Issuance
A food service manager's certificate shall be issued to any person who submits the required issuance fee, and:
(1) Completes the city food service manager's certification course or shows evidence of completion, within the past three (3) years, of a course of study
which is listed in the department of state health services worker's training program course registry, and achieves the required minimum score of seventy-five
(75) points out of a possible one hundred (100) points on a written examination administered or approved by the regulatory authority. An applicant who fails to
achieve a minimum score of seventy-five (75) on the written examination may repeat the examination one (1) time without repetition of the food sanitation
course of study;
(2) Provides evidence of certification within the past three (3) years by an agency which administers a national examination determined by the department of
state health services and/or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to be content valid and legally reliable; or
(3) Provides an associate's or bachelor's degree, or the equivalent, awarded within the past three (3) years, in restaurant or hotel and restaurant management
from an accredited college or university.
(Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 91-6, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/91; 1978 Code, sec. 11-84; Ordinance 07-025, sec. 7, adopted 3/20/07)
Sec. 10.02.135 Term; transfer
A food service manager's certificate shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance. The expiration date will be written on each certificate issued. The term
may be less than three (3) years for an individual who was certified by another agency or organization as provided for in section 10.02.134. No certificate shall be
transferable from one person to another person. (Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 91-6, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/91; 1978 Code, sec. 11-85)
Sec. 10.02.136 Renewal
Unless reexamination is required by state or federal law, a food service manager's certificate may be renewed by completing and submitting the renewal application form
provided by the regulatory authority not more than thirty (30) days before nor sixty (60) days after the date of expiration of the certificate. Such application for renewal
must be accompanied by payment of the fee as set out in section 10.02.138 of this division. (Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-86)
Sec. 10.02.137 Revocation
(a) A food service manager's certificate may be revoked by the regulatory authority on a finding that any of the following grounds exist:
(1) That the food service manager interfered with an inspection of the food service establishment by agents of the regulatory authority;
(2) That violations of the city's food service sanitation ordinance exist in the food service establishment;
(3) That the certified food manager knowingly falsified any information supplied on an application for certification issued under this division;
(4) That the certified food manager or any employee of the food service establishment has made use of a food service manager's certificate which has not
been duly issued by the regulatory authority.
(b) Prior to revocation of a food service manager's certificate, the regulatory authority shall give written notice to the holder of the certificate and to the owner of the
food service establishment in which the food service manager is employed. Such notice shall state:
(1) The grounds upon which the city will seek revocation of the certificate;
(2) That revocation becomes final ten (10) days after notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority before expiration of the
ten-day period.
(c) The notice required by this division is considered served when it is delivered to the holder of the certificate, and the owner of the food service establishment, or
when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the certificate and the owner of the food service
establishment. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/376
(d) The hearing provided for in this division shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by the regulatory authority. After completion
of the hearing, the officer designated by the regulatory authority to conduct the hearing shall make written findings as to whether or not the certificate is to be revoked. If
the hearing officer revokes the certificate, written notice of such revocation shall be served on the food service manager and the owner of the establishment with a copy of
the findings. Upon receiving written notice that the food service manager's certificate has been revoked, the food service manager shall surrender the certificate to the
regulatory authority.
(e) If the food service manager fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place, and date specified, the city shall present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie
case showing that an act or acts have been committed which constitute grounds for revocation of the certificate.
(f) In the event a certificate is revoked, the city shall not be liable for any refund of any part of the fee paid for the certificate.
(g) A person whose food service manager's certificate has been revoked shall not be granted a new certificate until such person has attended a course of training and
passed the required examination subsequent to the revocation, and met all requirements of an initial applicant.
(h) Food service manager's certificates remain the property of the city environmental health division and must be surrendered to the regulatory authority to be voided
when the permit has been revoked.
(Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 91-6, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/91; 1978 Code, sec. 11-87)
Sec. 10.02.138 Fees
(a) The fee for issuance of a food service manager's certificate is ten dollars ($10.00).
(b) The enrollment fee for the food service sanitation course of study provided by the regulatory authority shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and will not be refunded once
the course has begun. Those organizations which are exempt from the food service manager's certification course under section 10.02.133(a)(2) herein may attend the
food service sanitation course without payment of the required enrollment fee, so long as the training is being provided by city staff, subject to an availability of space.
(c) The fee for replacement of a valid and current certificate which has been lost, stolen, or damaged shall be five dollars ($5.00).
(d) All fees for issuance of certificates will be refunded in the event that no certificate is issued.
(Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-72, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-88)
Sec. 10.02.139 Certificate to be displayed in establishment
Food service manager certificates shall be prominently posted in the establishment in a place acceptable to the regulatory authority. (Ordinance 84-32, sec. 8, adopted
2/14/84; 1978 Code, sec. 11-89)
ARTICLE 10.03 SMOKING; TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 10.03.001–10.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in Public Places*
Part I. In General
Sec. 10.03.031 Definitions
Employee. Any person who is employed in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages, commissions or profits and any contract employee. Employee includes a
person who volunteers for a nonprofit entity.
Employer. A person that employs the services of one or more individuals.
Enclosed area. A space that is enclosed on all sides by solid impermeable walls that extend from the floor to the ceiling, inclusive of windows and doors.
Fraternal organization. A nonprofit organization that:
(1) Is chartered by a national organization in existence since 1953;
(2) Is tax exempt under section 501(c)(8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(3) Operates under a lodge system with a representative form of government; and
(4) Is organized for the exclusive benefit of the members of the organization and their dependents.
Operator. The owner or person in charge of a public place or workplace, including an employer.
Private club. Any building, premises or portion thereof which is permitted by the state as a private club for the storing, possession and dispensing for on-premises
consumption of alcoholic beverages. The term “private club” additionally includes premises operated by an organization which are not available to and not customarily
used by the general public and entry and privileges thereto are established by regulations of that organization distinct from a state alcohol and beverage private club
membership.
Public place. An enclosed area or any portion thereof that is accessible by the public or to which the public is admitted by general invitation or that is an enclosed
workplace.
Retail tobacco store. A retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other non-tobacco products is incidental.
Smoke or smoking. To inhale or exhale smoke from or to light, hold, or carry a lighted tobacco or tobacco-like product such as cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other such
device used for smoking.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/376
Workplace. An enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer in which employees work or have access during the course of their employment.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-1)
Sec. 10.03.032 Smoking prohibited
(a) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed public place within the city.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area in a building or facility owned, leased, or operated by the city.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area of a workplace.
(d) Except as provided in section 10.03.072 (outdoor distance exception), a person commits an offense if the person smokes within a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
from a primary public pedestrian entrance to or an operable window of an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.
(e) The owner, operator or other person in control of a public place commits an offense if the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent or stop another person from
smoking in an enclosed area in a public place.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in the seating area of an outdoor arena, stadium or amphitheater.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-2)
Sec. 10.03.033 Signs required
(a) The owner, operator, or other person in control of a public place or workplace where smoking is prohibited shall conspicuously post a sign at each entrance to the
premises clearly stating that smoking is prohibited on the premises or is only permitted in designated areas of the premises.
(b) The owner, operator, or other person in control of a public place shall conspicuously post signs in areas where smoking is permitted under division 2 of this article
(exceptions).
(c) A sign posted under this section shall include the telephone number at the public health department where a person may call to make a complaint under this article.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that an owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises failed to post a sign required under
this section.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-3)
Sec. 10.03.034 Employer responsibilities
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), an employer shall provide a smoke-free workplace for employees.
(b) If an employer requires employees to work in an area described in division 2 of this article (exceptions), the employer shall make reasonable accommodations for an
employee who requests assignment to a smoke-free area.
(c) An employer shall notify each employee and applicant for employment in writing that:
(1) Smoking in the workplace is prohibited; or
(2) Smoking is only permitted in designated areas of the workplace under division 2 of this article (exceptions).
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-4)
Sec. 10.03.035 Removal of ashtray or smoking accessory
The owner, operator, or other person in control of a public place and an employer shall remove any ashtray or other smoking accessory from a place where smoking is
prohibited. (Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-5)
Sec. 10.03.036 Voluntary designation of a nonsmoking facility
Nothing in this article implies that the owner, operator, or other person in control of an outdoor public place is prohibited from designating the entire facility as
nonsmoking. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of section 10.03.033 is posted. (Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted
4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-6)
Sec. 10.03.037 Public education
(a) The city manager or his designee shall:
(1) Develop a comprehensive tobacco education program to educate the public about the harmful effects of tobacco and its addictive qualities;
(2) Conduct informational activities to notify and educate businesses and the public about this article; and
(3) Coordinate the city's tobacco education program with other civic or volunteer groups organized to promote smoking prevention and tobacco education.
(b) To implement this section, the city manager or his designee may publish and distribute educational materials relating to this article to businesses, their employees,
and the public.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-7)
Sec. 10.03.038 Application of other law
This article is cumulative of other laws that regulate smoking. (Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-8)
Secs. 10.03.039–10.03.070 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/376
Part II. Exceptions
Sec. 10.03.071 General exceptions
This article does not apply to:
(1) A dwelling unit, as defined in section 28.01.004, that is used exclusively for private residential use;
(2) A hotel or motel room that is ordinarily used for sleeping and is designated as a smoking room, except that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
rooms in a hotel or motel rented to guests may be designated as smoking rooms;
(3) A retail tobacco store that is mechanically ventilated to prevent smoke from entering a nonsmoking area;
(4) A facility operated by a fraternal organization for a charitable, benevolent, or educational function if the facility is controlled by the organization and
operated exclusively for the benefit of the membership;
(5) An outdoor area of a public place that is not in the area described by subsection 10.03.032(d) (smoking prohibited);
(6) Private clubs;
(7) Outdoor areas of workplaces except as provided for by the provisions of section 10.03.032(d) or 10.03.072; and
(8) Participants in an authorized theatrical performance.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-9)
Sec. 10.03.072 Outdoor distance exception
A person may smoke within twenty-five (25) feet of an entrance to a restricted smoking facility if:
(1) The entrance is not a primary public pedestrian entrance to the premises; or
(2) The distance between the entrance and the adjacent roadway is less than twenty-five (25) feet.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25-06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-10)
Secs. 10.03.073–10.03.100 Reserved
Part III. Penalties and Enforcement
Sec. 10.03.101 Retaliation prohibited
A person commits an offense if the person discharges, refuses to hire, or retaliates against a customer, employee, or applicant for employment because the customer,
employee, or applicant for employment reports a violation of this article. (Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-11)
Sec. 10.03.102 Enforcement authority
(a) This section is cumulative of other laws providing enforcement authority.
(b) A person may report a violation of this article to the director of the public health department or his/her designee.
(c) The city manager or his designee may authorize a city employee conducting an inspection under any provision of the code to also inspect for compliance with this
article and issue a citation for a violation of this article.
(d) The director of the public health department or his/her designee may enforce this article and may seek injunctive relief.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-12)
Sec. 10.03.103 Enforcement guidelines
The city manager or his designee shall adopt enforcement guidelines applicable to this article. (Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-13)
Sec. 10.03.104 Violations; penalty
(a) A person who violates the provisions of this article commits a class C misdemeanor, punishable under section 1.01.009 (general penalty) by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00). A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this article, and need not be proved.
(b) Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation.
(Ordinance 06-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; 1978 Code, sec. 4-14)
ARTICLE 10.04 RAT CONTROL
Sec. 10.04.001 Ratproofing required
Every building or structure now constructed or hereafter constructed in the city shall be constructed and maintained in a ratproof condition so as to prevent the entry of
rats into and upon the premises. All buildings and structures, lots and premises shall be continuously kept by the owner, agent, tenant, lessee, person in charge, or
occupant thereof in a clean, sanitary condition and free from rats. (1958 Code, sec. 16-11; 1978 Code, sec. 13-30)
Sec. 10.04.002 Protection of goods required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/376
All food products or other products, goods, wares and merchandise likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats, whether kept for sale or for any other
purpose, shall be so protected as to prevent rats from gaining access thereto or coming in contact therewith. (1958 Code, sec. 16-12; 1978 Code, sec. 13-31)
Sec. 10.04.003 Stacking and elevating materials
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any lot or premises to suffer or permit lumber, boxes, barrels, loose iron or other material that may become a
harborage for rats to accumulate or remain on such lot or premises owned or occupied by such person, unless the lumber, boxes, barrels, loose iron or other material
described above shall be placed on supports neatly stacked and elevated at least two (2) feet from the ground, with a clear intervening space between to prevent the
harborage of rats. (1958 Code, sec. 16-14; 1978 Code, sec. 13-33)
Sec. 10.04.004 Inspections; right of entry
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, tenant, lessee, person in charge, or occupant of any building, place or premises, or any part thereof, in this city to refuse
admission to the director of health, or his officers, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day when such officer has announced his intention to enter such
building, place or premises for the purpose of inspecting same to determine the presence of rats or for the purpose of setting or directing the setting of rat traps or placing
or directing the placing of rat poison or ascertaining whether the provisions of this article are being complied with; provided, at the time of such entry, such officer shall
display a badge or credentials indicating his official capacity or connection with the department of health. Authority is hereby granted to such officer to so enter any such
building, place or premises for such purposes. (1958 Code, sec. 16-15; 1978 Code, sec. 13-34; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 5, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 10.04.005 Removal of trap or poison prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, tamper with, remove or change the location of any traps or poison placed by or under the direction of the director of health,
or any of his deputies. (1958 Code, sec. 16-16; 1978 Code, sec. 13-35)
Sec. 10.04.006 Declaration of nuisance
All buildings, structures or parts thereof that are infested with rats are hereby declared to be and are public nuisances, and the director of health and his officers are hereby
authorized and empowered to abate the same in the manner provided by law. (1958 Code, sec. 16-17; 1978 Code, sec. 13-36; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 6, adopted 3/27/07)
ARTICLE 10.05 MOSQUITO CONTROL*
Sec. 10.05.001 Collections of water prohibited
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant, or the agent of any nonresident or absent owner or occupant, of any lot or premises within the city to cause, suffer or permit
the accumulation or collection of any stagnant or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or which may become a breeding place for mosquitoes, or any other
accumulation of stagnant waters except when treated or protected as hereinafter provided. The collections of water to which the provisions of this section shall apply are
those which are at any time contained in ditches, ponds, pools, holes, depressions or other excavations, cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, basements, cisterns, tanks,
shallow wells, barrels, troughs, tubs, buckets and all similar containers, house roof gutters, defective flush toilet tanks, and all places where water collects and remains
stagnant. (1958 Code, sec. 16-18; 1978 Code, sec. 13-40)
Sec. 10.05.002 Treatment and protection of water
The methods of treatment and protection of any such collections of water shall be one or more of the following or any other effective method, approved by the director of
health in any particular case:
(1) Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) mesh, or any other material which will effectively prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
(2) Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers, together with thorough drying and cleaning.
(3) Using an approved larvicide applied as directed by the director of health.
(4) Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish; the absence of halfgrown
or older larvae shall be evidence of compliance with this measure.
(5) Filling or draining in accordance with the directions of the director of health of the city, or his designee.
(6) Removal of tin cans, bottles, whole or broken, tin boxes and other like containers.
(7) Draining all stagnant water collected in holes, depressions or other excavations, or in any receptacle, standing in and upon any premises, and serving no
purpose.
(1958 Code, sec. 16-19; 1978 Code, sec. 13-41; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 7, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 10.05.003 Filling excavations and depressions
(a) Required. All excavations and depressions, natural or artificial, existing upon any blocks, lots or premises of any character, whether occupied or unoccupied, must
be filled with dirt or some other suitable substance, and all such premises, vacant lots, blocks or fractional parts thereof must be filled to even grade with surrounding
property or premises, and drained by means of ditches, drains or culverts leading to the street where same is paved or to a gutter or ditch where unpaved.
(b) Right of city; assessment of costs. Should the owner of a property in violation of this article fail to comply within ten (10) days of the written order of the health
director to drain or fill his property, the city may drain or fill the lot or premises, and assess all costs incurred against the property owner. Written orders of the health
director may be issued in person, mailed to the owner's address, or published in a newspaper of general circulation in Jefferson County. Should the property owner be
unknown, the remediation of the property may be ordered by resolution of the city council with the costs assessed against the property. All notices or orders provided for
herein shall be deemed sufficient if sent by U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the occupant, owner, or persons having an interest in the
property.
(1958 Code, secs. 16-20, 16-25; 1978 Code, secs. 13-42, 13-43; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 8, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 10.05.004 Obstructing ditches
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any ditch in the city anything that will in any way obstruct the free flow of water through the same. (1958 Code,
sec. 16-21; 1978 Code, sec. 13-44)
Sec. 10.05.005 Nuisance water conditions promoting mosquito breeding
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/376
Any accumulation or collection of water in which mosquitoes may breed is dangerous to life and health and is hereby declared to constitute a public health nuisance.
Immediate abatement of such public health nuisances is necessary to prevent the breeding and proliferation of infectious mosquitoes. The health director of the city or
his/her designee is hereby empowered to immediately abate, without prior notice, any such public health nuisance, provided that notice thereof is given within seven (7)
days thereafter to the owner, occupant or agent of any nonresident where such public health nuisance was found. (Ordinance 02-070, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/02; 1978 Code,
sec. 13-45)
ARTICLE 10.06 WEED CONTROL*
Sec. 10.06.001 Permitting growth of weeds on lots or premises
(a) It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense and creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation who shall own or occupy any
lot or premises to suffer or permit weeds, grass or uncultivated plants other than trees to grow upon such lot or premises within one hundred (100) feet of the property line
of developed property to a greater height than twelve (12) inches on an average.
(b) It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense and creation and maintenance of a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot
or premises to suffer or permit weeds, grass or uncultivated plants other than trees to grow to a greater height than twelve (12) inches on that portion of right-of-way
which abuts such lot or premises between the centerline of such right-of-way and the property line of such lot or premises. Except, however, rights-of-way meeting any of
the following definitions shall not be the responsibility of the abutting owner or occupants:
(1) Ditches exceeding a depth of four (4) feet as determined by the city manager or his designee;
(2) Rights-of-way which governmental entities other than the city have a contractual obligation to maintain;
(3) Major arterial streets as determined by the city manager or his designee;
(4) Unpaved dedicated street rights-of-way;
(5) Street medians;
(6) Property owner in fee by the city.
(c) If it be shown that a person, firm, or corporation has violated this section, the defendant, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) prescribed by section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Section 1.01.009 states
that it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
provision of this code shall be punished by a fine.
(d) Upon a second conviction for a violation on the same property, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more
than the maximum fine prescribed by section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense.
(e) In addition to the fines and penalties provided for in this section, if a person, firm, or corporation owning any lot or premises in violation of this section fails or
refuses, after notice, to cut such weeds, grass or uncultivated plants, the designated enforcement officer may cause such weeds, grass or uncultivated plants to be cut in
accordance with section 10.06.004 of this article.
(f) In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the person whose name is listed on the tax rolls of the city as being the owner of the lot or premises
found to be in violation shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person is the owner of such lot or premises; provided, however, that such
presumption may be rebutted by the person charged with violating this section with evidence to the contrary; and provided further that the presumption established herein
shall have the evidentiary consequences enumerated in chapter 2 of the Texas Penal Code.
(Ordinance 84-40, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 92-48, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 03-024, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-50)
Sec. 10.06.002 Enforcement; abatement without notice
(a) The designated enforcement officer shall enforce the terms and conditions of this article.
(b) If the owner commits another violation by allowing weeds, grass or uncultivated plants to exist on the property in violation of this article, within twelve (12) months
after the date of the notice provided for herein, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property.
(c) If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within a 12-month period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of a change in
ownership, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by section 10.06.003.
(Ordinance 84-40, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 92-48, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 03-024, sec. 2, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-51)
Sec. 10.06.003 Notice to remove
(a) It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to notify the owner and/or agent of any premises within the city not dedicated to an agricultural use which is in
violation of section 10.06.001 to remove such weeds within seven (7) days after such notice shall be made as provided in this article.
(b) If the owner of property does not bring the property into compliance with this article within seven (7) days after notice of a violation, the city may do the work or
make the improvements required, pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property.
(c) The notice required under this section shall be in writing and may be served on the owner or agent:
(1) By handing it to him or her in person;
(2) By certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the county appraisal district records; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained, by publication at least once in the city's greatest circulated newspaper.
(d) If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the
validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(Ordinance 84-40, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 92-48, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 03-024, sec. 3, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-52)
Sec. 10.06.004 Right of city to cut weeds; assessment of costs
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/376
Should the owner of any lot or premises upon which weeds, grass, or uncultivated plants have been permitted to grow in violation of this article fail or refuse to cut or
remove such weeds, grass or uncultivated plants within seven (7) days after notice, as provided in section 10.06.003:
(1) The enforcement officer is hereby authorized to cause such weeds, grass or uncultivated plants to be cut and removed at the expense of the city, and to
assess the expenses thereof to the owner, as shown on the tax roll of the real estate or lot upon which such expense is incurred.
(2) The fee for cutting shall be billed to the owner of the premises at the rate of one cent ($0.01) per square foot, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00),
plus an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover all administrative costs.
(3) A statement of expenses which includes administrative fees incurred by the city for the cutting and removal of weeds, grass or uncultivated plants cut in
accordance with this section shall be mailed to the property owner shown on the tax roll at the time of service. The statement of expenses shall, in addition to
stating the amount of such expense, provide the date upon which such work was done and a description of the lot or premises upon which such work was done.
(4) Payment is due and is considered delinquent if not received within thirty (30) days of the date on the statement of account from the city.
(5) If payment is not made within ninety (90) days of such delinquency, the city's authorized agent is hereby authorized to add a lien assessment fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to the statement of expenses incurred by the city in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass or uncultivated plants under this section and to file
said statement of expenses as a lien at the county clerk's office against the premises which are in violation of this article.
(6) The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures made and interest shall accrue at the rate of ten (10) percent annually on the unpaid balance
due from the date of payment by the city.
(7) The city shall have a privileged lien upon such lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditure so
made, in accordance with provisions of Health and Safety Code, section 342.007, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements.
(8) The city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due.
(9) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the
improvements and of proper notices as required by this article.
(10) The remedy provided by this section is in addition to the remedy provided by section 342.005 of the Health and Safety Code.
(11) The governing body of a city may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a proceeding relating to the property brought under subchapter E,
chapter 33, Tax Code.
(Ordinance 84-40, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 86-104, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/86; Ordinance 92-48, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 00-31, sec. 1, adopted
3/28/00; Ordinance 03-024, sec. 4, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-53; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 9, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 10.06.005 Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds
(a) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches and are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any
person.
(b) Not later than the 10th day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section
342.006 of the Health and Safety Code.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) Identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing related to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(d) The city manager or his designee shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if the property owner files with the city a
written request for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice required under this section.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may
testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(f) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 342.007 of the Health and Safety Code. A
lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 342.007 of the Health and Safety Code.
(g) The authority granted a city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by Health and Safety Code, section 342.006.
(Ordinance 03-024, sec. 5, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-54; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 10, adopted 3/27/07)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
ARTICLE 10.07 AMBULANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.07.001 Definitions
Ambulance. Any vehicle used, designed or redesigned for the purpose of transporting the sick or injured.
Ambulance permit. The permit issued under division 2 of this article.
Basic life support ambulance. A vehicle that is used, designed or redesigned for transporting the sick or injured and that has sufficient equipment and supplies for
providing basic life support.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/376
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel.
(Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 78-65, sec. 1, adopted 6/6/78; Ordinance 85-82, sec. 1, adopted 8/13/85; 1978 Code, sec. 29-20; Ordinance 08-046,
sec. 1, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.002 Equipment
As a minimum requirement, every ambulance for which an ambulance permit is issued shall be equipped with the equipment required by the rules and regulations of the
department of state health services for a state basic life support ambulance permit. Such equipment shall be permanently labeled in some manner so as to indicate that the
equipment is owned by the ambulance company whose ambulance is being inspected. The rules and regulations of the state concerning equipment on ambulances are
incorporated by reference as if set out in full at this point. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 85-82, sec. 3, adopted 8/13/85; 1978 Code, sec. 29-24;
Ordinance 08-046, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.003 Licensed personnel
(a) Every ambulance, when in service, shall be manned with at least two (2) EMTs who are currently certified in standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
procedures approved by the American Red Cross or the American Heart Association.
(b) Only authorized personnel shall be allowed in the ambulance at any time. This does not apply to family members of the injured.
(Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 85-82, sec. 4, adopted 8/13/85; 1978 Code, sec. 29-25; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.004 Communications
Every ambulance shall be equipped with a fully operational two-way radio communications system. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 78-65, sec. 2,
adopted 6/6/78; 1978 Code, sec. 29-27; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.005 Transport of injured or ill persons
(a) When the holder of an ambulance permit agrees to respond to an emergency medical incident, he shall be required to send an ambulance to transport a sick or
injured person from a location within the city to an emergency medical facility. Ambulances involved in emergency calls shall travel at a speed no greater than ten (10)
miles per hour above the legal speed limit.
(b) In the event of a major emergency incident involving multiple casualties and/or fatalities, the first senior city EMS paramedic to arrive on the scene or the EMS
director/manager shall have complete control over the medical scene. This senior paramedic or EMS manager shall have authority to decide which ambulance will
transport the patient or patients and to designate which hospital or medical facility to which they are to be transported. A designated triage officer is to be authorized by
EMS to triage, tag, arrange for transport and to see that the patients get transported to the appropriate emergency medical facility.
(c) Any ambulance service which refuses to transport or which transports to an emergency medical facility other than one designated by the senior EMS paramedic or
triage officer, as provided for in subsection (b), shall result in a two (2) week suspension of the driver's identification card and permanent suspension of the driver's
identification card for a second offense committed during the term of the card.
(d) Any ambulance service which wishes to participate in the city's rollover program shall enter into an agreement with the city and be subject to the provisions and
requirements contained herein.
(Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 78-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/78; Ordinance 87-50, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/87; 1978 Code, sec. 29-28; Ordinance 08-046,
sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.006 Inspections
Each ambulance for which a permit is issued shall be inspected at least once every twelve (12) months to determine compliance with this article. As many additional
inspections as are determined to be necessary by the public health director or his designee may be made to insure enforcement of this article. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1,
adopted 1/3/78; 1978 Code, sec. 29-29; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.007 Identification card required
No person shall operate or drive an ambulance for the purpose of transporting the sick or injured for hire upon the public streets of the city unless he is wearing a valid
identification card issued by the public health director or his designee. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; 1978 Code, sec. 29-32; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted
5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.008 Application for identification card; transfer; expiration
Application for a city identification card shall be made in writing to the public health director or his designee on a form provided for that purpose. Such application shall
give the name, address and telephone number of the applicant. The applicant must be eighteen (18) years old, the holder of a driver's license valid for the operation of an
ambulance in the state and must exhibit proof that he/she has passed an emergency medical technician course. Such application must be signed and sworn to before a
notary public. Every application when filed shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). No card shall be transferable and every card shall expire one
year from the date of issuance. The card is subject to recall by the public health director and must be surrendered upon expiration of certification. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1,
adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 93-9, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/93; 1978 Code, sec. 29-33; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.009 Suspension or revocation of identification card
An ambulance identification card may be suspended for any period of time from one day to thirty (30) days, or may be revoked. The public health director may revoke or
suspend an identification card upon a finding that the holder has been convicted of violating any provision of this article or upon conviction of a moving violation of the
traffic laws of the state or the city, provided such moving violation occurs while the violator is driving or operating an ambulance, or the holder no longer meets the
requirements of section 10.07.008 of this article. Upon suspension or revocation of an identification card the public health director shall give written notice to the holder
of the card. The notice shall state the reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and that the holder of the card may request a hearing. The holder of an
identification card may request a hearing within five (5) days of the receipt of notice of suspension or revocation by filing same with the city manager or his designee. The
city manager or his designee shall conduct a hearing within fifteen (15) days of the request and may approve the suspension or revocation upon a finding that grounds for
suspension or revocation exist under this article or may overrule the suspension. Should a hearing be requested in accordance with this article, the suspension or
revocation shall be delayed pending the final decision of the city manager or his designee, which said decision shall be final. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78;
Ordinance 80-75, sec. 4, adopted 7/29/80; 1978 Code, sec. 29-34; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.010 Radio response to the 911 dispatch operations center of location and availability
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/376
A permit holder shall at all times respond to inquiries of the city by radio regarding the status of each permitted ambulance. (Ordinance 80-75, sec. 6, adopted 7/29/80;
1978 Code, sec. 29-35; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.011 Fees
The city manager is hereby authorized to establish and adjust fees for ambulance services consistent with the current payment practices of Medicare, Medicaid, and the
insurance industry. The fees, as established, shall be charged by the city for services rendered to the public. (Ordinance 84-42, sec. 1, adopted 3/20/84; 1978 Code, sec.
29-38; Ordinance 07-045, sec. 1, adopted 4/3/07; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 5, adopted 5/27/08)
Secs. 10.07.012–10.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 10.07.041 Required; exceptions
No person shall drive or operate an ambulance for the purpose of transporting the sick or injured for hire upon the public streets of the city unless there is attached to the
windshield of such ambulance a valid ambulance permit issued for such ambulance by the city. There shall be exempted from the provisions of the permit and license
requirements of this article those ambulances who transport persons from a location outside the city into the city, those ambulances who pick up a person inside the city
and transport said person outside the city, and those ambulances who transport persons only through the city. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 79-24,
sec. 1, adopted 3/27/79; 1978 Code, sec. 29-21; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.042 Fees
Every person, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain an ambulance permit shall make application in writing on a form provided by the city for that purpose to the
public health director or his designee. Such application shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the address and telephone number of
the location from which ambulance service will be originated. The application shall also show the make, model, motor number, correct state license number and
ownership for each ambulance unit to be operated by the applicant. Every filed application shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
$250.00 for the company permit plus $25.00 for each ambulance unit operating within the city. No permit shall be transferable and every permit shall expire one year from
the date of issuance. (Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 03-100, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 29-22; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 2, adopted
5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.043 Conditions for issuance
The following conditions are necessary to the issuance of a permit:
(1) There shall be in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, and in the standard form approved by the commissioner of insurance of the state, with coverage provisions insuring the
public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of the ambulance for which the permit is issued, and
providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits not less than the following sums:
(A) For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00);
(B) For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one accident, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00);
(C) For any injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000);
The public health director or his designee shall be furnished with a current insurance certificate certifying that such policy as specified above is in
full force and effect. Such certificate shall also provide that the city will be given ten (10) days' notice of any cancellation;
(2) The applicant cannot owe delinquent taxes to the city;
(3) The applicant has a valid permit issued by the department of state health services pursuant to chapter 773, Health and Safety Code; and
(4) The applicant, an employer or any employee of the applicant, or any person residentially domiciled with the applicant, an employer or any employee of
the applicant has not had an ambulance permit revoked within one year preceding the date of application.
(Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 78-70, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/78; 1978 Code, sec. 29-23; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.044 Suspension or revocation
An ambulance permit may be suspended by the public health director for any period of time from one day to thirty (30) days, or may be revoked. The public health
director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation to the holder of an ambulance permit. The notice of suspension shall include the dates of the proposed
suspension and the reasons therefor. The notice of revocation shall include the reasons for the proposed revocation. The holder of an ambulance permit may request a
hearing by written notice to the city manager or his designee within five (5) days of the receipt of notice of suspension or revocation. Upon receipt of a written request for
hearing, the city manager or his designee shall notify the permit holder of the time and place for a hearing to be held not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days
after receipt of request for hearing. After hearing, the city manager or his designee may, upon a finding that one or more grounds for revocation or suspension exist,
revoke or suspend the permit. If no ground for revocation or suspension is found by the city manager or his designee, he shall overrule the revocation or suspension. A
record shall be made of any hearing held under this section, and all costs associated with such hearing and record shall be paid by the permit holder. Impossibility of
performance shall be the only defense to revocation for failing to send an ambulance when requested to transport a sick or injured person from a location within the city to
an emergency medical facility within the city. The city manager or his designee shall render his decision in writing within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing.
The following shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of an ambulance permit by the city manager or his designee:
(1) The permit holder or an employee of the permit holder has violated any provision of this article;
(2) The permit holder or an employee of the permit holder has misused information received from a broadcast on the city's emergency radio frequency for
his own benefit, or the benefit of another person, in connection with the operation of an ambulance;
(3) The permit holder has allowed a person not holding a valid city identification card to operate the ambulance for the purpose of transporting a sick or
injured person or persons on the public streets of the city;
(4) The permit holder or an employee of the permit holder has, in the provision of ambulance service, violated the zoning ordinance of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/376
(Ordinance 78-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/78; Ordinance 78-7, sec. 2, adopted 1/17/78; Ordinance 80-75, sec. 3, adopted 7/29/80; 1978 Code, sec. 29-30; Ordinance 08-046,
sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
Sec. 10.07.045 Appeal
Appeal of the decision to revoke or suspend an ambulance permit by the city manager or his designee shall be made to the city council and shall be heard only upon the
record made of the hearing before the city manager or his designee. The substantial evidence rule shall apply. The city council shall hear said appeal upon receipt of a
request in writing for such appeal received within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision of revocation by the city manager or his designee. The record of the
hearing before the city manager or his designee shall be attached as a part of the request for appeal to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ordinance 78-7, sec. 3, adopted 1/17/78; Ordinance 80-75, sec. 5, adopted 7/29/80; 1978 Code, sec. 29-31; Ordinance 08-046, sec. 4, adopted 5/27/08)
CHAPTER 11
RESERVED
CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Radio, tuning to police or fire department frequency
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, or permit to be installed, use or permit to remain in any automobile, including any taxicab, wrecker or ambulance or other
vehicle, any radio tuned to the shortwave radio frequency of the police department, or the shortwave frequency of the fire department, without first having obtained the
permission of the chief of police or the fire chief of the city respectively. (1958 Code, sec. 23-26; 1978 Code, sec. 18-5)
Sec. 12.01.002 Telephonic alarm systems
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any
telephone line of the police department or fire department of the city.
(b) A “telephonic alarm system” is defined to mean any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically through the use of public
telephone facilities, to transmit a signal, message or warning to another location.
(1958 Code, sec. 23-45; 1978 Code, sec. 18-6)
Sec. 12.01.003 Skating and skateboarding on certain municipally owned property
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, roller blades, in-line skates, skateboards or similar devices to skate along or upon the public grounds of the Julie
Rogers Theatre, Tyrrell Historical Library, Beaumont Public Library, City Hall, Civic Center, Police Building, Energy Museum and Municipal Court Building, or the Art
Museum of Southeast Texas. “Public grounds” means property belonging to the city adjoining the facilities listed. (Ordinance 99-55, sec. 1, adopted 8/10/99; 1978 Code,
sec. 23-85)
Sec. 12.01.004 Playing ball on streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to play at a game of ball in any manner upon any public highway, street or alley in the city. (1958 Code, sec. 33-36; 1978 Code, sec.
23-32)
ARTICLE 12.02 WEAPONS*
Sec. 12.02.001 Discharging firearm
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a peace officer in the discharge of his official duties, to discharge any firearm within the city. It is an exception to this
prohibition if the firearm is discharged within an indoor firearm range, operated by a person or entity with all permits or licenses required to operate such a facility, that
meets the following requirements:
(1) The structure must be constructed in such a manner that a bullet of the maximum caliber allowed to be fired within the range may not escape from the
structure.
(2) The range must utilize bullet traps that prevent the bullet from escaping from the structure and, in addition, minimize the escape of lead particles into the
air, both inside and outside the structure.
(3) The ventilation of the structure must meet all regulations applicable to such use, including, but not limited to, the regulations of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the state commission on environmental quality.
(4) The structure must be constructed such that noise from the structure during use will not cause a disturbance to those across the real property boundary of
the facility.
(5) The building official is charged with enforcement of this section and may not issue a certificate of occupancy for the structure and other properties
associated with the use of the structure until it meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable codes of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/376
(6) Any interpretation of this section by the building official may be appealed to the building board of adjustment in accordance with the ordinances
applicable to such appeal.
(1958 Code, sec. 23-37; Ordinance 04-010, sec. 1, adopted 2/10/04; 1978 Code, sec. 18-7)
Sec. 12.02.002 Unlawful to carry firearms on vehicles operated by Beaumont Municipal Transit
It shall be unlawful for a person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly to enter a vehicle owned or operated by Beaumont Municipal Transit with a handgun or other
firearm capable of being concealed on the person. It is a defense to prosecution that the actor possessed a firearm while traveling to or from the actor's place of assignment
or in the actual discharge of duties as:
(1) A peace officer;
(2) A member of the armed forces or National Guard;
(3) A guard employed by a penal institution; or
(4) A security officer commissioned by the state private security bureau if:
(A) The actor is wearing a distinctive uniform; and
(B) The firearm is in plain view.
(Ordinance 95-76, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/95; 1978 Code, sec. 18-7.5)
Sec. 12.02.003 Discharging missiles
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge gravel, marbles, shot or any projectile, missile, object or material out of a gravel shooter, blowgun, air gun, rubber sling or
compressed gas, compressed air or spring device; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prevent the use of a compressed air device for the delivery
of handbills, circulars or newspapers; and provided that this section shall not apply to the sport of archery when it is practiced on the property of the participant or on
property upon which the participant has permission to practice archery, nor shall it apply to organized sports or adventure games employing the use of a low-velocity gaspowered
gun or air gun, so long as the game is played or practiced under supervision, and on private property owned or leased by the participant or sponsor of the game,
without the use of any metallic pellet or projectile, and no closer than three hundred (300) feet to any place of human habitation, and employing marker pistols or marker
guns, with nonmetallic chalk-type pellets or paint pellets. It shall, however, be unlawful for any person to propel an arrow or any other projectile onto or over the property
of another who has not given permission to the participant to propel an arrow or other projectile onto or over this property. (1958 Code, sec. 23-38; Ordinance 76-26, sec.
1, adopted 2/24/76; Ordinance 85-37, sec. 1, adopted 3/26/85; 1978 Code, sec. 18-8)
ARTICLE 12.03 CURFEW FOR MINORS*
Sec. 12.03.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city;
(2) Promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons under the age of seventeen (17), whose inexperience renders them particularly
vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and
(3) Foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children.
(Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-1; Ordinance 08-111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-
086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 12.03.002 Definitions
Curfew hours for minors.
(1) Sunday: 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(2) Monday: 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(3) Tuesday: 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(4) Wednesday: 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(5) Thursday: 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(6) Friday: 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(7) Saturday: 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural
disaster, an automobile accident, any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset.
Establishment. Any privately owned or leased place of business or leased public facility operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to,
any place of amusement or entertainment, such as theaters and game rooms.
Guardian. A person who:
(1) Under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) Is a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age who has not been emancipated by court order pursuant to chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/376
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners
of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A person who is a minor's biological, adoptive, or stepparent and who has legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under a
court order or agreement);
(2) A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor regularly resides;
(3) A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or
(4) A person eighteen (18) years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in subsection (1), (2) or (3)
above, for the person to assume the care or physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances).
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, parks, streets, highways, the common areas
of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, shopping malls, and shall include parking facilities adjacent to the same.
Remain.
(1) Linger or stay at or upon a place (premises); or
(2) Fail to leave the place/premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the place/premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the
function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ordinance 94-34, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/94; Ordinance 95-37, sec. 1, adopted 6/6/95; Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted
12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-2; Ordinance 08-111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14;
Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 12.03.003 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain in or upon any public place, or to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to
remain in or upon the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours for minors.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, encourages, or by insufficient control allows a minor to remain in or upon any
public place, or to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours for minors.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of any private establishment or the lessee of any public facility commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, allows, or
encourages a minor to remain in or upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours for minors.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false name, address, date of birth, or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible
violation of this section.
(Ordinance 94-34, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/94; Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-3; Ordinance 08-
111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 12.03.004 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under offenses that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) Accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or guardian;
(3) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, and the minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing the
following information: the name, signature, address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent may be
reached during the errand, the name of the minor, and a brief description of the errand, the minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to be
engaged in the errand;
(4) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(5) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(6) Involved in a case of “reasonable necessity” after parental notification of the police;
(7) Involved in an emergency;
(8) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
(9) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, as well as going to or returning home from the same, without any detour or stop;
(10) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of
assembly;
(11) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code; or
(12) Engaged in lawful volunteer or charity work at a recognized charity institution or is going to or coming from such activity without detour or stop.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 12.03.003(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/376
(Ordinance 94-34, sec. 1, adopted 7-12-94; Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-4; Ordinance 08-
111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 12.03.005 School age to be in school
(a) Compulsory school age to be in attendance at school; parental duties imposed.
(1) No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, other than a minor that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at any
place within the city except in attendance at school between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. during any official school day, unless the minor has written
proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that particular time, or unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor.
(2) Each parent or legal guardian of a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the minor from behaving
contrary to subsection (a)(1) of this section. No person shall fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this section.
(3) Any person who violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of failing to supervise a minor of compulsory school age.
(b) Children suspended or expelled from school to remain under supervision; parental duties imposed. If a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive,
is suspended or expelled from school, then each parent or legal guardian of the minor shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion:
(1) The duty to personally supervise the minor, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would have been
required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled; and
(2) The duty to prohibit the minor from being at any establishment or public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance
at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the circumstances found in section 12.03.004 hereof.
(c) No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, that has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision provided or
arranged by a parent or legal guardian pursuant to subsection (b) of this section.
(d) No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any establishment or public place at
the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school or employment had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the circumstances
described in section 12.03.004 hereof.
(Ordinance 94-34, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/94; Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-5; Ordinance 08-
111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 12.03.006 Penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this article. Such violation shall be a class C misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or
permitted.
(c) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section
12.03.003(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(Ordinance 94-34, sec. 1, adopted 7-12-94; Ordinance 01-056, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/01; Ordinance 05-093, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/05; 1978 Code, sec. 9-6; Ordinance 08-
111, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 11-086, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 14-063, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 17-073 adopted 11/7/17)
ARTICLE 12.04 GRAFFITI*
Sec. 12.04.001 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, fence, gate, other structure, tree or other real or personal property, either publicly or
privately owned, any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type commonly known and referred to as graffiti without the permission of the owner or operator of such
property. (Ordinance 93-52, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-25)
Sec. 12.04.002 Violations; penalty
(a) Every person who violates the provisions of section 12.04.001 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) Upon second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this article, the person shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(c) For purposes of this section, “conviction” includes a charge dismissed or disposed of by deferred adjudication or similar probation.
(Ordinance 93-52, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-26)
Sec. 12.04.003 Entrance by police for investigation
Upon detecting the existence of graffiti upon private property, which graffiti is visible from any area open to the public, a police officer may at any reasonable hour enter
upon the private property within his jurisdiction for the purpose of inspecting and documenting the existence and nature of the graffiti and determining the ownership of
the premises upon which the graffiti is located. (Ordinance 93-52, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-27)
Sec. 12.04.004 Removal
If the chief of police or his designated representative determines that the graffiti is located on a publicly or privately owned structure on public or private property within
the city and is visible from any public place or public right-of-way, then the chief of police or his designated representative may provide for the removal of the graffiti at
city expense if:
(1) The structure is owned by a public entity other than the city and removal of the graffiti is authorized with the consent of the public entity having
jurisdiction over the structure;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/376
(2) The structure is privately owned and the city obtains consent and waiver of liability from the owner; or
(3) The owner of the property cannot be found or will not respond to notification by the city.
(Ordinance 93-52, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-28)
ARTICLE 12.05 SOLICITING IN AND ALONGSIDE STREET*
Sec. 12.05.001 Definitions
For purpose of this article, the following terms have the meaning stated here:
Charitable organization or organization. An entity that the United States Internal Revenue Service recognizes to be a charitable organization or a church.
Contribution. Currency, coin, or check.
Location. The approaches to an intersection equipped with a traffic-control signal light and within one hundred feet of such an intersection that has been approved by the
public works director or his designee.
(Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.002 Prohibition; exception for charitable solicitation
(a) No person shall stand in or alongside a street or highway within the public right-of-way and sell or attempt to sell any goods or services or solicit, or attempt to
solicit, employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
(b) The prohibition, however, does not apply to a person soliciting contributions for charitable organizations which have been issued a permit under this article and who
are in compliance with other provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.003 Requirements for issuance of permit
In order to solicit contributions while standing in or alongside a street or highway within the public right-of-way, a charitable organization must comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date desired for soliciting, submit a complete application to the city police chief or designee for a permit. The
police department shall create a form and review procedure for this purpose. The form shall require the name of the charitable organization; a point of contact
for the organization (meaning the name and phone number of the individual seeking the permit for the organization); the desired date(s) and specific location(s)
for soliciting; the name, address, phone number and age of each individual who may solicit contributions on behalf of the organization; and an agreement of
the organization indemnifying the city and holding it harmless from any and all claims, suits, demands, damages, and attorney fees arising out of or related to
the acts or omissions of persons soliciting for the organization. The form may require further information that is reasonably necessary to the direct enforcement
of this section and the purposes of this article.
(2) At the time of submitting a completed application, the organization shall also submit the following items, and failure to do so renders the application
incomplete:
(A) Fee payment in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) (cash or money order only) to defray the city's costs of both processing the application
and advertising, and compliance monitoring on the street. This fee is nonrefundable, unless the permit is denied.
(B) Provide written proof of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for personal injury or
death to any one (1) person, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence of death or personal injury, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence of property damage or destruction. The city must be an additional named insured on the policy and specify that such
insurance is primary. The insurance policy must be issued by a company authorized to do business in Texas and have an effective date that covers the
date(s) of street soliciting.
(C) Provide written proof that the organization is a charitable organization, along with a copy of the organization's charter (or, if a foreign organization,
then a copy of its certificate of authority to do business in Texas).
(3) No more than three (3) permits per calendar year may be issued to an organization. For purposes of this subsection, local chapters of a state, national or
international organization are deemed separate organizations, but committees or other subdivisions of an organization are not so deemed.
(4) A permit shall authorize street soliciting only for three (3) consecutive calendar days, between the period of 9:00 a.m. and one (1) hour prior to sunset, at
the approved locations(s) specified in the permit.
(5) The police chief or designee shall not issue an organization a permit for a given date(s) or location(s) if a permit has already been issued to another
organization for such date(s) and location(s).
(6) The police chief or designee shall grant a permit if the organization provides the information and documents, and meets the requirements stated in the
above subsections (1) through (5) inclusive. The police chief or designee shall advise the organization's point of contact of the decision to grant or deny the
permit, not later than the tenth day after the date of receiving the application fee and all required information.
(7) Permits may only be issued for street segments and intersections approved by the public works director. A list of approved locations may be obtained
from the police department.
(Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.004 Contents of permit; carrying of permit
If a permit is granted, it shall state the name of the organization, the names of persons who will be soliciting contributions for the organization, and the approved date(s)
and location(s). The organization shall at its expense make sufficient copies of the permit to have a copy with each solicitor at each approved location, and shall readily
present such copy for inspection upon demand by any person. (Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.005 Offenses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/376
It is an offense for a person to solicit or attempt to solicit contributions for a charitable organization that is issued a permit and fail to:
(1) Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) Be named on the organization's permit;
(3) Wear a reflective orange or yellow visibility vest as the outermost garment;
(4) Be in the street or highway only when the controlling traffic signal light prohibits vehicle movement in that lane;
(5) Place an orange traffic-control cone, not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height, on the center stripe of each street and highway approaching the
intersection, at least one hundred (100) to one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the intersection, to warn drivers of a hazard ahead;
(6) Present for inspection a copy of the permit upon demand by any person; or
(7) Place a sign or signs at the intersection which comply with the requirements of exhibit A of Ordinance 04-091 and the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.006 Interference with traffic-control device
It is an offense for any person to obstruct, tamper with, alter, cover, or post any object on or to a traffic-control device. “Traffic-control device” includes but is not limited
to median markers, reflectors, signal control boxes, regulatory signs, directional signs, warning signs, and pedestrian walk lights. (Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted
10/26/04)
Sec. 12.05.007 Violations
Any peace officer observing any violation of any requirement or prohibition of this article is authorized to issue a citation for the person to appear in municipal court to
answer the charge. Upon issuance of the citation, such person shall immediately cease soliciting or attempting to solicit any charitable contribution under that
organization's permit. However, it is not the intent of this provision to bar such person from participating in future charitable solicitations approved under the provisions of
this article. (Ordinance 04-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/04)
ARTICLE 12.06 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.06.001 Definitions
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Antique auto. A passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old.
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or
parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Junked motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle as defined in Transportation Code subchapter E, section 683.071, as amended, that:
(1) Is a vehicle that is self-propelled and does not have lawfully attached to it both an unexpired license plate and a valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
and
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive
hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(3) Remains inoperable for thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest,
is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-56)
Sec. 12.06.002 Declared a public nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way, is detrimental to the safety
and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard
to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of the municipalities in the state, and is a public nuisance. This section shall not apply with regard to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with a business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a
licensed junkyard; or
(3) Unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor
storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence,
rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-57)
Sec. 12.06.003 Notice
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/376
(a) For abatement and removal of a public nuisance from private property, public property or public right-of-way within the city, the city manager or his designee shall
send notice to the owner of the junked motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the premises where the nuisance exists if on private property, or the owner or occupant
of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the nuisance exists. The notice shall state the following:
(1) The nature of public nuisance;
(2) That it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days;
(3) That if a hearing is desired before the removal of that vehicle or vehicle part, a request for such hearing shall be made before expiration of the ten-day
period; and
(4) That the owner shall request, either in person or in writing, to the city manager or his designee to set a date and time of hearing.
(b) The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of
record, and the owner or occupant of the private property, public property, or public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered
by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return.
(c) The procedures shall provide that the relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the same city or county after a proceeding for the
abatement and the removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(d) If the property owner or occupant commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety within a twelve-month
period from the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a
violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within a twelve-month period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership
change, then the city without notice may take any action as provided by subsections (a)(1) and (2) and assess its expenses as provided by section 342.007 of the Health
and Safety Code.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-57; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 11, 3/27/07)
Sec. 12.06.004 Hearing
(a) Generally. If a hearing is requested it shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. A public hearing must be held before the
vehicle or vehicle part is removed. The hearing shall be held before the municipal magistrate as provided herein.
(b) Determination; abatement. The municipal magistrate shall conduct hearings brought before said court, as set out herein, and shall determine whether the defendant
is in violation of this article. Upon a finding that said defendant is in violation of this article, said defendant shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine
in accordance with the penalty provision set forth in this code, section 1.01.009. The magistrate shall further order such defendant to remove and abate said nuisance
within ten (10) days, the same being a reasonable time. If the defendant shall fail and refuse, within said ten (10) days, to abate or remove the nuisance, the magistrate
may issue an order directing the city manager or his designee to have the same removed, and the city manager or his designee shall take possession of said junked motor
vehicle and remove it from the premises. The city manager or his designee shall thereafter dispose of said junked motor vehicle in such manner as required by law.
(c) Compliance. If, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the city manager or his designee to abate the nuisance, as herein provided, the owner of the junked
motor vehicle or owner or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the city manager or his designee for removal of the junked motor vehicle from the
premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article.
(d) Failure to comply; filing a complaint. If a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period provided by subsection (c) and the nuisance is not removed and abated
by the persons notified, the city shall request of the magistrate an order directing the city manager or his designee to have the same removed, and the city manager or his
designee shall take possession of said junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. The city manager or his designee shall, thereafter, dispose of said junked
motor vehicle in such manner as required by law.
(e) Removal when owner unknown. If there is a junked motor vehicle, as herein defined, on any premises, and neither the owner of the premises nor the owner of said
vehicle can be found and notified to remove same, then, upon a showing of such facts to the municipal magistrate, the court may issue an order directing the city manager
or his designee to have the same removed, and the city manager or his designee shall take possession of said junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. The
order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and correct identification number and license number if the information is
available at the site. The city manager or his designee shall thereafter dispose of said junked motor vehicle in such manner as required by law.
(f) Notice to state department of transportation. Within five (5) days after the date of removal of any vehicle under this section, notice shall be given to the state
department of transportation. Said notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part thereof removed.
(g) Reconstruction after removal. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
(h) Administration of section. This section will be administered by regularly salaried full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof
from property may be by any other duly authorized person.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-59)
Secs. 12.06.005–12.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Vehicle Storage Facilities*
Sec. 12.06.031 License required; application; fee
The owner of a junk motor vehicle which is exempt from this article by section 12.06.002(2) shall be required to comply with the licensing and other requirements of this
section. The word “person,” as used herein, shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep junk motor vehicles which are exempt under section 12.06.002(2) without first having obtained a license for
each such location from the city manager or his designee in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) An applicant for a license under this division shall file with the city manager or his designee a written application provided by the city and signed by the
applicant.
(3) All licenses shall be permanent unless revoked as provided herein. A one-time license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be submitted with the application
to the city. No fee will be required of an applicant which is exempt from ad valorem taxation as an institution of purely public charity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/376
(4) A license issued hereunder shall be automatically void if the licensee does not operate the licensed business for a continuous period of two (2) years.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-60; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 12, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 12.06.032 Display of license; requirements for premises
(a) The license issued pursuant to this division shall be plainly displayed on the business premises.
(b) The business premises, together with all things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(c) No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business.
(d) No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
(e) Weeds and other uncultivated growth on the premises, other than trees, shrubs and bushes, shall be kept at a height of not more than twelve (12) inches.
(f) No property of the licensee shall be allowed to rest on or protrude over any public street or right-of-way, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the
business premises.
(g) The property of the licensee shall be arranged so as to permit easy access for firefighting purposes.
(h) No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become
a fire hazard.
(i) The area of the premises where junk motor vehicles exempted under section 12.06.002(2) are kept which is visible from a public right-of-way and which fronts on a
public right-of-way shall be screened with an eight-foot opaque vertical masonry wall or wood board fence unless there is existing, at the time this division is passed, a
fence of any type which is made opaque within sixty (60) days of the date of this division. A chain-link fence with slats in each link will be considered to be opaque for
purposes of this section. Every twenty-five (25) feet along the wall or fence a tree shall be planted and maintained. The trees shall be at least two (2) inches in caliper and
six (6) feet in height or greater at planting and shall be within ten (10) feet of the wall or fence. Construction shall be in accordance with the standards as approved by the
building official of the city. Such fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept vertical, uniform and structurally sound. No fence shall be required
should a one-hundred-foot buffer exist between all public rights-of-way and storage of junk so long as the trees required herein are planted, existing and maintained.
(j) The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by the city manager or his duly authorized agent at any reasonable time.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-61; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 13, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 12.06.033 Revocation of license
(a) The city manager or his designee, prior to revocation of any license issued hereunder, shall give written notice to the holder of said license. Such notice shall contain
the reason for the proposed revocation, and provide that the revocation shall be effective fifteen (15) days after notice unless an appeal is filed. The following shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the license issued hereunder:
(1) The licensee has violated any provision of this article;
(2) The licensee has obtained his license through fraud, misrepresentation or misstatement;
(3) The licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, or is a nuisance, or is
being operated or carried on in any unlawful manner;
(4) The licensed business or activity is no longer being operated on this licensed premises.
If a license is revoked, the owner and/or occupant of the vehicle storage facility has sixty (60) days to remove or abate all junked vehicles, including parts of a junked
vehicle. If the owner or occupant of the vehicle storage yard fails or refuses to remove all junked vehicles and parts of a junked vehicle within the sixty (60) day period,
the city may file charges with municipal court and may clean the property and charge the expense thereof to the person who had a license on the property.
(b) Appeal of the revocation or refusal to grant a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the city manager within fifteen (15) days after notice of revocation or
refusal to grant or renew a permit. The city shall appoint a hearing officer to hear said appeal if such request was timely. Revocation shall be suspended pending hearing
by the hearing officer and such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the request for hearing. The substantial evidence rule shall apply, and
the decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
(Ordinance 03-023, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-62)
ARTICLE 12.07 LITTER CONTROL*
Sec. 12.07.001 Definitions
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Container. A sturdy, durable, watertight, reusable receptacle with a tightfitting lid designed to prevent exposure or dispersion of its contents by the elements, or a plastic
bag not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) mils thick that has a capacity of not more than thirty (30) gallons and that is tied or closed securely.
Elements. Any man-made or natural force that, with reasonable foreseeability, could carry litter, trash, garbage, or waste from one place to another, and includes air
currents, rain, water currents, and animals.
Litter. Any man-made or man-used object, organic or inorganic material, or solid waste, and specifically includes trash which is not placed in:
(1) A “container” as defined herein;
(2) An authorized sanitary waste disposal site; or
(3) Another approved area, depository, or vehicle designated for transport or disposal of litter, trash, garbage, or waste.
Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, business trust, estate, trust, association, and any other legal entity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/376
(Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 84-40, sec. 3, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 03-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-69)
Sec. 12.07.002 Littering
It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense for a person to dispose of litter except in a container as defined in section 12.07.001, or in an authorized sanitary waste
disposal site, or in another approved area, depository or vehicle designated for transport or disposal of litter, trash, garbage or waste. (Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted
4/6/82; 1978 Code, sec. 13-70)
Sec. 12.07.003 Responsibility for retrieving litter
(a) A person who owns or occupies property commits an offense if that person allows litter on that person's property.
(b) A person who owns or occupies any lot or premises commits an offense if that person allows litter on that portion of rights-of-way which abut such lot or premises
between the centerline of such rights-of-way and the property line of such lot or premises.
(c) A person commits on offense if that person fails to retrieve and properly store litter that is on private or public property adjacent to that person's own property if such
litter is attributable to that person's place of business or business activity or if such litter is a result of that person's failure to properly dispose, store or containerize such
litter. It shall be a defense to a prosecution for violation of this subsection that the defendant's retrieval of litter would constitute a trespass in violation of the Texas Penal
Code.
(Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 87-2, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/87; 1978 Code, sec. 13-71; Ordinance 07-028, sec. 14, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 12.07.004 Notice to remove and authority to abate
(a) It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to notify the owner and/or occupant of any premises within the city which is in violation of section 12.07.002 or
12.07.003 by:
(1) Written notice issued by hand notice in person to the property owner and/or occupant or person(s) responsible for improperly disposing of the litter; or
(2) Certified letter issued to the owner as listed on the county appraisal district roll and to the occupant stating that the violation must be corrected within
seven (7) days from the date of issuance of the letter.
(b) If the owner and/or the occupant commits another violation of littering as stated in section 12.07.002 or 12.07.003 on the property within twelve (12) months after
the date of the notice, the city may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property.
(c) If a violation covered by a notice under section 12.07.002 or 12.07.003 occurs within a 12-month period after such notice, and the city has not been informed in
writing of a change in ownership, then the city, without further notice, may take any action permitted by section 12.07.005.
(Ordinance 03-025, sec. 2, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-71.1)
Sec. 12.07.005 Penalties
(a) Except as otherwise provided by this section, if it be shown that a person has violated this article, upon conviction the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(b) Upon second conviction for a violation of this article, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) In addition to the fines and penalties provided for in this section, if a person owning or occupying land or property fails to remove litter, trash, garbage or waste from
the property within seven (7) days after notice as provided in Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, subchapter A, section 342.006, the city is hereby authorized to cause
such litter, trash, garbage, or waste to be removed with the expenses of cleaning and removal to be payable by the owner or occupant of the property.
(Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 84-40, sec. 4, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance 87-21, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/87; Ordinance 92-49, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92;
Ordinance 03-025, sec. 3, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-72)
Sec. 12.07.006 Assessment of cost; remedy by city
The city shall assess to the owner or occupant of the property actual cleaning and removal expenses, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus an administrative fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00). A statement of expense, which includes administration fees, incurred by the city in the cleaning and removal of any litter, trash, garbage, or waste
under this article shall be mailed to the property owner as shown on the tax roll at the time of service. The statement of expenses shall, in addition to giving the amount of
such expense, provide the date upon which such work was done, and a description of the lot or premises upon which such work was done. Payment is due and is
considered delinquent if not received by the city within thirty (30) days. If payment is not made within ninety (90) days of such delinquency, the city's authorized agent is
hereby authorized to add a lien assessment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the statement of expenses incurred by the city in the cleaning and removal of any litter, trash,
garbage or waste under this section and to file said statement of expenses as a lien at the county clerk's office against the premises which are in violation of this article.
This statement of expenses shall, in addition to giving the amount of such expense, provide the date upon which such work was done and a description of the lot or
premises upon which such work was done. The city shall have a privileged lien upon such lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to
secure the expenditure so made, in accordance with provisions of Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, subchapter A, section 342.007; the lien is inferior only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements. Suit may be instituted in the name of the city, and statement of expenses so made as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima
facie evidence of the amount expended for such work or improvements. (Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 84-40, sec. 5, adopted 3/13/84; Ordinance
92-49, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 03-025, sec. 4, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-73)
Sec. 12.07.007 Injunctions
(a) In addition to the fines and penalties provided in this article, if it appears that a person has violated or is violating or is threatening to violate any provisions of this
article, the city attorney may institute a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain the person from continuing the violation or threat of
violation.
(b) On application for injunctive relief and a finding that a person is violating or threatening to violate any provision of this article, the court shall grant such injunctive
relief as the facts may warrant.
(Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; 1978 Code, sec. 13-74)
Sec. 12.07.008 Strict enforcement
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/376
(a) All law enforcement personnel, inspectors, and other designated personnel shall carry out the provisions of this article and may issue citations for violations of this
article. All law enforcement officers and representatives shall strictly enforce and prosecute the provisions of this article, and court officials shall see that this article
receives strict interpretation and adjudication in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) In any prosecution for violation of section 12.07.002 or 12.07.003, proof that litter came from a particular vehicle together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was, at the time of such offense, the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute in evidence a rebuttable presumption that the defendant was the person
who violated section 12.07.002 or 12.07.003.
(Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 03-025, sec. 5, adopted 3/25/03; 1978 Code, sec. 13-75)
Sec. 12.07.009 Liberal construction; provisions additional to existing law
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose; and all provisions of this article shall be in addition to any other laws, statutes, or
powers for enforcing penalties, fines, or forfeitures authorized by law with respect to any actions, commissions, or omissions declared unlawful by this article; and this
article shall not diminish a court's authority to prosecute a violation of other state or federal regulations, statutes, or laws. This article shall not be construed to be
inconsistent with any law of the state. In the event that any term or provision of this article shall be inconsistent with any law of the state, on its face or as applied to a
particular factual situation, the state law shall prevail and this article shall not apply. (Ordinance 82-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; 1978 Code, sec. 13-76)
ARTICLE 12.08 NOISE*
Sec. 12.08.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates another meaning:
dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the slow meter response, as
specified by the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
Nonresidential property. Any real property within the limits of the city which is not included in the definition of residential property as defined in this section.
Person. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation.
Property line. The line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, leased or occupied by one person from that owned,
leased, or occupied by any other person and the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of property of any person who owns, leases or otherwise occupies an
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy.
Residential property. Any real property developed and used for human habitation and which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation, unless such premises are actually occupied and used primarily for purposes other than human habitation.
Sound nuisance. Any sound which either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 12.08.005 or otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons with ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the city.
(Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.002 Declaration of findings
The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use,
affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city, and the necessity in the public interest for the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions contained in sections 12.08.003 and 12.08.004 are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. (1958 Code, sec. 22-5; 1978 Code, sec. 13-12; Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1,
adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.003 Causing prohibited
It shall be unlawful and constitute the creation and/or maintenance of a public nuisance for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the
city. A noise does not have to exceed the maximum permissible sound levels contained in section 12.08.005 in order to constitute a violation of this article if such noise
disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of a person of ordinary sensibilities. (1958 Code, sec. 22-6; 1978 Code, sec. 13-13; Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.004 Acts or conditions prohibited
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this code, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(1) Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of
the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any
such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any
horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is, for any reason, held up.
(2) Radios and other sound-producing devices emanating from vehicles. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio or audio
and visual sound device, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants of ordinary sensibilities or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons of ordinary
sensibilities who are in the vehicle in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. For the sound to be “plainly audible,” words or phrases need not be distinguishable and bass
reverberations are sufficient.
(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio or television receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
(4) Yelling, shouting and other such vocal noises. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/376
other type of residence, or of any persons of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity.
(5) Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons
of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity.
(6) Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities.
(7) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(8) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, or loaded in such manner, as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(9) Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(10) Construction or repairing of buildings.
(A) The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues.
(B) If the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
(11) In the vicinity of schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or
unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
(12) Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
(13) Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of a noise to any performance, show or
sale.
(14) Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along
streets and other public places, upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity of or on such streets or other public places.
(15) Pile drivers, hammers and other such appliances. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or any time on Sundays, of any pile
driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
(16) Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal-combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden such noise.
(1958 Code, sec. 22-7; Ordinance 94-32, sec. 1, adopted 6/21/94; 1978 Code, sec. 13-14; Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.005 Maximum permissible sound levels
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein by the preceding sections of this article, no person shall conduct, permit, or allow any activity or sound source to produce a
sound discernible at any location beyond the property lines of the property on which the sound is being generated that when measured as provided in section 12.08.006
exceeds the applicable dB(A) level listed below for the property on which the sound is received:
(1) Residential property.
(A) 55 dB(A) between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(B) 50 dB(A) between 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(2) Nonresidential property.
(A) 70 dB(A) between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(B) 65 dB(A) between 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(b) The dB(A) levels set forth in this section apply to the property where the sound is being received. Any sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels set forth in this section
under the conditions and measurement criteria set forth in this article is a violation of this article. Evidence that an activity or sound source produces a sound that exceeds
the dB(A) levels specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence of a sound nuisance that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of others in violation of this article. Regardless of the measurable dB(A) level established above and measured as provided in this section the generator of
any sound of such a nature as to cause persons of ordinary sensibilities occupying or using any property other than the property upon which the sound is being generated
to be aware of sympathetic vibrations or resonance caused by the sound shall also be prima facie evidence of a sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in violation of this article.
(Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.006 Noise measurement
(a) Any noise measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be made with a sound level meter which meets the American National Standards
Institute's standard. The A-weighted network (scale) at “slow” response shall be used to measure the sound level.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/376
(b) No external measurements shall be made during precipitation or if the wind speed exceeds 15 miles per hour.
(c) Exterior noise levels shall be measured at the property line of an offended person. Where practical, the microphone shall be positioned four to five feet above the
ground and ten feet or more away from any reflective surface. For the purpose of enforcing this article, a measurement period shall be taken over a period of at least 10
minutes.
(d) Interior noise levels shall be measured at a point at least four feet from any wall, ceiling or floor.
(Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
Sec. 12.08.007 Exceptions
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations herein specified.
(1) Noise emanating from a facility on property located within the light industrial zoning district is subject to the decibel limits and hours of operation
prescribed under section 28.04.007 (performance standards).
(2) Noise emanating from a facility on property located within the heavy industrial zoning district is subject to the decibel limits and hours of operation
prescribed under section 28.04.007 (performance standards).
(3) Use of sound equipment at a facility on property located within the central business district that produces sound as measured at any point along the
property line of the permitted venue not greater than 85 decibels between:
(A) 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday; or
(B) 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday or Saturday.
(Ordinance 11-025, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11)
ARTICLE 12.09 PROSTITUTION LOITERING*
Sec. 12.09.001 Definitions
In the interpretation of this article, the following words and terms are to be used and interpreted as defined hereafter:
Act of prostitution. Offers to engage, agrees to engage, or engages in sexual conduct for a fee or solicits another in a public place to engage with him or her in sexual
conduct for hire.
Assignation. The making of any appointment or engagement for prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of such appointment or engagement.
Beckons. To summon or signal by a wave of the hand, a nod or other gesture with the intent of soliciting an act of prostitution.
Enticing. To wrongfully solicit, persuade, attract, coax, seduce, lure or tempt someone to commit an act of prostitution.
Hailing. To call out or greet someone with enthusiasm in an effort to solicit an act of prostitution.
Inducing. To invite or appeal to someone to engage in illicit sexual activity.
Known prostitute or panderer. A person who, within one (1) year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this article, has within the knowledge of the arresting
officer been convicted of violating the statute of the state defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing, or offering or agreeing to commit an act of prostitution.
Loiter. Remaining idle in essentially one place, and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly.
Procuring. To get and make available a person for an act of prostitution.
Sexual conduct. Includes homosexual relations, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual contact, and sexual intercourse.
Soliciting. To accost, lure or tempt someone with immoral intentions into unlawful conduct by seduction.
Thoroughfare. A street or passage through which one can travel.
(Ordinance 84-92, sec. 1, adopted 7/10/84; 1978 Code, sec. 18-19)
Sec. 12.09.002 Prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly loiter in or near any thoroughfare, street, highway, or place open to the public in a manner and
under circumstances manifesting the intent of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution or assignation. Among circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are that such person is a known prostitute or panderer; repeatedly beckons to, stops or
attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation; or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily
gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall
be convicted of violating this section if it appears that at trial the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. (Ordinance 84-92, sec. 1, adopted 7/10/84;
Ordinance 86-11, sec. 1, adopted 2/18/86; 1978 Code, sec. 18-20)
Sec. 12.09.003 Violations; penalty
Every person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than the maximum fine prescribed by section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. (Ordinance 84-92, sec. 2, adopted 7/10/84; Ordinance 92-41, sec. 1, adopted
5/5/92; 1978 Code, sec. 18-21)
ARTICLE 12.10 SOLICITATION TO PURCHASE OR ACQUIRE A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE,
DANGEROUS DRUG OR VOLATILE CHEMICAL*
Sec. 12.10.001 Definitions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/376
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another
meaning:
Controlled substance. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by section 481.002(5), Texas Health and Safety Code, or any amendments thereto.
Controlled substance analogue. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by section 481.002(6), Texas Health and Safety Code, or any amendments thereto.
Dangerous drug. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by section 483.001(2), Texas Health and Safety Code, or any amendments thereto.
Prohibited substance. A controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical, or any combination thereof.
Volatile chemical. Any of the chemicals, or an isomer of any of the chemicals, listed in section 485.001, Texas Health and Safety Code, or any amendments thereto.
(Ordinance 93-68, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-29)
Sec. 12.10.002 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he requests, commands or attempts to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise
transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person.
(b) It is no defense to prosecution under this section that:
(1) No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited; or
(2) The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a prohibited substance.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that:
(1) The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which would not constitute a violation of any applicable law; or
(2) The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his duties or by a law enforcement agent acting
in the lawful discharge of an official duty.
(d) Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00). However, any conduct prescribed hereunder which also constitutes an offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section, but
shall be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense under chapter 481 or
chapter 485, Texas Health and Safety Code.
(Ordinance 93-68, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-30)
Sec. 12.10.003 Findings
In setting the amount of penalty for violation of this article, the city council affirmatively finds that this article governs conduct involving trafficking in illegal and
dangerous chemical substances that poses a serious threat to the public health, and that it is therefore appropriate to prescribe a maximum fine of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for a violation of this article pursuant to the authority granted by section 2 of Acts 1987, 70th Legislature, chapter 680 (section 54.001 of the Local
Government Code as amended by chapter 1, Acts of the 71st Legislature, Regular Session, 1989). (Ordinance 93-68, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/93; 1978 Code, sec. 18-31)
ARTICLE 12.11 WOUNDS RECEIVED UNDER SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES
Sec. 12.11.001 Report by doctors, nurses and ambulance drivers
Whenever any person has been shot and wounded, or killed, through the discharge of firearms of any character, whether such discharge shall be accidental or otherwise, or
has suffered an injury of any character as a result of any affray, assault or accident, it shall be the duty of all doctors, surgeons, nurses and ambulance drivers, having such
information, to immediately report the fact of such injury or death and all information they may have of the cause of, and circumstances surrounding, such injury or death,
with the person's name and address, if known, to the police department. (1958 Code, sec. 23-41; 1978 Code, sec. 18-9)
Sec. 12.11.002 Report by hospital attendants
All persons in charge of any hospital, clinic or similar institution located within the city, receiving any person so shot, wounded or killed or otherwise injured, as set forth
in section 12.11.001, whether living or dead at the time of admission, shall immediately report to the police department the fact of the admission of any such person to the
institution, the time of admission, character of injury or cause of death, name and address of such person, and any other information or knowledge they may have of the
cause of and circumstances surrounding such injury or death. (1958 Code, sec. 23-42; 1978 Code, sec. 18-10)
Sec. 12.11.003 Applicability of requirements as to reports
The provisions of sections 12.11.001 and 12.11.002 shall apply to all cases where persons are shot, wounded, killed or injured, as set forth in section 12.11.001, within the
city, as well as in all cases where such persons are brought into the city for treatment at any hospital, clinic or similar institution located within the city. (1958 Code, sec.
23-43; 1978 Code, sec. 18-11)
CHAPTER 13
RESERVED
CHAPTER 14
PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC PLACES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/376
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 AIRPORTS AND AVIATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.02.001 Standards governing the conduct of commercial aeronautical services and activities, fixed base operator activities, and specialized aviation
activities
The revised minimum standards and requirements for the conduct of commercial aeronautical services and activities, minimum standards and requirements for fixed base
operator activities and minimum standards and requirements for specialized aviation activities are hereby adopted by reference and can be found on file at the office of the
city clerk. (Ordinance 90-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/20/90; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-1)
Secs. 14.02.002–14.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Heliports and Helistops
Part I. In General
Sec. 14.02.031 Ownership, control or operation of landing fields in city
(a) Written authorization required. No person shall own, control, or operate any landing field of any kind within the city without first securing written authorization
from the city.
(b) Continuing existing facilities. Except as hereinafter specified, heliport and helistop facilities lawfully existing on the effective date of this division may be
continued.
(Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-21)
Sec. 14.02.032 Definitions
Helicopter. An aircraft used for the transportation of persons or materials and whose support in the air is derived chiefly from the aerodynamic forces on engine-driven
airfoil blades rotating around a vertical axis.
Heliport. Any area which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas including buildings or other facilities for
activities such as refueling, parking, storage, maintenance and repair of helicopters.
Helistop. An area used, or intended for use, for the landing, boarding and takeoff of helicopters, which does not have facilities for such activities and refueling, storage,
maintenance or repair of helicopters.
Private heliports or helistops. Private heliports or helistops are those which restrict usage to the owner or operator or to persons authorized by the owner or operator to
land.
Public heliports or helistops. Public heliports or helistops are those open to the general public and not requiring prior permission of the owner or operator to land.
Temporary helistops. A ground-level area that is intended to be used on a temporary basis as a helistop. Temporary helistops shall be granted for a period of no longer than
thirty (30) days.
(Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-22)
Sec. 14.02.033 Parking requirements
Vehicle parking requirements for helistops or heliports shall be determined by the city manager or his designee. Typically, five (5) spaces per landing/takeoff area will be
desirable. (Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-23; Ordinance 07-011, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 14.02.034 Landing requirements for helicopters
Helicopters shall land only at established heliports and helistops within the city, unless such landing is for law enforcement or emergency purposes. Emergencies shall
include conditions in which life, health, or property is in danger or may be in danger. All flight operations shall be conducted in accordance with current Federal Aviation
Administration rules and regulations. (Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-24; Ordinance 07-011, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 14.02.035 Violations; penalties
Except as otherwise provided by this section, if it is shown that a person has violated this division, upon conviction, the defendant shall be punished by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon a second conviction for a violation of this division, the defendant shall be
punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ordinance 86-90, sec. 2, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-28; Ordinance 07-011, sec. 5, adopted
2/6/07)
Secs. 14.02.036–14.02.060 Reserved
Part II. Specific Use Permit
Sec. 14.02.061 Required; exception
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/376
It is the intent of the city to provide for helicopter operations in a manner which provides for the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Establishment of heliports or
helistops shall be by specific use permit only, except when developed by the city on property owned by the city. The city council may require information or conditions
necessary to protect the public interest in the application for, or operation of, heliports or helistops. (Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-25)
Sec. 14.02.062 Application; contents; additional information
(a) Application process; contents. Applications for specific use permits for heliports or helistops shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee and subject to all
requirements and conditions of specific use permits as established in section 28.04.001(e) of this code. Applications shall also include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s).
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the property owner(s), along with signed approval of the owner or owner's representative for such
application.
(3) The location, size and facilities to be provided at the proposed site.
(4) A copy of preliminary approval from the Federal Aviation Administration that the area may be operated as a heliport or helistop. This information shall
include the “Notice of landing area proposal,” a letter of no objection from the Federal Aviation Administration and a copy of all information provided to the
Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) The anticipated number of takeoffs and landings anticipated, along with variations and anticipated development and activity increases in the future.
Aircraft types and the proposed purpose of the facility shall be included.
(6) The proposed days and hours of operation.
(7) Proposed fire protection.
(8) An analysis and calculation details related to potential noise impacts.
(9) Where landing areas are on structures or buildings, or not at ground level, certification from an engineer currently registered by the state shall be
required, stating that the proposed landing area is structurally adequate for operation as a heliport or helistop.
(10) A detailed description of potential impacts on adjacent lands and provisions for alleviating impacts, including such items as buffer zones, security,
public access and flight safety.
(b) Additional information may be required for approval. The city council shall consider the information provided and reserves the right to require additional
information or grant approval subject to specific conditions and requirements necessary to protect the public interest. Such conditions and requirements may include
provisions related to minimum altitudes, traffic patterns, approach routes and a time limit for operation of the area as a heliport or helistop.
(c) Applications for temporary helistops; contents; approval. Applications for temporary helistops shall include the requirements and potential restrictions of heliports
and helistops. Approval of a temporary helistop shall be based upon the successful compliance with all of the conditions provided in section 28.04.001(e) of this code. The
responsibility for the issuance of the temporary helistop permit shall be with the city manager or his designees.
(d) Review, consideration of applications by city. All applications for heliports or helistops should allow at least thirty (30) days for review and consideration by the
city. Failure to provide the minimum review period may be sufficient reason for denial.
(Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-26; Ordinance 07-011, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 14.02.063 Revocation; show cause notice; appeals; hearing
If a heliport or helistop is not operated in accordance with the laws of the United States, the state, the ordinances of the city, or conditions or requirements of the specific
use permit, the city manager or his designee may, at any time, give notice, in writing, to the licensee or other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such
facility, to show cause why the permission issued for the operation should not be revoked and cancelled. Such notice to show cause shall become effective as a
cancellation after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of same. On or before the expiration of the ten-day period, the permittee or the person in control of the
operation and maintenance of the facility may file a written appeal with the city manager or his designee, in which it is requested that the city council grant a hearing upon
the question of whether or not the permit issued by the city shall be cancelled or revoked. Such appeal shall operate as a stay or postponement of such revocation and
cancellation of the permit until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final determination. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after
the date of filing of such appeal. The action of the city council, after hearing the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive to all parties. (Ordinance 86-90, sec. 1,
adopted 8/26/86; 1978 Code, sec. 2 1/4-27; Ordinance 07-011, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/07)
ARTICLE 14.03 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.03.001 Street map adopted
The map of the city heretofore prepared by the engineering office of the city and presented to the city council for its approval and adoption is hereby adopted as the
official map of the city, and the streets shall henceforth be named as reflected in such map until otherwise changed by the city council. (1958 Code, sec. 33-1; 1978 Code,
sec. 23-1)
Sec. 14.03.002 Laying out streets and fixing bounds by city engineer
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to survey and lay off the several streets of the city, and fix the bounds and limits between the sidewalks and the streets. (1958 Code,
sec. 33-3; 1978 Code, sec. 23-4)
Sec. 14.03.003 Official street and highway plan
The official street and highway plan for the adequate development of arterial and collector streets in the city is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section by
reference, and shall be on file in the office of the city clerk; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to affect the adoption of the official map of the city,
which ordinance of adoption is codified in section 14.03.001, or to affect the incorporation of the zoning map of the city, which adoption of said zoning map is codified in
section 28.01.005. (1958 Code, sec. 42-43; 1978 Code, sec. 23-5; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 1, adopted 6/5/07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/376
Sec. 14.03.004 Street lines not to be changed
In no case shall the existing lines of streets and sidewalks be changed or altered, except upon survey by the city engineer. (1958 Code, sec. 33-11; 1978 Code, sec. 23-6)
Sec. 14.03.005 Conformance to plan and standards in construction of streets
All streets within the city and those within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the official street and
highway plan of the city, the official street construction standards of the city, and the official street construction specifications of the city. However, reduction in the rightof-
way widths as established by the official street and highway plan of the city may be approved by the city manager based on engineering considerations related to
existing structures and land development. (1958 Code, sec. 42-46; Ordinance 82-74, sec. 2, adopted 7/20/82; Ordinance 84-142, sec. 1, adopted 10/23/84; 1978 Code, sec.
23-9)
Sec. 14.03.006 Interference with pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or alter in any manner, any public sidewalk or street pavement, unless he shall have first obtained a permit from the
city engineer. (1958 Code, sec. 33-31; 1978 Code, sec. 23-12; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 4, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.007 Removal of material from street
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any street construction materials, articles or substances placed on any street of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any sand, earth or paving material from any street, alley or public grounds in the city except when the same is done
under contract with the city or by special permit.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-38; 1978 Code, sec. 23-13)
Sec. 14.03.008 Malicious injury to sidewalk or driveway
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously tear up, injure, deface or destroy any sidewalk or driveway or any portion thereof in the public right-of-way.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-32; 1978 Code, sec. 23-14; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 5, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.009 Barricades
(a) Placing during street construction.
(1) When any street or sidewalk in the city is being paved, constructed or repaired, the same shall be properly barricaded and lighted in accordance with the
guidelines established in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices by the person engaged in the performance of such work. Such barricades and
lights shall remain until such time as the city engineer shall declare the street or sidewalk ready for travel.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or disturb any such barricade or light without permission of the city engineer.
(b) Erecting detour and barricade signs during building operations. Contractors or other persons authorized to erect detour signs on streets before doing or after
construction work shall, before erecting such detour or barricade signs, obtain the written permission of the city engineer to do so, who shall notify the fire department, the
police department, and the public works department immediately upon granting such permission.
(c) Disregarding. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse or other animal or vehicle of any description over, along or upon any street of the city
while the street is being paved or repaired before the same shall be declared ready for travel by the city engineer, or to disregard any legally placed barricades.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-9, 33-10, 37-31; 1978 Code, secs. 23-19–23-21; Ordinance 07-060, secs. 7, 8, adopted 6/5/07)
State law references–Tampering with warning devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 472.021; obeying warning signs and barricades, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 472.022.
Sec. 14.03.010 Obstructing sidewalks
(a) Permission to place objects thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to obstruct the use by pedestrians of any sidewalk in the city by placing
thereon any boxes, material, vehicles or other objects whatever; provided, however, when it may appear to be to the best interest of the public generally, the city manager
may, by written permission, authorize the placing of certain objects on the city sidewalks.
(b) Handling of goods thereon. All merchants shall have the right to occupy one-half of the sidewalks in receiving and forwarding goods, wares and merchandise;
provided, however, such space shall not be occupied longer than five (5) minutes at a time.
(c) Exhibiting goods thereon. It shall be unlawful for any merchant doing business in this city to occupy and use any part of the sidewalks for the purpose of exhibiting,
displaying and advertising goods, wares and merchandise.
(d) Passages into and out of certain places. It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way obstruct the passage in or out of any church, theater or other public place,
or any place of business.
(e) Sales thereon. It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale at auction or otherwise any goods, wares or merchandise on such sidewalks.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-14–33-18; 1978 Code, secs. 23-22–23-26)
Sec. 14.03.011 Trees and shrubbery
(a) Overhanging and protruding, distance requirements.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any tree, shrub, vine, or other plant to be grown, maintained or cultivated in such a manner that any portion
of the plant may overhang or protrude upon or over any sidewalk, unless there shall be a full ten (10) foot clearance between the surface of all portions of such
sidewalk and the overhanging plant; over any street or highway in the city unless there shall be a full twelve (12) foot clearance between the surface of all
portions of such street or highway [or] at a lesser distance than seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet from any fireplug in the city; provided, however, all shade trees
now growing between the sidewalk and the curb on any public street or highway in the city, less than seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet from any such fireplug,
shall not be affected by the terms of this section.
(2) It shall also be unlawful for any person to allow any tree, shrub, vine, palm or other plant to be planted, maintained or cultivated between the sidewalk
and the curb on any public street or highway in the city at a lesser distance than thirty (30) feet from the corner of any block on any such public street or
highway, such measurements to be computed at the point of the intersection of the curblines extended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/376
(b) Not to obstruct driver's view. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit trees, shrubs, bushes or plants to grow on the street right-of-way immediately adjoining
property which he owns or has control of, or upon his private property, in such manner as to obstruct the view of approaching traffic from the right or left. Such trees,
shrubs, bushes or plants growing upon the street right-of-way may be removed by the city.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-29, 37-29; 1978 Code, secs. 23-30, 26-6; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 4, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 14.03.012 Removing landmarks or signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any post, stake or other mark indicating the lines of any street or alley. (1958 Code, sec. 33-37; 1978 Code, sec. 23-33)
Secs. 14.03.013–14.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Sidewalk and Driveway Construction and Maintenance
Part I. In General
Sec. 14.03.051 Definitions
(a) As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Abandoned driveway. A driveway shall be considered to be abandoned when the following exist:
(1) When the parking or land use has been so situated as to make the driveway not usable or not needed; or
(2) When the buildings or other structures have been remodeled or situated on the adjacent property in such manner as to prevent a vehicle from parking
completely on the adjacent private property.
Alley. A public or private right-of-way which is used only for secondary access to individual properties which would otherwise have their primary access from an adjacent
public street.
Commercial driveway. Any passageway designed or intended for vehicular movements between the roadway and any point outside the street right-of-way, when such
passageway leads to any public or private area outside the street which is designed or intended for the parking of any commercial vehicle, or for the parking of any
vehicles to serve land other than a single-family residence.
Curb return or curb radius. That part of the curbing at an intersection or at a driveway which is curved to form the connection between intersecting curblines.
Frontage. That portion of adjacent property contiguous to a single street property line. For the purpose of this division, frontage shall be measured as the total distance
over which the street right-of-way line and the lot or property lines are congruent, and shall include all lots or properties under the legal control of the applicant.
Residential driveway. Any passageway designed or intended for vehicular movements between the roadway and any point outside the street right-of-way, when such
passageway leads to any public or private area designed or intended for parking to serve land used for a single-family residence.
Right-of-way. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way or such use as set forth in the instrument establishing the right-of-way.
Roadway. That section of street lying between the face of curbs or edge of driving surface if noncurbed.
Safety zone. That portion of the frontage right-of-way between any two (2) driveways.
(b) Whenever any term used herein is not defined herein, but is defined in any other ordinance or state law, such definition shall be deemed to apply to such term used
herein.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-41, 33-42; 1978 Code, sec. 23-40; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 11, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.052 Maintenance of sidewalks, driveways and alleys
(a) Persons responsible for; liability in damages; declaration of nuisance. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent in charge or tenant of property abutting on any
sidewalk or parkway to keep such sidewalk or parkway in good and safe condition and free from any defects of whatever kind or character; and any such party who shall
fail to comply herewith shall be primarily liable in damages for any injuries (including death), loss or damage sustained as a result of such unsafe and defective condition.
In this connection, any sidewalk or parkway which has become or is defective, unsafe or hazardous is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the failure of any owner, agent
in charge or tenant to construct, reconstruct or repair any such sidewalk or parkway ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired by the city engineer shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
(b) By owner or lessee. The maintenance of any driveway, sidewalk or alley shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the property served by the driveway,
sidewalk or alley.
(c) Replacement of driveway altered or removed as part of roadway construction. Any existing driveway which is destroyed, altered or removed as a part of the
construction or reconstruction of any roadway will be replaced by the city to a design within these regulations. The maintenance of any driveway so replaced by the city
shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of property served by the driveway.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-4, 33-46, 33-55; Ordinance 79-71, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/79; 1978 Code, secs. 23-41, 23-53, 23-54; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 20, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.053 Contractor's bond; construction
(a) Any person engaging in the business of contracting for, making, constructing and laying concrete or other permanent type sidewalks and curbs and driveways or
pipes in the city shall be required to execute a good and sufficient bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), said bond having a corporate surety, which
corporation must be an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, payable to the city and providing that any person having any cause of action secured by
such bond is hereby authorized to sue on such bond without impleading the city, and such bond shall not be exhausted by the first recovery, but shall be subject to
successive recoveries for damages accruing to any person by reason of any defective or faulty workmanship thereon; provided further that any person contracting for the
construction and laying of any sidewalk, driveway or pipes in the city shall first obtain the permit and then construct and lay the sidewalk, driveway or pipes according to
plans, specifications and grades to be furnished by the city engineer, or such plans and specifications as may be hereafter prescribed and adopted by the city council. The
person contracting to construct and lay such sidewalks, driveways or pipes in the city shall keep and maintain the sidewalk, driveway or pipes, when so constructed or
laid, for a period of two (2) years, free of any cost or charge to the owner thereof caused by reason of any defective or faulty material used therein, or by reason of any
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/376
defective or faulty workmanship thereon, or in the event that the sidewalk, driveway or pipes as made, constructed and laid shall fail to comply with the specifications as
herein provided.
(b) Such bond, herein provided for, shall be approved by the city engineer and deposited with the city clerk before any such person shall engage in the business of
making, constructing and laying such sidewalks and driveways or pipes in the city.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-13; 1978 Code, sec. 23-45; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 14, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.054 Indemnification
The grantee of any driveway, sidewalk or pipes permit shall hold harmless the city and its agents and employees against any action for personal injury or property damage
sustained by reason of the exercise of his permit. (1958 Code, sec. 33-54; 1978 Code, sec. 23-46; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 15, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.055 Right to inspect driveways and require conformance with standards and specifications reserved; costs of repair or maintenance
The city reserves the right to inspect driveways, sidewalks or pipes at any time during construction and to require such changes as may be necessary to make the
construction conform to city street standards and specifications. At any time after the construction of any driveway, sidewalk or pipes, the city reserves the right to inspect
such facility and require such repairs or maintenance as may be necessary to protect the public. The cost of any such repair or maintenance shall be borne by the owner or
lessee of abutting property. (1958 Code, sec. 33-47; 1978 Code, sec. 23-47; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 16, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.056 Driveway construction required; grade; curb cuts
It is the duty of all persons owning property abutting on paved streets in the city to construct or cause to be constructed, at their own cost and expense, driveways leading
from the curbline to the property line on such lots as may be necessary to enter with any vehicle from the street, on such grade as may be furnished by the city engineer,
and, in doing such work, property owners shall have the right to cut down the curb wall, but only as may be directed by the city engineer. It shall be the duty of the city
engineer, on the application of property owners, to furnish the correct grade for such proposed driveways free of cost, and the work of constructing such driveways shall
be done under his supervision. (1958 Code, sec. 33-12; 1978 Code, sec. 23-48)
Sec. 14.03.057 Materials and labor for construction of driveways and sidewalks
All materials and labor necessary for the construction of the driveways and sidewalks authorized in the permit shall be furnished by the owner. All materials shall meet
city street construction standards and specifications. (1958 Code, sec. 33-48; 1978 Code, sec. 23-49)
Sec. 14.03.058 Driveway approaches
(a) Intent. It is the intent of this section that the location and angle of a driveway approach in relation to the street or intersection shall be such that a vehicle leaving the
abutting property may turn into the lane of traffic moving in the desired direction and be channeled within such lane before crossing the intersection or proceeding along
the street, and that a vehicle entering the abutting property may turn out of the nearest lane of traffic without interfering with other traffic.
(b) Location and angle of intersection.
(1) No driveway approach shall be permitted to encroach upon any municipal facility. However, the relocation of municipal facilities may be authorized by
the city engineer if it is in the public's interest and provided that such relocation shall be completed by and at the expense of the applicant and in accordance
with specifications provided by the city engineer in the permit issued therefor.
(2) At street intersections, no curb cut for a driveway approach shall be permitted within thirty (30) feet of the extended curbline or the edge of pavement.
(3) Where sidewalks exist or are to be constructed, the beginning of the driveway approach shall not commence nearer the corner of a street intersection than
the inside edge of the sidewalk along the intersecting street.
(4) The interior angle formed by the extension of the axis of the driveway approach and the centerline of the street shall fall between forty-five (45) degrees
and ninety (90) degrees.
(5) Adjacent driveway approaches shall be separated by a safety island of twenty (20) feet minimum width.
(6) On interior lots, the tangent point of the driveway curb at the street curbline shall not extend beyond a property line on any commercial driveway.
(7) A residential driveway shall not be located nearer than two (2) feet to an interior property line. The minimum width of the driveway shall be ten (10) feet.
(c) Driveway approach width.
(1) Where adjacent owners are, or will, use off-street parking as a common parking lot, or where there are no physical barriers to prevent the use of the
parking area as a common parking lot, then the area in question shall be deemed to be one tract and a common driveway may be permitted if the total driveway
width does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) The width or throat of a driveway approach shall not be greater than thirty-five (35) feet for commercial or public establishments, measured at right
angles to the axis of the driveway approach.
(3) Driveway approaches for motor vehicle docks and buildings with vehicle doorways may be as wide as sixty (60) feet. Where more dock space is
required, the driveway approach shall be separated by a safety island.
(4) When the area immediately behind and adjacent to the street right-of-way is to be used as a vehicle parking area, curbs and other barriers shall be
installed as required by the city engineer to prohibit such parked vehicles from extending into the right-of-way.
(d) Number of driveway approaches allowed.
(1) Not more than two (2) driveway approaches shall be permitted on any tract with a frontage of one hundred (100) feet or less.
(2) Not more than three (3) driveway approaches shall be permitted on any tract with frontage of more than one hundred (100) feet but less than three
hundred (300) feet.
(3) Not more than four (4) driveway approaches shall be allowed for any tract with more than three hundred (300) feet but less than six hundred (600) feet.
(4) For tracts with frontage in excess of six hundred (600) feet, one additional approach may be allowed for each additional three hundred (300) feet of
frontage in excess of six hundred (600) feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/376
(e) Angle or recessed parking prohibited. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or used for angle or recessed parking. To qualify for a driveway approach, the
approach must provide access to a vehicle doorway, a dock or an off-street parking lot with sufficient room for the vehicle to maneuver and reenter the street front-first
from said parking lot. This provision shall apply only to commercial driveways.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-49; 1978 Code, sec. 23-50; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 17, adopted 6/5/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 14.03.059 Driveway abandonment
When a driveway has been abandoned within the meaning of this division, the city engineer may order the replacement of curbing and/or sidewalks so as to effectively
close such driveways. When any such driveways are to be closed for the reasons set forth above, the city engineer may order the replacement of curbing and/or sidewalks
so as to effectively close such driveways. When any such driveway is to be closed for the reasons set forth above, the city engineer shall notify the property owner in
writing of the work to be done. Upon notification thereof, the property owner shall proceed to perform such work at his own cost. If within thirty (30) days from such
notification work has not been started on the installation of the curb and/or sidewalk as set forth in the notification, such work may be done by the city and all costs, plus
25%, thereof assessed as a lien against the property, and shall be a personal liability of the owner or lessee of the abutting property. (1958 Code, sec. 33-50; 1978 Code,
sec. 23-51; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 18, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.060 Exceptions to requirements
It is the intent of this division that exceptions to the above provisions be granted only for extreme circumstances and only in those cases where the public interest would
be served by such exceptions. The city engineer is authorized to permit those exceptions which meet the above requirements. (1958 Code, sec. 33-51; 1978 Code, sec. 23-
52; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 19, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.061 Appeals
If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the city engineer, he may appeal such decision to the city council. All such appeals shall be made in writing to the city
manager. The city council shall consider all evidence submitted by the applicant and the city engineer and shall make a final decision as to whether or not an exception
shall be granted. (1958 Code, sec. 33-52; 1978 Code, sec. 23-55; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 21, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.062 Effect of noncompliance
If the applicant shall refuse to obey the final decision of the city engineer or the city council, the building official shall refuse to issue said applicant a building permit.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-53; 1978 Code, sec. 23-56; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 22, adopted 6/5/07)
Secs. 14.03.063–14.03.090 Reserved
Part II. Permits
Sec. 14.03.091 Required; bond to be filed; voiding
Before constructing, reconstructing, repairing or altering any driveway or sidewalk, a permit, in addition to any other permits, shall be obtained from building inspections
division; provided, however, no such permit shall be required for the construction of any driveways or sidewalks installed as a part of the paving or widening of any street
in accordance with plans approved by the departments of public works and traffic and transportation and installed as a part of a contract of the city. No permit shall be
issued to any person until that person has filed the bond as required in section 14.03.053. If the driveway or sidewalk is not constructed within six (6) months of the date
of issuance of a permit, said permit becomes null and void. (1958 Code, sec. 33-43; 1978 Code, sec. 23-42)
Sec. 14.03.092 Application; requests to establish pipe sizes and grades
(a) Application for such permit shall be made to the building inspections division on forms prescribed by the city. Each such application shall be submitted with a scaled
drawing showing the address and lot and block number, if platted, of the property where the driveway or sidewalk is to be located, the width of the driveway requested,
the location of the driveway or sidewalk requested with respect to private property lines, the location of existing driveways on either side of the proposed driveway
serving the same property or adjacent property, if any, and such other information as may be requested by the city. Before the permit is issued, it shall be approved as to
location and design by the city engineer and the driveway construction approved by the department of public works. After the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
request the public works department to establish pipe sizes and grades, if needed, prior to the beginning of construction. Such request shall be made twenty-four (24)
hours in advance to allow proper scheduling.
(b) Applications for driveway or sidewalk permits shall be made by the owner or lessee of the abutting property, or by a contractor representing the owner or lessee.
(c) No driveway or sidewalk shall be relocated or structurally altered, nor any dimensions altered, without a duly executed permit as set forth herein.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-44; 1978 Code, sec. 23-43; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 12, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.093 Fees
The following fees shall be applicable for the issuance of a permit for a driveway or sidewalk as an additional fee to that for building permits as set out in section
14.03.091:
(1) Residential driveways: $35.00.
(2) Commercial driveways: $50.00.
(3) Driveways not within the city limits: $75.00.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-45; Ordinance 83-126, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 23-44; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 13, adopted 6/5/07)
Secs. 14.03.094–14.03.130 Reserved
Division 3. Excavations, Cuttings or Tunnelings*
Part I. In General
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/376
Sec. 14.03.131 Definitions
For purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Barricade. Barricades, signs, traffic cones, signals, flags, flares, and all other traffic-control and warning devices and procedures as outlined in the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Blockage. Any obstruction of the street, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
Bore hole. A hole that is drilled under a street, highway, roadway, alley, or sidewalk.
City engineer. The city engineer of the City of Beaumont or his authorized representative.
Contractor. Any person or group of persons entering into an agreement with the city.
Director or director of public works. The director of public works of the city or his appointed representative.
Emergency. A situation in which life, health, or property is in danger or may be in danger. Failure of utility service is an emergency.
Manual. The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Permit. Written approval.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or governmental entity.
Right-of-way. All that property held by the city for street, highway, roadway, or sidewalk purposes, but shall not include easements and publicly held property commonly
known as alleys located at the rear of lots and used for utilities and utility access.
Shall, should and may. The word “shall” indicates a mandatory condition; the word “should” indicates an advisory condition to insure safe operation conditions; the word
“may” indicates a permissive condition.
Street. Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. Arterial, collector, and local
streets shall be as designated on the city's official street and highway plan, as amended from time to time. A copy of this plan shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.
Street cut. Any excavation, cutting or tunneling of, or placing any earth or excavation material upon, any right-of-way.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-57; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 23, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.132 Cutting surface of street
(a) Restoration required. When any part of any street, avenue or alley, or other public place, in this city, shall be torn, dug up or taken up for any purpose, the person
doing the same shall, upon completion of the work, and as fast as practicable during the accomplishment thereof, return the earth and ram and puddle the same to a firm
and solid bearing, and in such manner as will entirely prevent settling of such earth, and leave the street in as good condition as he found it, and to the entire satisfaction of
the city engineer.
(b) Restoration after excavation. Parties taking up any pavement or making any excavation, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall do so in a careful manner,
and on paved streets shall preserve every part thereof, and in case of any excavation made, shall refill the same and thoroughly tamp and leave the same in first-class
condition for re-laying the pavement, and on unpaved streets the excavation shall be refilled in the same manner to a height level with the street, and should any
depression afterwards occur in any line of trench, it shall be refilled until it is permanently settled and flush with the street, and in all cases the street shall be left in as
good condition as found.
(c) Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner disturb or take up any portion of any street, paved or unpaved, in the city, without first having applied to
the proper authority of the city and obtained a permit to do so, after stating the amount of pavement necessary to be taken up.
(d) Digging holes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to pick or dig holes in the streets or drive any sharp instrument therein that will make a hole.
(1958 Code, secs. 33-5–33-8; 1978 Code, secs. 23-15–23-18; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 6, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.133 Blockage; barricades required
Any person who undertakes to perform work or other activity upon, in, under, or above any public right-of-way which requires that the right-of-way be partially or
completely closed shall use barricades, signals, signs, flags, flares, and other traffic-control warning devices and procedures during the duration of the activity in the
manner outlined by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted hereinbelow. Any such person shall also be required to obtain a permit from the
director of public works unless specifically exempted by section 14.03.182. The permit must be acquired before activity is begun. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted
5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-59; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 24, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.134 Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by reference
The current Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices is hereby incorporated into and made part of this section by reference and shall be on file in the office of
the city clerk. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-60; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 25, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.135 Times streets not to be blocked
(a) Except in an emergency, or unless approved in advance by the director of public works, no street blockage shall occur on an arterial or collector street between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(b) All traffic lanes of arterial and collector streets and all sidewalks along such streets shall be opened and all street cuts shall be paved, covered by steel plates, or
backfilled at the conclusion of each day's work to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Street cuts which would be impractical to close at the conclusion of each day's work
shall be left open only if prior approval has been obtained from the city engineer and director of public works.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-67; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 29, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.136 Applicant responsible for materials, etc.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/376
The applicant shall be responsible for all work, activity, barricades, maintenance, restoration, and other actions required by the permit, the manual, the nature of the work,
and all other applicable laws and standards. The city is not required to provide labor, materials, barricades, working conditions, or other actions necessary for performance
of work or other actions. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-70)
Sec. 14.03.137 Street cuts to be marked
The permittee shall mark each street cut with an identifying colored marker, located to avoid areas of heavy traffic flow. The colors for the required marks are as follows:
(1) Safety red:
(A) Electrical power, distribution and transmission.
(B) Municipal electrical systems.
(2) High visibility safety yellow:
(A) Gas distribution and transmission.
(B) Oil distribution and transmission.
(C) Dangerous materials, product lines, steam lines.
(3) Safety alert orange:
(A) Telephone and telegraph systems.
(B) Police and fire communications.
(C) Cable television and traffic-control systems.
(4) Safety precaution blue: Water systems and slurry pipe lines.
(5) Safety green: Storm and sewer systems.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-71; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 32, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.138 Bond required
An applicant for a street cut permit shall have in force with the city a surety bond in the principal amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); provided that no bond
shall be required of any utility company franchised by the city. The bond shall be executed by the permittee as principal and by a corporate surety satisfactory to the city
engineer and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. The bond shall be payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto and conditioned that the
principal and surety will pay all damages to any person caused by, or arising from, or growing out of, any violation of the terms of this division. Recovery on such bond
shall be cumulative. The bond shall provide that it may not be cancelled without thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city. The bond shall be good for a period of
one (1) year from date of issuance of the permit. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-72; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 33, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.139 Concrete cuts
Removal and replacement of existing concrete shall be made by the use of breakout grooves sawed by a concrete saw in accordance with details shown on the plans
accompanying the application for a street cut permit and as directed by the city engineer. Where street cuts are made within three (3) feet of existing dummy joints,
construction joints, or expansion joints, concrete shall be removed to the existing joint. Breakout grooves shall be cut perpendicular to the surface as directed by the city
engineer and shall be sawed to a depth not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) inches. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-73)
Sec. 14.03.140 City repair of noncomplying street cuts
(a) A street cut permit shall be issued for a period of time adequate to complete the proposed street cut.
(b) If a street cut does not comply with the terms of this division, the city engineer shall notify the permittee in writing of the deficiency. If the street cut is not properly
repaired within fifteen (15) days of the written notice, the city may make necessary repairs and charge the permittee therefor at a rate sufficient to cover all direct costs
incurred plus twenty-five (25) percent of that cost to compensate for unquantifiable administrative expenses and other overhead. In situations in which the permittee
cannot be reached and notified by telephone, in person, or in writing or does not respond after such notification and the deficiency is an emergency, the city may make
necessary repairs and charge the permittee for all direct costs incurred plus twenty-five (25) percent.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-74)
Sec. 14.03.141 Material to match
Permanent patches and repairs shall be made of a material that corresponds with the material in the existing street. An asphalt patch shall not be permitted in a concrete
street, nor shall a concrete patch be permitted in an asphalt street. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-75)
Sec. 14.03.142 Bore holes, etc.
Bore holes shall be made in a manner that will not interfere with the operation of the street or other facilities and shall not weaken or damage any embankment or
structure. The use of water or other fluids in connection with a boring operation shall be permitted only as necessary to lubricate cuttings. Jetting shall not be permitted.
The street above a completed bore hole shall have no indentations, pockets or recesses that may trap and hold water, nor shall there be bumps or high places resulting from
the drilling of a bore hole. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-76)
Sec. 14.03.143 Curbs and gutters
Curbs and gutters to be replaced shall be removed to the next expansion joint on both sides of the street cut or, with the approval of the city engineer, the curb and gutter
may be sawed with a concrete saw to produce a smooth joint. Curbs and gutters shall be replaced within forty-eight (48) hours of removal unless an extension is first
granted by the city engineer. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-77)
Sec. 14.03.144 Backfilling
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/376
(a) Backfilling material not under a street, roadway or sidewalk shall be free from lumps, large rocks, or other foreign material and debris and shall be compacted to the
density of the original undisturbed material.
(b) Excavation, alteration, backfill, and repairs under a street, roadway, or sidewalk shall be made in conformity with the standard drawing and material requirements
on file in the city engineer's office; provided that, in exceptional circumstances, when in the judgment of the city engineer, modifications will be necessary to insure and
protect the best interest of the city.
(c) The city may require density tests of backfill material by a testing laboratory. If the material tested fails to meet compaction requirements, the expense of the testing
shall be borne by the permittee and it shall take immediate action to correct all deficiencies; or, if the questionable area, after testing, is shown to meet compaction
requirements, the cost of the test shall be borne by the city.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-78)
Sec. 14.03.145 Excavation restriction
When, in the judgment of the city engineer, excavating within a street should not be allowed, the street cut shall be bored, tunneled or drilled under the paved section, and,
where the city engineer deems it necessary, such crossings shall be encased in a manner approved by the city engineer. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978
Code, sec. 23-79)
Sec. 14.03.146 Cleated equipment restrictions
Cleated equipment shall not be used in street cuts without use of “street pads” to prevent damage to the street, roadway or alley. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted
5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-80)
Sec. 14.03.147 Certificate of insurance required
An applicant, other than the city or a utility company having a franchise agreement with the city, shall, prior to the issuance of a street cut permit, furnish the city with a
copy of a policy of insurance issued by an insurer acceptable to the city showing that the permittee has in force, and will maintain in force during the performance of the
street cut and for the period of the street cut permit, public liability insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one accident and
property damage insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-81; Ordinance 07-
060, sec. 34, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.148 City not liable
This division shall not be construed as imposing upon the city, or any official or employee thereof, any liability or responsibility for damages to any person; nor shall the
city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, the issuance of permits, or approval of any
excavation work. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-82)
Secs. 14.03.149–14.03.180 Reserved
Part II. Permits
Sec. 14.03.181 Permit required for street cuts; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, except the city, to make a street cut unless such person shall first obtain a street cut permit from the city engineer, except in the
following cases:
(1) A street cut permit shall not be required for the installation of a utility pole which is installed without disturbing existing pavement or paved sidewalks;
(2) A street cut permit shall not be required of contractors performing work for the city;
(3) A street cut permit shall not be required of the state department of transportation if work is to be performed on a street under the jurisdiction and control
of the state department of transportation;
(4) A street cut permit shall not be required as a prerequisite to a street cut in an emergency;
(5) A street cut permit shall not be required for construction of a driveway or sidewalk if permits under other applicable codes for such construction have
been obtained.
(b) All other provisions of the code shall apply to each of the above exceptions.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-58)
Sec. 14.03.182 Permit required for barricading; exceptions
(a) A barricading permit shall be required of any person, except the city, who undertakes to perform work or other activity upon, in, under or above any public right-ofway
which requires that the right-of-way be partially or completely closed, except in the following cases:
(1) A barricading permit shall not be required for minor construction work performed by utility companies. Utility work shall be considered minor if a
collector or arterial street is not blocked between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and if
the blockage does not exceed two (2) hours during a twenty-four-hour period. Subject to the above limitations, usage of manholes shall be considered minor
utility work. At any time, blockage of more than one traveled lane, or blockage of a single lane when that lane is the only lane of travel for a direction, on any
arterial or collector street shall not be considered minor.
(2) A barricading permit shall not be required for work when no portion of the street is to be blocked and pedestrian movement can be maintained without
using the street.
(3) A barricading permit shall not be required of contractors performing work for the city.
(4) A barricading permit shall not be required of the state department of transportation if work is to be performed on a street under the jurisdiction and
control of the state department of transportation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/376
(5) A barricading permit shall not be required as a prerequisite to a street cut in an emergency.
(6) A barricading permit shall not be required for construction of a driveway or sidewalk if permits under other applicable codes for such construction have
been obtained.
(b) All other provisions of the code and manual shall apply in subsections (a)(1) through (6) above.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-61)
Sec. 14.03.183 Application requirements; fee
(a) Application for a street cut and/or barricading permit shall be made in writing on a combined form provided by the city. The form shall be obtained from the city
engineer. The application form shall be completed and accompanied by plans showing the location of the proposed street cut or proposed barricades. In each instance in
which a street cut permit is obtained for a utility company, the utility company shall be the applicant and shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this
division.
(b) The fee for a street cut and/or barricading permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per permit with an additional charge of five dollars ($5.00) per day or portion of a day
during which the right-of-way is occupied by the applicant.
(c) The city engineer may require revisions to street cut plans submitted with an application if, in his opinion, such revisions are necessary to serve the best interest of
the city. Street cuts shall be made in strict compliance with the approved plans, and the city engineer or his designee shall have the right of inspection at all times.
(d) The city engineer may require revisions to barricading plans submitted with an application if, in his opinion, such revisions are necessary to serve the best interest of
the city. Barricading shall be in strict compliance with the approved plans and the city engineer or his designee shall have the right of inspection at all times.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; Ordinance 83-125, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 23-62; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 26, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.184 Submission of application prior to action; disapproval
(a) Application for a street cut and/or barricading permit shall be made not less than two (2) business days prior to the proposed work or blockage. If an application is
not approved, reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing.
(b) Failure to comply with provisions of a prior street cut or barricading permit shall be a satisfactory reason for disapproval of subsequent applications.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-63)
Sec. 14.03.185 Appeal
(a) If an application is not approved by the city engineer, the applicant may appeal that decision to the city manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
city manager within ten (10) calendar days of the adverse decision. The city manager shall hold a hearing and render his decision within five (5) business days from the
date of the hearing.
(b) An applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council from any adverse decision or ruling of the city manager. To perfect an appeal, the aggrieved party shall
file the reason for appeal in writing with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the adverse decision appealed from. The city council shall hold a public hearing
on such appeal after furnishing notice of such hearing to the applicant. Notice shall be sufficient if deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with sufficient
postage attached, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the written appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-64; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 27, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.186 Permit to be available at site
The street cut/barricading permit shall be kept at the location of the street cut/blockage at all times that work or a blockage is occurring. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted
5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-65)
Sec. 14.03.187 Emergency situations
(a) In the event of an emergency occurring between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except city holidays, immediate notice shall be given
the director of public works and application for a street cut/barricading permit shall be made on the next business day following the emergency street cut.
(b) In the event of an emergency occurring between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on weekends or city holidays, application shall be made on the next
business day, and immediate notification shall be given to the city police department. In emergency situations, all basic barricading and street cut standards outlined in the
manual or this division shall apply.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-66; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 28, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.188 Additional permit requirements
At any time after the issuance of a permit, the city engineer may impose additional permit requirements when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, to avoid
traffic congestion, or otherwise protect the best interests of the city. (Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-68; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 30, adopted
6/5/07)
Sec. 14.03.189 Revocation
(a) The city engineer or his authorized representative may stop work related to a permit issued hereunder in an emergency situation or if any requirement of the permit
is not met.
(b) The permit holder, or the person named as responsible for or in charge of work or action, shall be notified of violation of any requirement of the permit and be given
a reasonable time to correct the deficiency. The length of time shall be determined by the city engineer for deficiencies related to street cuts and barricading. The
maximum time to correct deficiencies shall be twenty-four (24) hours. After the designated time, the permit may be revoked.
(c) In the event a permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to continue to work or block the roadway, except to restore the site to its proper condition. Restoration shall
begin immediately.
(d) A permittee shall have the right to appeal to the city manager the decision or ruling of the city engineer to revoke a permit. To perfect an appeal, the aggrieved party
shall file the reason for appeal in writing with the city manager within ten (10) calendar days after the revocation. The city manager shall hold a public hearing on such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/376
appeal after furnishing notice of such hearing to the permittee. Notice shall be sufficient if deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with sufficient postage
attached, addressed to the permittee at the address shown on the written appeal. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council under section
14.03.185.
(Ordinance 81-37, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-69; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 31, adopted 6/5/07)
Division 4. Right-of-Way Management Regulations*
Sec. 14.03.190 Title
This division shall be known and cited as the right-of-way management regulations for the city. (Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.191 Construction; governing law; venue
This division shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state and the city charter and city code to the extent that such charter and city code are not in
conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in the county.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.192 Scope
This division shall be effective within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city. (Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.193 Purpose; objectives; applicability
(a) Purpose. This division provides principles and procedures for the placement of structures and facilities, construction, excavation, encroachments, and work activities
within or upon any public right-of-way and to protect the integrity of the road and city utility system. To achieve these purposes, it is necessary to require permits of
private users of the public rights-of-way, except as prohibited by law, and to establish permit procedures, rules, and regulations for work done within or upon the public
rights-of-way.
(b) Objectives. Public and private uses of public rights-of-way for location of facilities employed in the provision of public services should, in the interests of the
general welfare, be accommodated; however, the city must ensure that the primary purpose of the rights-of-way, safe passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is
maintained to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations, roadways, the city utility system, facilities and properties should
be protected, competing uses must be reconciled, and the public safety preserved. The use of the public rights-of-way by persons, agencies, network providers, and public
infrastructure contractors is secondary to these public objectives and the movement of traffic. This division is intended to strike a balance between the public need for
efficient, safe transportation routes and the use of public rights-of-way for location of facilities by public and private entities. The division thus has several objectives:
(1) To ensure that the public safety is maintained and that public inconvenience is minimized.
(2) To protect the city's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities, and property in the public rights-of-way when
work is accomplished.
(3) To facilitate work within the public rights-of-way through the standardization of regulations.
(4) To maintain an efficient permit process.
(5) To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city.
(6) To establish a public policy for enabling the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies,
industry competition, and technological development.
(7) To promote cooperation among the agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors (as defined herein) and the city in the occupation of
the public rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to:
(A) Eliminate duplication that is wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly;
(B) Lower the agencies', network providers', public infrastructure contractors' and the city's costs of providing services to the public; and
(C) Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways by minimizing street cuts.
(8) To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(9) To further the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing aesthetic standards for installation of facilities in the public
right of-way that are reasonable, are technically feasible, and are reasonably directed to avoiding or remedying the intangible public harm of unsightly or outof-
character deployments.
(c) Applicability.
(1) The requirements of this division apply to all persons, agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors that place structures and
facilities or that conduct construction, excavation, encroachments, and work activities within or upon any public rights-of-way except:
(A) Persons, agencies, or public infrastructure contractors providing service drops for single-family and two-family residence-zoned properties on
private property. All permits for these properties will be issued through the city's building inspection department.
(B) New residential service connections which are permitted through the building inspection department of the city as provided in section 14.03.199(a)
(5) below.
(C) Right-of-way use for valet-parking.
(D) Right-of-way use for sidewalk cafes.
(E) Revocable use of the right-of-way pursuant to an encroachment agreement.
(2) Any permit issued prior to March 26, 2019 will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of
issuance of the permit and is not affected by this division, except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/376
in accordance with this division.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.194 Definitions
Abandon and its derivatives. The facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts,
network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left by provider in an unused or nonfunctioning condition for more that 120 consecutive calendar
days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still in active use.
Abandoned facilities. Facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or from any other facilities, or from any other facilities that
are in use or that still carry service. Facilities are deemed to be abandoned facilities if they are not properly registered with the city.
Agency. Any franchised person operating in the right-of-way. “Agency” includes all contractors and subcontractors hired or retained to do construction for an agency.
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes.
(1) Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284.
Applicant. An owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under the provisions of this division.
Backfill. The placement or return of dirt, fill, or other material for the purpose of restoring an excavated area.
Certificated telecommunications provider (CTP). A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service
provider certificate of operating authority by the public utility commission to offer local exchange telephone service. A CTP does not include a network provider, as
defined herein.
Chapter 284. Tex. Loc. Gov. Code, chapter 284.
City. The City of Beaumont, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city.
City council. The municipal governing body of the City of Beaumont, Texas.
City engineer. The director of engineering of the City of Beaumont or any other person designated by the city manager to administer this division.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Beaumont.
Closure. A complete or partial closing of one or more lanes of traffic of a major thoroughfare and the complete closure of any other type street or sidewalk.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to
an existing pole or structure.
Compaction. Ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density with a moisture content of -2 percent to +4 percent of optimum under paved surfaces and ninety (90) percent
of maximum density with a moisture content of -2 percent to +4 percent of optimum outside of paved surfaces.
Concealment or camouflaged. Any facility that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, or otherwise concealed such that the facility blends into the surrounding
environment and is visually unobtrusive. A concealed facility also includes any facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the facility or pole is located
and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a facade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree
branches.
Construction. Breaking of pavement, excavation, installation of facilities, boring or jacking of utilities, restoration of pavement cuts, or other work by an agency, network
provider, or public infrastructure contractor in a public right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing primary service, restoration, or maintenance
of existing facilities within the right-of-way.
Consumer price index. The annual revised consumer price index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics or other
publication as authorized by state law.
Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specifically designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed
informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to the city zoning
ordinance regulation of light pole banners, as may be further amended.
Disaster emergency. An imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is
threatened, and includes, but is not limited to any declaration of emergency by city, state, or federal governmental authorities.
Distributed antenna system or DAS. Shall be included as a type of “network node.”
Duct or conduit. A single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics, or other wires. “Duct” or “conduit” shall not include the maintenance duct associated with a conduit
that is reserved for use in replacing damaged cable or for rerouting purposes.
Easement. Shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose
whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities.
Emergency. Any event that may threaten public health or safety, including, but not limited to, damaged or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged, plugged, or
leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems, damaged facilities, downed aerial facilities, downed poles or service outages whether to one customer or an area of the city.
Erosion control. Compliance with TxDOT Erosion and Sediment Control measures, as amended.
Excavate or excavation. To dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a public right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity
removes or disturbs the paved portion of the right-of-way.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/376
Facilities. The plant, equipment, and property, including, but not limited to, lines, transport service, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, pipelines, ducts, cables and wires
located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way and valves, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of
utility services, wireless or network services, or communications services to the public.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor; authorized to oversee cable television and other multi channel
regulation on a national level.
Highway right-of-way. Right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway.
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic by the city. Such zones include H-C, historic-cultural landmark overlay, HC-L, historiccultural
landmark and RCR-H, residential conservation and revitalization.
Law. Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
Local. Within the geographical boundaries of the city.
Local exchange telephone service. Telecommunications service provided within an exchange to establish connections between customer premises within the exchange,
including connections between a customer premises and a long distance provider serving the exchange. The term includes tone dialing service, service connection charges,
and directory assistance services offered in connection with basic local telecommunications service and interconnection with other service providers. The term does not
include the following services, whether offered on an intra-exchange or inter-exchange basis:
(1) Central office based PBX-type services for system of seventy-five (75) stations or more;
(2) Billing and collection services;
(3) High-speed private line services of 1.544 megabits or greater;
(4) Customized services;
(5) Private line or virtual private line services;
(6) Resold or shared local exchange telephone services if permitted by tariff;
(7) Dark fiber services;
(8) Nonvoice data transmission service offered as a separate service and not as a component of basic local telecommunications service;
(9) Dedicated or virtually dedicated access services; or
(10) Any other service the public utility commission determines is not a local exchange telephone service.
Location. The city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node.
Macro tower. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by chapter 284, section 284.103 and that supports or is capable of
supporting antennas.
Major thoroughfare. Any thoroughfare type D or higher as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, as amended.
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height,
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches.
Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity.
Municipality owned utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public
right-of-way.
MUTCD. Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collation; and
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/376
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node.
Order. The Federal Communications Commission Declaratory Ruling, Third Report and Order, FCC WT Docket No. 17-79, adopted September 26, 2018.
Pavement cut. A cut made into the paved surface of a public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or public easement.
Permit. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from a municipality before a network provider may perform
an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority.
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association,
and other such entity who owns or controls facilities.
Pole. A service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole.
Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns.
Provider. Has the same meaning as “network provider.”
Public infrastructure contractor. A person hired or retained to do construction of facilities that will be maintained by the city. “Public infrastructure contractor” includes
all subcontractors.
Public right-of-way management ordinance. An ordinance that complies with chapter 284 [Texas Local Government Code].
Public right(s)-of-way. The area on, below, or above a roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, waterway, or other way and that is open for public use, and that is owned
by the city in full or in part, and that is managed and controlled by the city. The term does not include:
(1) A private easement; or
(2) The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Residential service connections. A connection to private property from the right-of-way for individual residential service.
SCADA or supervisory control and data acquisition systems. A category of software application programs and hardware used by the city for the process control and
gathering of data in real time from remote locations in order to monitor equipment and conditions of the city public water and wastewater utility facilities. These systems
may utilize both cable and wireless communications.
Service pole. A pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, that is owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city and supporting only network nodes.
Small cell or small wireless facility. A facility meeting all of the following criteria: (1) facilities mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including their antennas, or
on structures no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures, or that do not extend existing structures where they are located to a height of more than 50 feet
or by more than 10 percent, whichever is greater; (2) each antenna is no more than 3 cubic feet in volume; (3) all other wireless equipment associated with the structure,
including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre existing associate equipment on the structure is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; and (4)
facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of applicable safety standards specified in 47 CFR rule 1.1307(b). Unless specifically
provided for herein, provisions addressed to network nodes herein shall also apply to small cells and small wireless facilities.
Stealth. A method that hides or conceals an antenna, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment or any other support structure, including network nodes.
Street. Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area
between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the
entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a “street” does not. A “street” does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either
are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
SWPPP. Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
TAS. Texas Accessibility Standards.
Thoroughfare. Any public traffic artery, major street, secondary street or alley.
Traffic signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the
purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
Underground requirement area. An area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above-ground structures have been removed and buried or have been
approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that
prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way.
User. A person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context.
Utility. Any privately or publicly owned entity that uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general public service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas,
electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such
entity and located within and near the right-of-way.
Utility pole. A pole installed primarily for the purpose of providing electric distribution or telecommunications as defined by section 51.002, Utilities Code and that
provides: (1) electric distribution with voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or (2) services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by section 51.002,
Utilities Code. A utility pole does not include a pole installed primarily for the purpose of providing other services or for third parties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/376
Utility service pole. A pole installed by a utility for the purpose of connecting a utility pole to a customer's building or other premises to provide electric distribution or
telecommunications as defined by section 51.002 Utilities Code.
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as defined in Texas Local Government Code chapter 284.
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using
a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.195 Police powers
An agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the city which includes the power to adopt and
enforce ordinances, including amendments to this division, necessary for the safety, health, and welfare of the public. Agencies, network providers, and public
infrastructure contractors shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the city or any other legally constituted governmental unit
having lawful jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof. The city reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding anything in this division or a permit to
the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of this division or a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be resolved in
favor of the latter. (Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.196 City engineer's authority; enforcement; violations
(a) City engineer's authority.
(1) The city engineer is authorized to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this division and to promulgate regulations, including but not
limited to, engineering, technical, and other special criteria and standards, including design standards, to aid in the administration and enforcement of this
division that are not in conflict with this division, the Code of Ordinances of the city, or state or federal law.
(2) Enforcement. The city engineer is authorized to enter upon a construction site for which a permit is granted under this division or, where necessary, upon
private property adjacent to the construction site for purposes of inspection to determine compliance with the permit or this division without notice. If the
inspection requires physical contact with the equipment, the city engineer must provide written notice to the agency, network provider, or infrastructure
contractor within five (5) business days of the planned inspection. Agency, network provider or infrastructure contractor may have a representative present
during such inspection.
(b) Violations. A person, agency, or public infrastructure contractor commits an offense if he:
(1) Performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises construction without a valid permit issued under this division;
(2) Violates any provision of this division;
(3) Fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this division; or
(4) Fails to comply with an order or regulation of the city engineer issued pursuant to this division.
(c) This division may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the city has for
violation of this division.
(d) Prior to initiation of civil enforcement litigation, a person, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor who has violated a provision of this division
must be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the timeframe specified by the city engineer. This section does not prohibit the city engineer or the city from
taking enforcement action as to past or present violations of this division, notwithstanding their correction.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.197 Penalties
(a) Any violation of the following provisions or terms of this division by any person, firm, corporation, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor:
section 14.03.208(f), excavation safety, section 14.03.209, no directional boring zones, and section 14.03.211(c), deposit of dirt and material on roadways, of this division
shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009(b) of this code for each offense. Every day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any violation of the other provisions or terms of this division by any person, firm, corporation, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall be
a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009(a) of this code for each offense. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.198 Permit required
(a) Permit required. Any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor seeking to place facilities on, in or over a public right-of-way or to engage in
construction, excavation, encroachments, and work activities within or upon any public right-of-way shall first file an application for a right-of-way permit with the city
and shall abide by the terms and provisions of the right-of-way permit and this division pertaining to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) City construction, reconstruction, and maintenance activities are excepted from the permitting requirements outlined herein.
(2) No application, permit or fee is required of network providers for:
(A) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
(B) Replacing or upgrading facilities that are substantially similar in size or smaller; and that do not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/376
(C) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes or similar structures that are strung on cables between
existing poles or node support poles, in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code. If, however, traffic will be affected by the installation,
placement, maintenance or replacement of a micro network node or similar structure, a traffic-control plan is required per section 14.03.212.
(3) Substantially similar shall mean:
(A) The new or upgraded facility, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than ten (10) percent larger than the existing
facility or 10 feet, whichever is greater; or the extension of facilities less than six feet from a tower; or the new or upgraded pole will not be more than ten
(10) percent higher than the existing pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the applicable height limitations prescribed by
Local Government Code chapter 284, as may be further amended; or increasing the size of ground equipment cabinets by ten percent in height or volume;
(B) The replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing pole;
(C) The replacement or upgrade does not defeat existing concealment elements of a pole; and
(D) The determination of whether a replacement or upgrade is substantially similar is made by measuring from the dimensions of the facilities as
approved by the city.
(4) Although no application, permit or fee is required, the city requires advance notice of the work described above and approval of the pole's owner for that
specific address. Work under this section must still meet all other requirements in this division.
(c) Permits generally.
(1) Permits will be issued in the name of the agency or network provider that will own the facilities. Permits for public infrastructure will be issued in the
name of the public infrastructure contractor.
(2) Any agency with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city (grant) to use the public rights-of-way that is in
effect at the time this division takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant, unless prohibited by law, until the grant expires or until it
is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the agency or as otherwise provided for by law.
(3) Construction, excavation, or work area. No agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall perform construction, excavation, or work
in an area larger or at a location different, or for a longer period of time than that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation,
or work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than originally
requested under the application or for a longer period of time, the agency or public infrastructure contractor shall notify the city engineer immediately and,
within twenty-four (24) hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or work.
(4) Permit transferability or assignability. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor may subcontract the work to be performed under
a permit if the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor is responsible for the performance of the work under the permit and all insurance
and financial security as required. Permits are transferable and assignable upon written notice to the city engineer that the transferee or assignee has posted all
required security pursuant to this division. Any transferee or assignee shall be bound by all requirements of the permit and this division. The physical
construction of public infrastructure, excluding agency infrastructure and facilities installed by network providers, in new developments is the responsibility of
the developer of the land. Ownership of that infrastructure remains with the developer of the land until accepted by the city. Any agency or public
infrastructure contractor performing work on infrastructure that is within a public right-of-way, but prior to infrastructure acceptance by the city, shall obtain a
permit from the city and permission from the owner of all of the infrastructure in the public right-of-way. The agency or public infrastructure contractor shall
be financially responsible to the owner of the infrastructure to carry out all remedial work necessary to receive acceptance by the city of that infrastructure.
This financial obligation shall apply only to the work in the public right-of-way done by the agency or public infrastructure contractor. The city will not accept
for dedication public infrastructure if the work performed on that infrastructure is not in accordance with applicable city specifications.
(5) Any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor found to be conducting any excavation activity within the public right-of-way without
having first obtained the required permit(s) shall immediately cease all activity (exclusive of actions required to stabilize the area) and be required to obtain a
permit before work may be restarted.
(6) The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor from knowingly using the
public rights-of-way unless the agency or public infrastructure contractor has complied with the terms of this division.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.199 Right-of-way permit application; permit contents
(a) General to all right-of-way permits.
(1) Application submissions. Each application for a permit shall be submitted using the required form, which may be obtained from the engineering
department. The applicant must determine what type of permit is sought and complete the correct application. The city is not responsible for determining that
the correct application was completed by the applicant and approval of a permit contrary to the provisions of this division does not create a vested right.
(A) Required disclosures on application. The applicant shall disclose if the applicant proposes that the facilities will be located in: a historic district;
within one hundred fifty (150) feet; near a historic site, or a structure or landmark recognized as historic by the city, state or federal government; within a
park; within a residential district; or in an area that has undergrounding requirements.
(B) Drawings. The applicant shall provide detailed drawings in electronic form, with calculations and dimensions to show strict conformity to the size,
distance and spacing limitations in this division.
(C) Format. The applicant requesting a permit shall provide the city with documentation in the format specified by the city.
(D) Interference. The applicant shall provide analysis indicating that the proposed facilities will not cause any interference with city public safety radio
system, traffic signal light system, or other city safety communications components.
(E) Address and location. The applicant must provide the specific address for all facilities that will be located on a pole. Addresses are determined by
the city's GIS department. The applicant shall provide a dated aerial photograph of the overall site depicting the site's relation to major streets and
highways and poles. For any application requesting a new pole, photos are required showing the before and after conditions.
(F) Other required permits. The applicant must ascertain, in consultation with the city, whether any other authorizations from the city will be required
in order for the proposed installation to be made and completed. For all applications for the installation or construction of wireless facilities, including
network nodes and node support poles, if any such additional authorizations are required, the applicant is responsible for providing all the information
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/376
necessary for the city to review and act on the additional authorizations. Such additional authorizations that must be included with the application shall
include, but not be limited to, executed agreement(s) with the city for attachment to service poles, as provided in subsection (b)(4)(E) below.
(G) Completeness. The application is not complete unless it contains all information required by this division, requested on the application form, and
required by any supplemental list of required documentation provided by the city with the application form.
(2) No person, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall install facilities or otherwise encroach upon the right-of-way or make a
pavement cut or excavate in a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the engineering department, except in an emergency or without having
first made contact with the city in times of emergency.
(3) If the project lies within a TxDOT, Entergy, JCDD6, LNVA or any other agency's right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the
state, federal government or other appropriate agency at the time of application.
(4) Franchised agencies and agencies that are certificated telecommunications providers have prior authorization to do work in public rights-of-way.
However, an agency's use of the public rights-of-way is subject to and must occur in accordance with state laws, federal laws, and city ordinances, policies,
standards and procedures. Said use is nonexclusive and does not establish priority for use over other franchise holders, permit holders, or the city. A permit
issued by the city is required for all work done in the public rights-of-way, except as indicated in section 14.03.198(b).
(5) New residential service connections do not require a permit under this division. However, a building permit may be required from the building
inspections department. An agency or public infrastructure contractor must inquire with the building inspections department as to whether a permit is required
for such service connections. Maintenance or replacement of existing service connections that requires excavation will require a permit under this division.
(6) The city shall state on the permit the activity for which the permit is issued and any additional restrictions or requirements that have been placed upon the
permit besides those incorporated into the permit by this division, the zoning ordinance, or other law or regulation, as applicable.
(7) All construction and installation in the public rights-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit issued for the facilities. The city engineer shall be
provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(8) A copy of the right-of-way construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for
inspection by the city engineer at all times when construction or installation work is occurring.
(9) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall update any new information on permit applications within ten (10) business days
after any change occurs.
(10) Agencies, network providers, or public infrastructure contractors may apply jointly for permits to work in public rights-of-way at the same time and
place.
(11) All permit holders must contact the public works department by telephone at least forty-eight (48) hours before work begins under the permit.
(12) If no work has begun on a network node permit within six months of final approval of the permit, or within thirty (30) calendar days of final approval
for a standard right-of-way permit, the permit shall be void, and a new permit shall be required.
(13) A sixty (60) day extension to a permit may be granted if requested by the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor in writing to the
engineering department. Such a request must be made before the permit expires. If no call for the cancellation of a permit, or for an inspection after completion
of the work, is received within the sixty (60) day extension period, the permit shall be void, and a new permit shall be required.
(b) Types of permits.
(1) Standard right-of-way permits.
(A) A standard right-of-way permit is required whenever a cut or excavation is made in a public right-of-way by an agency or public infrastructure
contractor.
(B) Application for a standard right-of-way permit shall be made no less than two (2) city business days prior to the date of the proposed activity. If the
proposed cut or excavation is to be made in the public rights-of-way dedicated to the state, a city permit is required in addition to any and all permits
required by the state or other agencies. A city permit is required although specific authority has been granted by the engineering department to cut a
paved street, curb or alley as a part of a new construction project.
(C) There is no fee for a standard right-of-way permit. There is, however, an annual fee for use of the right-of-way and a contract with the city is
required. Where such fees are not otherwise determined by franchise or prohibited by state or federal law:
(i) Fee per linear foot: $1.75.
(ii) Fee per street crossing: $1,000.00.
(D) Late fees may be assessed as allowed by law.
(E) The contract shall determine any inflator for the annual fee, and if the contract expires, the rate in effect on the date of expiry shall be the initial
rate for any additional contract terms.
(2) Permits issued under emergency conditions. Any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor maintaining facilities in the public rightsof
way may proceed with repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work be done immediately. The
agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor doing the work shall notify the engineering department no later than the next business day by
telephone or e-mail when an emergency permit is required. A permit application for the proper permit under this section must be submitted and the fee, if any,
paid no later than the next business day after the work is commenced.
(3) Standard right-of-way maintenance permits.
(A) A maintenance permit is required whenever work is being done by an agency or infrastructure contractor in or on a major thoroughfare and no cut
or excavation is required.
(B) Application for a maintenance permit must be submitted no later than the business day prior to the date of the proposed maintenance work.
Applications may be submitted in person or e-mail to the engineering department.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/376
(C) The requirements outlined for permits issued under emergency conditions in subsection (2) of this section apply to maintenance permits, as do the
remaining requirements of this division.
(4) Small cell right-of-way permits.
(A) Required. A small cell right-of-way permit is required for network providers. The permit may be for transport facilities, network nodes, or network
node support poles.
(B) Fees per application. Fees per application for network nodes, transportation facilities, and poles are the maximum allowed by Texas Local
Government Code chapter 284 or the order, whichever is lower, as further amended.
(C) Small cell maintenance permit. A small cell maintenance permit is required for any activity in the right-of-way unless an exception in section
14.03.198(b)(2) applies. A small cell maintenance permit is subject to the same fees, requirements and timeframes as a small cell right-of-way permit.
(D) Transport services. Network providers may obtain transport service from a person or entity that is paying city fees to occupy the public right-ofway
that are equivalent to transport fees stated in section 14.03.205(c). If third-party transport services are used, the network provider must identify the
third-party provider, and provide documentation, at the time of filing the application, that the third-party transport service provider is paying city fees and
that the network provider has received written permission to use such transport services for the specific address.
(E) Collocation on a service pole. An applicant proposing collocation on a city-owned service pole must submit a copy of the signed agreement with
the city allowing the collocation on the city-owned service pole located at a specific location at the time of filing the permit application.
(F) Installation of network node. For purposes of determining, annual and monthly fees for wireless facilities under section 14.03.205(a), the city will
assume installation of the facilities six months from the date the permit is approved.
(G) Application completeness, timeframe. Not later than the 30th day after the date of receipt of an application for a permit for a network node or node
support pole or not later than the tenth day after receipt of an application for a transport facility, the city shall determine whether the application is
materially complete and notify the applicant of that determination. If the city determines that the application is incomplete, the city shall specifically
identify the missing information in the notification to the applicant, with reference to the specific rule or regulation requiring the information.
(H) Approval or denial of application, timeframe. Unless the time periods herein are tolled or extended by written agreement between the city and the
applicant, the city will approve or deny applications according to the following:
(i) For applications for one or more new node support poles, no later than the 150th day after the date of receipt of a materially complete
application;
(ii) For applications for one or more network nodes on existing poles or structures, no later than the 60th day after the date of receipt of a
materially complete application;
(iii) For applications to install network nodes on a mixture of existing and new poles, no later than the 90th day after the date of receipt of a
materially complete application;
(iv) For a transport facility, no later than the 21st day after the date of receipt of a materially complete application.
(I) Tolling of timeframe. If the city has notified the applicant that the application is materially incomplete, the time frame for the city's review is tolled
until the applicant provides the required information or documents, as provided in the order.
(J) Documentation for denial. If the city denies a complete application, it must document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable code
provision or other municipal rule, regulation, or other law on which the denial is based. The city shall send the documentation of the reason for denial by
electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date the city denies the application.
(K) Cure after denial. Not later than the 30th day after the date the city denies the application, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the
denial documentation and resubmit the application without paying an additional application fee, other than a fee for actual costs incurred by the city.
Notwithstanding subsection (H), the city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the date
the city receives the completed revised application. The city's review of the revised application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial
application.
(L) Fees are $500.00 per application covering up to five network notes, $250.00 for each additional network node per application, $1,000.00 per
application per new pole.
(c) Denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit.
(1) Denial of a permit. A permit may be denied for any one of the following reasons:
(A) The proposed activity will substantially interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and no procedures, or procedures which are inconsistent with
this division, have been implemented to minimize the interference.
(B) The proposed construction will substantially interfere with another activity for which a permit has been issued, or will conflict or interfere with
existing facilities already in the public right-of-way.
(C) The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic-control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of
the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
(D) The activity or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a city ordinance or regulation or a state or federal statute or regulation.
(E) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor requests to cut a city-maintained street that can be crossed by jacking, boring or
tunneling.
(F) There is a lack of available space.
(G) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor:
(i) Does not have liability insurance as required by section 14.03.202;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/376
(ii) Has consistently failed to perform in accordance with the requirements of this division;
(iii) Has failed to furnish all of the information required by this division or, except for good cause shown, to file the applications within the time
prescribed by this division;
(iv) Has misrepresented or falsified any information in the applications;
(v) Has failed to comply with the performance warranty/guarantee as provided in this division;
(vi) Is not in compliance with applicable requirements of an existing permit issued under this division;
(vii) Does not have a contractor's license or other required license; or
(viii) Has not compensated the city, unless the agency, network provider or public infrastructure contractor is not legally obligated to compensate
the city by contract, by agreement, or by law for using public property.
(2) Suspension or revocation of a permit. The city engineer may suspend by stop-work order or revoke any or all permits granted to allow work in the public
rights-of-way on the same grounds on which a permit may be denied under subsection (c)(1) or for the following reasons and subject to the procedural
guidelines noted in this division and any agreement that applies to the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor using the public rights-ofway,
as well as any limitations imposed by federal or state law:
(A) Failing to comply with an order of the city engineer;
(B) The recognition that a permit was issued in error;
(C) Failing to comply with restrictions or requirements placed on the permit by the city engineer;
(D) The city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of equipment:
(i) Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property;
(ii) Equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property; or
(iii) There is imminent danger to the public; or
(E) Violating any provision of this division.
(3) The city engineer shall provide written notice of a denial, suspension or revocation to the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor.
Construction that is suspended may not resume until the city engineer determines that the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor has
corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard that caused the suspension.
(4) A permit that was revoked due to failure to comply with an order of the city engineer, failure to comply with the restrictions or requirements placed upon
the permit by the city engineer, a violation of this division, or for public health, safety or welfare reasons may be reinstated by the city engineer if the city
engineer determines that:
(A) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard that caused the revocation
or denial; and
(B) The health, safety and welfare of the public is not jeopardized by reinstating or issuing the permit.
(5) An agency or public infrastructure contractor may appeal a permit denial, suspension, or revocation in accordance with the provisions of section
14.03.201 of this division.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.200 Facility size and locations
These provisions apply to all facilities, including those of franchise utilities, unless specifically contradicted in the franchise agreement.
(1) Location in right-of-way, generally. Facilities and related ground equipment shall be placed within two (2) feet from the outer edge of the right-of-way
line and three (3) feet from back of curb to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way,
unless on an existing pole.
(2) Location in right-of-way, new development. All facilities in new developments shall be located in accordance with exhibits 1, 2, and 3 to Ordinance 19-
017, unless an alternative location has been approved by the city engineer. Such utility locations are hereby adopted as standard locations for facilities in new
developments. The intent of these items is that they serve as a standard, not only to agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors working
under city permit, but also to all city agencies whose routine business requires the installation, repair or relocation of utilities.
(3) Location in right-of-way, existing development. New facilities to be installed in previously developed streets should be located as in exhibits 1, 2, 3 and
4 to Ordinance 19-017. If that location is already being used by another facility, the new facility shall be located such that it does not interfere with other
facilities, both existing and future. No new facilities shall be located longitudinally in a median or under existing or proposed pavement, unless permitted by
the city engineer.
(4) New poles.
(A) Antenna poles are to be installed pursuant to the design detail as shown on attached exhibit A to Ordinance 19-017 and made a part hereof. The
single globe lighting is optional.
(B) Materials. Poles located in medians must be constructed of steel or concrete, or other material approved by the city engineer. Wood poles are
prohibited.
(C) Pole height. New poles or modified utility poles may not exceed the lesser of:
(i) Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within five hundred (500) linear feet of the new pole in the same public
right-of-way; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/376
(ii) Fifty-five (55) feet above grade level.
(D) Pole spacing. In order to avoid congestion of right-of-way caused by multiple pole installations, minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to
roadways, minimize the effect on property values, and to maintain the aesthetics of the area by avoiding the negative impact on the public of unsightly
proliferation of poles in the right-of-way, poles shall be spaced as provided herein. New poles, including new utility service poles, shall be spaced apart
from existing utility poles or node support poles at the same distance as the spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than at a
minimum one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a utility pole or another node support pole. New poles must be ten (10) feet from a driveway, twelve (12)
feet from the dripline of existing trees, fifteen (15) feet from a pedestrian ramp, twenty (20) feet from a traffic signal pole, and eighteen (18) inches from
the paved area of a sidewalk. In nonresidential zoning districts, facilities shall be located between tenant spaces, storefront bays or adjoining properties
where their shared property lines intersect the right-of-way. In residential zoning districts, facilities shall be located where the shared property line
between two residential parcels intersects the right-of-way. Access by vehicles or pedestrians may not be blocked by poles.
(5) Attachments to city-owned service poles.
(A) In accordance with agreement. Installations on all service poles are restricted to network providers and shall be in accordance with an agreement.
The city manager, or his designee, may enter into these agreements on behalf of the city.
(B) Electrical meters. No electrical meters are allowed on service poles or screening walls.
(C) Required industry standard pole load analysis. For proposed installations on service poles network provider shall complete and submit to the city
an industry standard pole load analysis indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load.
(D) Height of attachments. All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade. If a network node attachment projects
toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above
grade.
(E) Installations on traffic signals. Installations on all traffic signal structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may
compromise the safety of the public. Location on signal arms is prohibited. Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall:
(i) Be encased in a conduit separate from the traffic light electronics;
(ii) Have an electric power connection separate from the traffic signal structure; and
(iii) Have an access point separate from the traffic signal structure.
(F) Installations on street signage. Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may
compromise the safety of the public. Installation of network node facilities on any street signage structure that has electronic equipment shall:
(i) Be encased in a conduit separate from any city signage electronics;
(ii) Have an electric power connection separate from the signage structure;
(iii) Have an access point separate from the signage structure.
(6) Height of equipment mounted on poles. Pole-mounted facilities shall be installed at least eight (8) feet above grade, and if a facility is projecting toward
the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above grade.
(7) Protrusion of equipment. Pole-mounted or structure-mounted facilities shall not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by
more than two (2) feet.
(8) Size of pole mounted equipment. Pole mounted enclosures may not be taller than five (5) feet. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are
not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment,
power transfer switches, cut-off switches and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
(9) Antenna size. Each antenna that does not have exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole: must be located inside an enclosure of
not more than six cubic feet in volume; may not exceed a height of three (3) feet above the existing structure or poles or extend the height of the structure on
which it is mounted by more than 10% above the preexisting height; and may not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by
more than two (2) feet. If an antenna has exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole, the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed
elements: must fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet; may not exceed a height of three (3) feet above the existing structure or pole
or extend the height of the structure on which it is mounted by more than 10% above the preexisting height; and may not protrude from the outer
circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two (2) feet. Antennas with exposed elements must be mounted flush with the pole near the top.
The cumulative size of other equipment associated with the equipment attached to an existing structure or pole may not: be more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
(10) Limitation on equipment on poles. There shall be no more than one network node on any one pole.
(11) Private pole owner permission. Network providers must have written approval of the utility pole owner for each specific pole address and location on
such pole. Written permission must be submitted with the application for a right-of-way permit.
(12) Electrical code. All poles must meet National Electrical Code clearance standards. Equipment attached to a utility pole must be installed in accordance
with the National Electrical Safety Code, subject to applicable codes, and the utility pole owner's construction standards.
(13) Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between
existing utility poles and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles, are exempted from the requirements for submitting a right-of-way
application, obtaining a right of-way permit, and payment of a right-of-way access fee.
(14) Prohibition on overhead facilities and overhead transport facilities. In order to protect, maintain, and promote the appearance and natural surroundings
in public parks and certain residential areas by avoiding the negative impact on the public of unsightly proliferation of poles in the right-of-way, facilities may
not be installed overhead in a public right-of-way if the public right-of-way is in a park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is both class E+ or smaller
and is in an area zoned residential or restricted to residential use by deed restrictions. All transport facilities must be underground in the above-mentioned
areas. Underground facilities are required for standard permit holders along type D or smaller thoroughfares.
(15) Underground construction and use of poles. As required by the subdivision ordinance of the city, and the comprehensive zoning ordinance as it relates
to overlay districts, and when required by general ordinances, deed restrictions, regulations or rules of the city or applicable state or federal law, and in order to
protect, maintain, and promote the appearance of areas within the city that have been designated as underground areas, to promote and protect the public health
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/376
by avoiding the intangible public harm or unsightly or out-of-character deployments, the agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's new
facilities shall be placed underground at agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's expense. Underground facilities must be buried at
least two (2) feet below surface level. Placing facilities underground does not preclude the use of otherwise acceptable ground-mounted equipment appurtenant
to underground facilities, unless such ground-mounted equipment is otherwise prohibited. Related equipment, such as pedestals, must be placed in accordance
with the city's applicable code requirements and rules, including all visibility easement requirements. In areas where existing facilities are aerial, the agency,
network provider, or public infrastructure contractor may install aerial facilities. If location is designated by the city to be an underground requirement area,
then an agency's or network provider's permit for the location of the facilities, at such location will be revoked ninety (90) calendar days after the designation,
with removal of said facilities at such location within ninety (90) calendar days of such designation, or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the city for the
transition of other overhead facilities. Placement of street-related poles and facilities above grade in the right of-way, including but not limited to stop signs and
streetlights, does not preclude an area from designation as an area requiring undergrounding and placement of facilities on street-related poles in an area
requiring undergrounding is prohibited.
(16) Ground equipment, parks and public art. For the safety of park patrons, particularly small children, to preserve the investment made by the community
in parks and public art, to protect, maintain, and promote the appearance and natural surroundings in public parks by avoiding the negative impact on the
public of out of-character deployments, and to allow full lines-of-sight near park property and public art, no ground equipment may be installed in a right-ofway
that is within a park, within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of the boundary line of a park, or within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of public art.
(17) Ground equipment, generally. Ground equipment shall be minimal and the least intrusive. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the
surrounding area, and to enhance the safety requirements of line-of-sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city engineer may deny a request for a
permit for a proposed location of ground equipment where existing ground equipment within one hundred fifty (150) feet already occupies a footprint of 28
cubic ft. or more to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. Ground equipment shall be of a neutral color, and use exterior building
materials that are compatible with surrounding structures, as determined by the planning director.
(18) Concealment and enclosure, generally. To the extent technically feasible, facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as reasonably possible in an
equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a
conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized. Guy wires, anchors, pedestals, boxes, and other above-grade facilities shall not fully
or partially encroach within a sidewalk area, including a clear vertical clearance of seven and one-half (7.5) feet above the sidewalk.
(19) Preserve sight visibility and access.
(A) No above-ground facilities shall be located closer than three (3) feet from the back of street curbs or edge of alley or within the sight visibility area.
(B) Accessibility to property may not be compromised by above-ground facilities except during construction.
(20) Historic district criteria.
(A) Stealth or concealment of facilities and poles shall be required by the city with decorative poles, in historic districts. Applications for placement of
facilities in a historic district must include proposed stealth or concealment measures and include decorative poles, design provided herein.
(B) Micro network nodes may not be lashed on lines in a historic district, a minor residential street abutting a residential district, or an area adjacent to
a park.
(C) Historic districts within the city are zoned as H-C, historic-cultural landmark overlay and RCR-H, residential conservation and revitalization, as
such zoning may be amended. Historic landmarks are those properties individually zoned as HC-L, historic-cultural-landmark as such zoning may be
amended.
(21) Utility easements. Above-ground facilities and poles are prohibited in a utility easement if such utility easement is not adjacent to and parallel with a
public way, except with the written permission of the underlying fee owner. The city may rely upon county appraisal records to determine the ownership of the
fee interest in the property. Poles must be spaced 150 feet or more from any existing pole. Applications for permit under section 14.03.199(b) must be
accompanied by a site plan. All other requirements of this division apply. This section shall not prohibit the replacement of existing poles or structures in such
utility easement. No facilities or poles are to be installed in an exclusive water or sewer easement.
(22) Colors. In order to avoid or remedy the intangible public harm of unsightly or out-of character deployments, all equipment mounted on a pole,
including antennas, must match the color of the pole. Colors for all facilities in historic districts must be in accordance with approved historic district design
guidelines.
(23) Temporary utilities. Temporary utilities may be located in nonstandard locations.
(24) General construction and maintenance requirements. Facilities and pole shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that does not:
(A) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right of-way;
(B) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
(C) Violate applicable codes, statutes, historic preservation laws, or other law;
(D) Interfere with the city's public safety infrastructure;
(E) Violate or conflict with this division; or
(F) Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. section 12101 et seq.) and the Texas Accessibly Standards.
(25) Compliance with AASHTO. All facilities in the right-of-way must meet the requirements and guidelines outlined in the AASHTO roadside design
guide in effect at the time of application.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.201 Appeals
(a) Applicability. Appeals may be filed pursuant to this section related to interpretations of this division, decisions of the city engineer related to the final denial,
suspension, or revocation of a permit, or if the applicant believes that the final denial of a permit materially inhibits the provision of service in violation of sections 253 or
332 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. However, the appeal process provided by this section shall not be available for criminal violations of this division. An appeal
filed pursuant to this section does not postpone the effectiveness of the final decision of the city engineering regarding denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. The
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/376
city engineer's decision is the final decision under Texas Local Government Code section 284.154(d). The city engineer may adopt rules regulating the process and
requirements for appeals.
(b) Appeal to city manager. A permittee or applicant may appeal interpretations or decisions referred to in subsection (a) above by filing a written appeal with the city
manager within seven (7) business days of receipt of denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the
basis for the aggrieved party's challenge to the city engineer's interpretation or decision under this division. The city manager may adopt rules regulating the process and
requirements for appeals.
(c) Issuance of decision by city manager. Decisions of the city manager shall be issued within ten (10) business days of receipt of the written appeal. Decisions of the
city manager shall be final. Failure to render a decision shall constitute a denial.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.202 Insurance requirements
(a) Agencies and network providers. Each agency or network provider applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of the each of the following types
of insurance and coverage limits. These insurance policies shall be underwritten by insurance companies with an A.M. Best Rating of A VI or better.
(1) Commercial general liability on an occurrence form with minimum limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00) aggregate. This coverage shall include the following:
(A) Products/completed operations to be maintained for one (1) year.
(B) Personal and advertising injury.
(C) Owners and contractors protective liability.
(D) Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards.
(2) Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit. This coverage shall include all
owned, hired and nonowned automobiles.
(3) Workers compensation and employers liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for coverage A and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
coverage B employer's liability is required.
(b) Public infrastructure contractors. Each public infrastructure contractor applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of insurance for the same
types of insurance coverages outlined in subsection (a) above; however, the policy limits under the general liability insurance shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. All other coverage provisions outlined in subsection (a) above shall apply.
(c) The method for proof of insurance is a certified copy of the insurance policy. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably
adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry, the agency,
network provider, or public infrastructure contractor require adjustment of the coverage.
(d) The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state or letters written by the agency in those instances where the state does not issue such letters,
which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, certificates of self-insurance must be approved in advance by the risk manager for the city.
(e) The agency, network provider or public infrastructure contractor shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage
required by this section to the city. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall exercise
reasonable efforts to pay for and accomplish the change.
(f) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the engineering department. An insurance certificate
obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval, through the city's insurance advisor. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect
changing liability limits. An agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that
may develop which may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify the city.
(g) Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period of time for which a permit shall be issued or the space occupied. Insurance coverage must be
available on a “per project” basis.
(h) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the agency or public infrastructure contractor and include the city
as an additional insured. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(i) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city.
(j) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall pay premiums and assessments. A company that issues an insurance policy has no recourse
against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor must provide that
the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(k) Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance company to notify the city in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days before canceling or failing to
renew the policy or before reducing policy limits or coverages.
(l) Each agency must comply with the insurance requirements in this section, unless the agency's current franchise or license agreement with the city specifically
addresses insurance requirements, in which case the franchise or license agreement shall control.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.203 Indemnification
(a) To the extent authorized by law, each certificated telecommunications provider, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor placing facilities in the
public rights-of-way shall indemnify, and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless from and against all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses,
expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature,
including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor any agent, officer, director,
representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the certificated telecommunications provider, agency, network provider or public infrastructure contractor, while
installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/376
(b) The indemnity provided by this subsection does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or
subcontractors. If a certificated telecommunications provider, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor and the city are found jointly liable by a court
of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity
available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state law.
(c) This section is solely for the benefit of the city and the certificated telecommunication provider, agency, network provider or public infrastructure contractor and
does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.204 Performance warranty/guarantee
(a) Any warranty made hereunder shall serve as security for the performance of work necessary to repair the public rights-of-way if the agency, network provider, or
public infrastructure contractor fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the work under the permit.
(b) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor, by acceptance of the permit, expressly warrants and guarantees complete performance of the work
affecting the city's right-of-way in a good and workmanlike manner acceptable to the city and warrants and guarantees all such work done for a period of one (1) year
after the date of acceptance and agrees to maintain upon demand and to make all necessary repairs during the one-year period. This warranty shall include all repairs and
actions needed as a result of:
(1) Defects in workmanship;
(2) Settling of fills or excavations;
(3) Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and specifications;
(4) Failure to barricade;
(5) Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work;
(6) Restoration of improvements including, but not limited to, landscaping and irrigation; or
(7) Any other violation of this division or the ordinances of the city.
(c) The one-year warranty period shall run from the date of the city's acceptance of the work which shall be the date of the letter of acceptance issued by the city to the
agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor. If repairs are required during the one-year warranty period, those repairs need only be warranted until the
end of the initial one-year period starting with the date of acceptance. It is not necessary that a new one-year warranty be provided for subsequent repairs after
probationary acceptance.
(d) At any time prior to completion of the one-year warranty period, the city may notify the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor of any needed
repairs. Such repairs shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours if the defects are determined by the city to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety, and
welfare. Nonemergency repairs shall be completed within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.205 Annual and monthly rates for right-of-way rental
(a) Fees for network nodes. Fees for network nodes shall be based on reasonable fair market value of the use allowed in accordance with the anti-gift provisions of the
state constitution. The initial rental fee per node shall be $2,000.00 annually and shall be adjusted each January 1st to reflect changes in the annual revised consumer price
index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless otherwise provided by valid, constitutional, state law.
(b) Fees for service poles. Fees for service poles shall be based on reasonable fair market value of the use allowed in accordance with the anti-gift provisions of the state
constitution. The initial rental fee per pole shall be $1,000.00 annually and shall be adjusted each January 1st to reflect changes in the annual revised consumer price index
for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless otherwise provided by valid, constitutional, state law. A network
provider must pay the an amount equal to the lower of the greatest amount allowed by Texas Local Government Code chapter 284 and the greatest amount allowed by
federal law, as further amended, per year per service pole for collocation of a network node on a city-owned service pole. The monthly fee shall begin six (6) months from
the date of permit approval. Fees will continue until the owner of the network node notices the city of the abandonment of the facility pursuant to section 14.03.217.
(c) Fees for transport facilities. Fees for transport facilities shall be based on reasonable fair market value of the use allowed in accordance with the anti-gift provisions
of the state constitution. The initial rental fee shall be a minimum of $28.00 per node monthly and shall be adjusted each January 1st to reflect changes in the annual
revised consumer price index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, a published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless otherwise provided by valid, constitutional,
state law. Late fees may be assessed as allowed by law.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.206 Registration
(a) In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors placing facilities or engaging in
construction, excavation, encroachments, and work activities within or upon any public right-of-way must register with the city. Registration must be renewed annually on
or before January 31st. Annual renewal is required to allow the city to contact the current owners of facilities when emergencies arise and to coordinate infrastructure in
the right-of-way. The registration form to be used may be obtained from the engineering department. If a registration is not renewed, and subject to sixty (60) calendar
days notification to the agency, all facilities owned by the agency within the city will be deemed to have been abandoned and shall become the property of the city. When
any information provided for the registration changes, the agency or public infrastructure contractor shall notify the city of the change no more than thirty (30) calendar
days after the date the change is made. Registration shall include:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner of the facilities to be located in the public rights-of-way, including the business name, assumed
name, or trade name under which the agency operates or under which it has operated within the past five (5) years. In the case of a public infrastructure
contractor, the name, address, and telephone number(s) of the public infrastructure contractor and the name, address, and telephone number(s) of the developer
for whom the public infrastructure contractor is working.
(2) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) who will be contact person(s) for the owner.
(3) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of any contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) who will be working in the public rights-of-way on behalf of
the owner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/376
(4) The name and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact for the owner who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day.
(5) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) who will be attending the utility coordination meetings for the owner.
(6) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) who will be receiving plans of city construction projects on behalf of the owner.
(7) The name, address, and telephone number(s) of the person who will be responsible for receiving notification of abandonment issues on behalf of the
owner.
(8) Proof of insurance as required by section 14.03.202.
(9) For agencies that are certificated telecommunications providers, a copy of the notice of approval issued by the public utility commission of the state that
grants the certificated telecommunications provider a service provider certificate of operating authority (SPCOA) or certificate of convenience and necessity
(CCN).
(10) The ordinance number of any franchise or license, if any, issued by the city that authorizes the owner to use the public rights-of-way.
(b) Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a permit. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall update and keep current its
registration with the city at all times.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.207 Plans of record
(a) Any agency or network provider with facilities in the public rights-of-way shall submit plans of record in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) A city street map marked in such a manner as to evidence which type D and above thoroughfares along which the agency or network provider has placed
facilities (not including boxes and other appurtenances) shall serve as the plans of record for the agency or network provider. The address and GPS coordinates
must be included for any pole or equipment collocated on a pole. The city street map will be made available in a digital format upon request to the city
engineer.
(2) On or before January 31st of each calendar year following the initial submittal of its plans of record, an agency or network provider shall provide to the
city engineer plans of record that show all installations of new facilities, and all changes, additions, abandonments, and relocations relating to existing facilities
completed in the previous calendar year, including the address and GPS coordinates for such facilities.
(b) Plans of record shall not include information that is a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law. Information marked
“proprietary” or “confidential” will not be accepted by the city. Location information is not a trade secret or proprietary/confidential information, and this subsection may
not be construed to authorize an agency or network provider to fail to provide location information.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.208 General rights-of-way use and construction
(a) Responsibility for employees, courtesy and drug policy. Agencies, network providers and infrastructure contractors shall be responsible and liable for the acts and
omissions of their employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, and subcontractors in connection with the installations
of facilities in the right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's acts or omissions. Work in the public
rights-of-way shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights, and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. Citizen
satisfaction must be a priority in using the right-of-way. Agencies, network providers, and infrastructure contractors shall train their employees to be customer serviceoriented
and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its facilities in the right-of-way. Employees shall be clean, courteous,
efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the public. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the employee is not
interacting in a positive and polite manner with citizens, he or she shall request that the agency, network provider or infrastructure contractor take all remedial steps to
conform to these standards. It is the policy of the city to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, sale, or
use of illegal drugs or alcohol by agency's, network provider's or infrastructure contractor's employees, contractors, subcontractors, or vendors while on city rights-of-way
is prohibited.
(b) Minimal interference. Agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's facilities shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as not to
interfere with sewers, water pipes, or any other property of the city, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures, or other facilities that may have been
laid in the rights-of-way by, or under, the city's authority. The agency's, network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's facilities shall be located, erected, and
maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with improvements the city may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct the free use of the rights-of-way or other public property, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction,
repair, operation, or removal thereof, and shall not obstruct or impede traffic. The agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor shall not cause any interference
with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other city safety communications components.
(c) Responsibilities under permit; location of facilities.
(1) A permit does not relieve an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor of the responsibility to coordinate with other utilities and to
protect existing facilities. An agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor working in the right-of-way is responsible for obtaining line locates
from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the geographic information system or the plans of record
does not satisfy this requirement.
(2) In performing location of facilities in the public rights-of-way in preparation for construction under a permit, agency, network provider, or public
infrastructure contractor shall compile all information obtained regarding its or any other facilities in the public rights-of-way related to a particular permit and
shall make that information available to the city in a written and verified format acceptable to the city engineer.
(3) Protection of utilities. Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall
contact the state one-call system or any other company operating under the one call statute and, to the extent required by chapter 251 of the Texas Utilities
Code, make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local government departments, and all other agencies that might have facilities in the
area of work to determine possible conflicts.
(A) Field locations shall be marked prior to commencing work. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall support and
protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus that may be affected by the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches
subsequent to construction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/376
(B) A person shall only use a water-based paint in the public right-of-way to mark the location of existing underground utilities. A person commits an
offense, if a marking he makes in the public right-of-way to mark the location of existing underground utilities remains visible longer than sixty (60)
calendar days after being applied.
(d) Underground construction and use of poles.
(1) Facilities shall be maintained in an appropriate manner.
(2) Should the city desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor, the
agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall cooperate with the city in any construction by the agency, network provider, or public
infrastructure contractor that involves trenching or boring, provided that the city has first notified the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor in some manner that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area in which the agency's, network provider's or public infrastructure
contractor's construction is occurring. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall allow the city to place its facilities in the agency's,
network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's trenches and bores, provided the city incurs any incremental increase in cost of the trenching and
boring. The city shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities buried in the agency's, network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's
trenches and bores under this subsection.
(e) Joint trenching.
(1) The public rights-of-way have a finite capacity for containing facilities. The city engineer may require an agency, network provider, or public
infrastructure contractor to share trench space to minimize the disruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(2) All facilities shall meet any applicable local, state, and federal clearance and other safety requirements, be adequately grounded and anchored, and meet
the provisions of any contracts executed between agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor and the other joint user. Agency, network
provider, or public infrastructure contractor may, at its option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the joint user for its costs.
(f) Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation will exceed a depth of five (5) feet, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor
must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term “excavation” includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen
excavation subject to collapse. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
standards and regulations.
(g) Erosion control. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies
with city, state and federal guidelines. All installations shall comply with TxDOT Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, as amended.
(h) On-site requirements. Agencies, network providers and public infrastructure contractors subject to this division must have a minimum of one (1) English-speaking
representative at the site where work is being performed at all times. Additionally, each of agency's, or network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's vehicles
shall bear a sign identifying the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor that owns the vehicles.
(i) Electrical supply. Agencies, network providers and public infrastructure contracts are responsible for obtaining any required electrical power services to their
facilities. The city shall not be liable for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the facilities, including without limitation; stoppages or shortages
caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the facilities or the act or omission of any other tenant of the structure or user of the right-of-way,
or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. Generators and back-up generators are prohibited in the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.209 No directional boring zones
In the city, the public infrastructure must be maintained and protected by all agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors. The public health, safety
and welfare is at risk when damages to water and sewer mains occur. To protect the water and sewer system, no person, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor will be allowed to directionally bore longitudinally with water and sewer mains that are twelve (12) inches or larger. The installation of facilities in the public
rights-of way will be installed by open excavation to assure the protection of the city's water and sewer system. The city has available mapping that identifies such mains.
The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor is responsible for obtaining and using this information in the design of new facilities. When boring is
acceptable, pothole process is required for twelve (12) inches or larger water and sewer mains or any main that is deemed critical by the city. Bore time is restricted to the
following schedule: 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to noon on Friday and no bore on Saturday and Sunday. Missiles are not considered
directional boring and are not allowed unless otherwise approved by the city. (Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.210 Joint planning and construction; coordination of excavations
(a) Excavations in city rights-of-way disrupt and interfere with the public use of the city streets and damage the pavement and landscaping. The purpose of this section
is to reduce this disruption, interference and damage by promoting better coordination among agencies, network providers, or public infrastructure contractors making
excavations in public rights-of-way and between these agencies, network providers and public infrastructure contractors and the city. Better coordination will assist in
minimizing the number of excavations being made wherever feasible and will ensure the excavations in city rights-of-way are, to the maximum extent possible, performed
before, rather than after, the reconstruction of the streets by the city.
(b) Utility coordination meeting.
(1) The city will hold a utility coordination meeting a minimum of two (2) times per year. The purpose of the meeting is for the city to inform agencies,
network providers, and public infrastructure contractors of proposed and current community investment projects in the city and also for the agencies, network
providers, and public infrastructure contractors to inform each other and the city of current and future projects. Each agency, network provider and public
infrastructure contractor is encouraged to attend and participate in the meetings of the city, of which the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor will be made aware.
(2) The city will notify the affected agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors at least six (6) months before construction will start on
a city project. Preliminary plans will be provided to the affected agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors at least four (4) months
before the project is to start construction. Final plans will be provided to the affected agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors at least
two (2) months before the project is to start construction.
(3) Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor
shall work with other agencies, network providers, and public infrastructure contractors so as to reduce as much as possible the number of right-of-way cuts
within the city.
(c) Excavation master plan. In addition to participating in the utility coordination meetings, any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor owning,
operating or installing facilities in public rights-of-way, providing water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, video, or other utility services, shall meet annually with the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/376
city engineer, at the city engineer's request, to discuss agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's excavation master plan. At such meeting, to the
extent not already in possession of the city, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall submit documentation, in a form required by the city
engineer, showing the location of the agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's existing facilities in the public rights-of-way.
(1) Agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall discuss with the city engineer its excavation master plan and identify planned major
excavation work in the city. The city engineer may make his own record on a map, drawing, or other documentation of each agency's or network provider's or
public infrastructure contractor's planned major excavation work in the city; provided, however, that no such document prepared by the city engineer shall
identify a particular entity, or the planned major excavation work of that particular entity.
(2) Each agency or public infrastructure contractor shall submit annually, on or before March 31st, a revised and updated excavation master plan. As used in
this subsection, the term “planned major excavation work” refers to any future excavations planned by the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor when the excavation master plan or update is submitted that will affect any public rights-of-way for more than five (5) business days, provided that
the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall not be required to identify future major excavations planned to occur more than three (3)
years after the date that the agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's master plan or update is discussed.
(3) Between the annual meetings to discuss planned major excavation work, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall inform the
city engineer of any substantial changes in the planned major excavation work discussed at the annual meeting. The city will not preclude an agency, network
provider, or public infrastructure contractor from obtaining a permit for a project that was inadvertently excluded from the agency's, network provider's or
infrastructure contractor's excavation master plan or was unknown at the time the plan was created.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.211 Minimizing the impacts of work in the rights-of-way
(a) Noise, dust, debris, hours of work. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall conduct work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance of the work, the agency, network provider, or public
infrastructure contractor shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris. No work shall be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except with the written permission of the city engineer, or in case of an emergency. Bore time is restricted to the following schedule: 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to noon on Friday and no bore on Saturday and Sunday. Missiles are not considered directional boring and are not allowed unless otherwise
approved by the city.
(b) Trash and construction materials.
(1) Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall maintain the work site so that:
(A) Trash and construction materials are contained so that they are not blown off of the construction site.
(B) Trash is removed from a construction site often enough so that it does not become a health, fire, or safety hazard.
(C) Trash dumpsters and storage or construction trailers are not placed in the street without written approval of the city engineer.
(2) Agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor may only use approved trash haulers when working in the public rights-of-way.
(c) Deposit of dirt and material on roadways. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall eliminate the tracking of mud or debris upon any
street or sidewalk. Equipment and trucks used during construction, excavation, or work activity shall be cleaned of mud and debris prior to leaving any work site.
(d) Protection of trees and landscaping. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features as
required by the city and shall be responsible for supplemental maintenance and watering during construction and until restoration is complete and in accordance with the
performance warranty made the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor under this division. All protective measures shall be provided at the expense
of the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor. Agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor and its contractors, and agents shall obtain
written permission from the city manager before trimming trees hanging over its facilities in the right-of-way. When directed by the city manager, agency, network
provider or infrastructure contractor shall trim under the supervision and direction of the parks director. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims
arising from agency's, network provider's, or infrastructure contractor's actions under this section.
(e) Protection of paved surfaces from equipment damage. Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever outriggers are placed on any paved
surface. Tracked vehicles with grousers are not permitted on paved surface unless specific precautions are taken to protect the surface. Agency, network provider, or
public infrastructure contractor shall be responsible for any damage caused to the pavement by the operation of such equipment and shall repair such surfaces. Failure to
do so will result in the use of the agency's, network provider's, or public infrastructure contractor's performance warranty/guarantee by the city to repair any damage, and,
possibly, the requirement of additional warrantee(s).
(f) Protection of property. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall protect from injury any public rights-of-way and adjoining property
by providing adequate support and taking other necessary measures. Agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall, at its own expense, shore up and
protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting
from failure to properly protect and carry out work in the public rights-of-way.
(g) Clean-up. As the work progresses, all public rights-of-way and private property shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris. All
clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor. Agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor shall restore any disturbed area to its original condition. All restoration work must be completed within ten (10) business days following the date of substantial
completion of the work in the right-of-way. Such clean-up and restoration shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city engineer.
(h) Vehicle parking. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall make provisions for employee and construction vehicle parking so that
neighborhood parking adjacent to a work site is not impacted.
(i) Walkways. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall maintain an adequate and safe unobstructed walkway around a construction site
or blocked sidewalk in conformance with city code.
(j) Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor receives
notice thereof, the agency, network provider or infrastructure contractor, shall remove all graffiti on any of its facilities located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not
relieve the agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation.
(k) Signage.
(1) Agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area
on the cabinet of the facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/376
ground notification signs) or the city manager.
(2) Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor shall not post any other signage or
advertising on the facilities or poles.
(l) Ownership. No part, of any facilities placed on the right-of-way pursuant to this division will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of,
the right-of-way, except for facilities accepted as city facilities by the city engineer in writing. All other facilities placed in the right-of-way pursuant to this division will
be and remain the property of the agency or network provider and may be removed by the agency or network provider at any time, provided the agency or network
provider shall obtain permits or give notice as required by this division.
(m) Notification. Each agency, network provider, and public infrastructure contractor shall notify the public works department forty-eight (48) hours before undertaking
any work in the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.212 Traffic control
(a) No person, agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor may close a public street without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. An
application for a maintenance permit and a traffic-control plan shall be submitted to the city engineer no less than seven (7) business days prior to the date of the proposed
closure unless an emergency exists, in which case immediate notice must be given to the city engineer. If a proposed construction project is to be made in the public rightof-
way dedicated to the state, a city permit shall be required in addition to any and all permits required by the state.
(b) When it is necessary to obstruct traffic, an application for a maintenance permit and traffic-control plan shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to starting
construction. No permit will be issued until the traffic-control plan is approved by the city engineer. No agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall
block access to and from private property, block emergency vehicles, block access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve
housing structures, or any other vital equipment unless the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor provides the city with written verification of
written notice delivered to the owner or occupant of the facility, equipment, or property at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance.
(c) When necessary for public safety, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall employ flag persons whose duties shall be to control traffic
around or through the construction site. The use of flag persons may be required by the city engineer.
(d) Unless approved by the city engineer, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall not impede rush hour traffic on major thoroughfares
during the morning or evening rush hours. No construction shall be performed nor shall any traffic lane be closed to traffic during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, without the written approval of the city engineer.
(e) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to no more than two (2) hours at any time outside of the morning and evening rush hours unless approved by
the city engineer.
(f) Traffic-control devices and barricades, as defined in part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, or any successor publication thereto, must be used
whenever it is necessary to close a traffic lane or sidewalk. Traffic-control devices and barricades are to be supplied by the agency, network provider, or public
infrastructure contractor. If used at night, they must be reflectorized and must be illuminated or have barricade warning lights.
(g) Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, or any successor publication thereto, shall be used as a guide for all maintenance and construction
signing. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall illustrate on the permit the warning and control devices proposed for use. At the direction
of the city engineer, such warning and control devices shall be modified.
(h) The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit if proposed construction activity will substantially interfere with vehicular traffic flow on major thoroughfares or is
inconsistent with procedures of this division.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.213 Requirements for street cuts and repairs
(a) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all street cuts in such a manner as to avoid a hazard to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic until permanently repaired.
(1) When emergency repairs are deemed necessary by the city engineer to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the agency, network provider, or
public infrastructure contractor that is responsible for the cut shall be notified immediately. If the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor
does not provide an acceptable schedule for making the emergency repair within eight (8) hours of being notified, the repairs will be performed by the city, and
the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor will be billed for the repairs necessary to complete the project, including clean up.
(2) Agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor will be required to maintain the interim cut repair until they have completed final repairs.
(3) Traffic bearing steel plates shall be utilized on all concrete paving cuts until required curing is accomplished. Asphalt shall be used to provide smooth
ramps at the edges. Plates or asphalt may be used for temporary repairs.
(b) All damage caused directly or indirectly to the street surface or subsurface outside the pavement cut area shall be regarded as a part of the street cut. These areas, as
established by the city inspector, will be included in the total area repaired.
(c) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall notify the public works department immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or
privately owned.
(d) Construction methods.
(1) The city's special provisions to standard specifications for public works construction and the city's standard construction details shall govern the cutting
and restoration of street and alley pavements in the city. These requirements shall apply equally to any person, public infrastructure contractor, network
provider, agency or city department who makes cuts and repairs to streets and alleys in the city. Any above or in-ground equipment shall not be partially or
completely within the sidewalk area, or within eighteen (18) inches of the paved sidewalk, unless otherwise approved by the city.
(2) Permanent repairs of utility cuts in existing streets, alleys or easements will be completed by the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure
contractor within fourteen (14) calendar days of beginning the work. If an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor does not believe that it
will be able to meet this schedule, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor must contact the city engineer concerning an alternative
schedule for the repairs. Any alternative schedule must be approved by the city engineer prior to the beginning of the work. The agency, network provider, or
public infrastructure contractor will be responsible for any maintenance of the repair for a period of one (1) year after the repair is complete. Failure to do so
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/376
will result in the use of the agency's, network provider's or public infrastructure contractor's performance warranty/guarantee by the city to repair any damage,
and, possibly, the requirement of additional warrantee(s) and/or the denial of future permits.
(3) Steel plates left in the right-of-way after repairs are completed will be removed by the city and become the city's property.
(4) Excavation in street or alley pavements should begin with an air-hammer shovel, a pavement breaker or other equipment that will not damage the
pavement outside an approximate width of the ditch prior to beginning trenching operations. All street excavations will be saw cut before the street is repaired.
Full depth saw cuts are required. If the excavation is to pass under where the curb is installed without dummy/expansion joint, the agency, network provider, or
public infrastructure contractor may saw cut a smooth line one (1) foot beyond each side of the disturbed base. If no damage to curb is evident to the city
inspector, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor may pump concrete under curb and gutter on cuts less than one (1) foot wide. The
city inspector will make this determination prior to concrete being placed under existing curb and gutter.
(e) Notification of homeowners' and homeowner associations. When an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor is installing more than five
hundred (500) linear feet of underground facilities, the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall notify in writing all homeowner associations,
from information maintained by the city, and individual homeowners along the route. Door hangers are an acceptable form of written notification. This notification shall
give information about the project, not limited to the proposed location of the facilities, the time length for construction and a contact person to report any problems. The
agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor must also contact all homeowner associations concerning the location of any underground improvements.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.214 Standards for repair and restoration
(a) Agency, network provider, public infrastructure contractor responsibility. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall be fully responsible
for the cost and actual performance of all work in the public rights-of way. The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall do all work in
conformance with any and all engineering regulations, construction specifications, and design standards adopted by the city. These standards shall apply to all work in the
public rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated in the permit.
(b) All restoration shall result in a work site condition equal to or better than the condition in which the site existed prior to construction. Restoration must be approved
by the city engineer. In addition to the regulations, specifications, and standards referred to in subsection (a), the following provisions shall apply to work in the public
rights-of-way of the city:
(1) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer and the property owner. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to:
(A) Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work or better by sodding, as directed by the city;
(B) Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(C) Backfilling of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes which must be done within seven (7) business days after excavation of the bore
pits, potholes, trenches or other holes, unless other safety requirements are approved by the city engineer;
(D) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(E) Restoration of excavation site to city specifications;
(F) Restoration of all landscaping trees, shrubs, ground cover, and sprinkler systems; and
(G) Repairing and replacing existing erosion control devices that have been damaged or destroyed as a part of the work.
(2) All locate flags shall be removed during the clean-up process by the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor at the completion of the
work.
(3) Restoration must be made in a timely manner as agreed upon by the city engineer and the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor. If
restoration is not satisfactory and/or is not performed within the agreed upon timeframe, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all
work previously permitted but not complete, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete, or the city
may complete the work and bill the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor for the repairs performed by the city.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.215 Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets
(a) Generally. No agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor shall cause an open trench excavation or potholing of facilities in the pavement of any
public right-of-way for a period of three (3) years from the completion of construction or resurfacing except in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(b) Criteria for approval. No permit for excavation in the right-of-way of new streets shall be approved unless the city engineer finds that all of the following criteria
have been met:
(1) Boring or jacking without disturbing the pavement is not practical due to physical characteristics of the street or alley or other utility conflicts.
(2) Alternative utility alignments that do not involve excavating the street or alley are found to be impracticable.
(3) The proposed excavation cannot reasonably be delayed after the three-year deferment period has lapsed.
(c) Exemptions for emergency operations. Emergency maintenance operations shall be limited to circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the
restoration of customer service. Agencies, network providers, or public infrastructure contractors with prior authorization from the city engineer to perform emergency
maintenance operations within the public rights-of-way shall be exempted from this section. Any agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor
commencing operations under this section shall submit detailed engineering plans, construction methods, and remediation plans no later than the next business day after
initiating the emergency maintenance operation.
(d) Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets and alleys. The streets shall be restored and repaired in accordance with design
and construction standards adopted by the city and guaranteed in accordance with section 14.03.204.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.216 Relocation of facilities for public improvements
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/376
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, water, and
other pipelines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes. in aerial facilities in, across, along, over, or
under a public street, alley, or public rights-of-way occupied by an agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the
grade of streets.
(b) The agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor must relocate its facilities at its own expense in a timely manner and prior to the start of
construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor to the enforcement
provisions contained herein.
(c) A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects, unless the adjustments are exempt under section 14.03.198(b).
(d) If the agency, network provider or public infrastructure contractor fails to remove or relocate its facilities as requested within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of
the request, then the city shall be entitled to remove the facilities at the sole cost and expense of the agency, network provider, or infrastructure contractor without further
notice. Agency or network provider shall, within thirty (30) calendar days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable expenses
incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the facilities. A hold may be placed on any permits not approved until payment
is received.
(e) The duty to remove and relocate at the agency, network provider, or public infrastructure contractor's expense is not contingent on the availability of an alternative
location acceptable for relocation.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 14.03.217 Abandonment and removal of facilities
(a) If a registration is not renewed, and subject to sixty (60) calendar days notification to the agency all facilities owned by the agency within the city will be deemed to
have been abandoned and shall become the property of the city. The city has appropriated $0 to pay for the cost of any removal or storage of facilities placed in the rightof-
way, as authorized under this division, and no other funds are allocated.
(b) Any agency or network provider that intends to discontinue use of any facilities within the public rights-of-way shall notify the city engineer in writing of the intent
to discontinue use. Such notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be discontinued, including the address and GPS coordinates of any pole, a date of
discontinuance of use, which date shall not be less than thirty (30) calendar days from the date such notice is submitted to the city engineer. Upon receipt of notice of
discontinuance of use, the city shall have a right of first refusal to acquire agency's or network provider's facilities with the cost for such facilities to be negotiated by the
city and the agency or network provider.
(c) Agency or network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove or relocate its facilities if ordered to do so by the city pursuant to this
division. Agency or network provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual costs of removal of facilities if agency or network provider fails to promptly disconnect,
remove and relocate its facilities. Payment must be made within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of an invoice for the actual costs from the city.
(d) The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by the agency, network provider or infrastructure contractor for facilities or related ground equipment that
have been removed.
(Ordinance 19-017 adopted 4/2/19)
ARTICLE 14.04 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 14.04.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Park. A public park, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
Vehicle. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description.
Exception is made of baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city parks.
(1978 Code, sec. 20-1)
Sec. 14.04.002 Enforcement
(a) Officials. The director of parks and recreation and the park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
article.
(b) Ejection. The director and the park attendants shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article.
(c) Seizure of property. The director and the park attendants shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park used in violation of
this article.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-8; 1978 Code, sec. 20-3)
Sec. 14.04.003 Park property regulations; wild animals and birds; hours
(a) Buildings and other property. No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts of appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal; fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition; or dig or remove any soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants or
materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment or other means.
(b) Trees, shrubbery, and lawns. No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or
plant. No person shall dig or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(c) Wild animals, birds, etc. No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight. No person
shall give or offer or attempt to give to any animal any known noxious substances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/376
(d) Hours. All city parks, other than open areas adjacent to the Civic Center complex, shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or as otherwise
posted. It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon the parks of the city described herein during hours that the park is closed. Parks may be opened at other times at the
discretion of the city manager.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-2; Ordinance 91-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/19/91; Ordinance 91-50, sec. 1, adopted 6/4/91; 1978 Code, sec. 20-4; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 2, adopted
5/8/07)
Sec. 14.04.004 Sanitation
(a) Pollution of waters. No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water of any fountain, pond, lake or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters.
(b) Refuse and trash. No person shall bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in any park or left anywhere on the ground thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-3; 1978 Code, sec. 20-5)
Sec. 14.04.005 Traffic
(a) Motor vehicle laws apply. No person shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state and city motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and
operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this article.
(b) Enforcement of traffic regulations. No person shall fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct
traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued by the director.
(c) Obey traffic signs. No person shall fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property.
(d) Speed of vehicles. No person shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding twenty (20) miles an hour, except upon such roads as the director may
designate by posted signs for faster travel.
(e) Operation confined to roads. No person shall drive any vehicle on any area except the designated park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director of parks.
(f) Parking. No person shall park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat
and with instructions of any attendant who may be present. No person shall double park a vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official.
(g) Bicycles. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before
overtaking and passing any pedestrian.
(h) Horseback riding. No person shall ride a horse except on designated bridle trails.
(1958 Code, secs. 25-4, 25-5(g); 1978 Code, sec. 20-6; Ordinance 15-017, sec. 1, adopted 6/16/15)
Sec. 14.04.006 Hunting; trapping; discharging firearms
No person shall hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring guns, slings or any other
form of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human safety or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping
device. Shooting into areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. (1958 Code, sec. 25-5(a); 1978 Code, sec. 20-7)
Sec. 14.04.007 Picnic areas
(a) No person shall picnic or lunch in places other than those designated for that purpose. Activities in such areas shall be limited when necessary to prevent congestion
and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
(b) No person shall violate the regulations and use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches, which follows generally the rule of “first come, first
served.”
(c) No person shall use any portion of the picnic areas or any other buildings or structures therein for the purposes of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons
except with special permit from the director.
(d) No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other
refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-5(b)–(e); 1978 Code, sec. 20-8)
Sec. 14.04.008 Games
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes
except in areas set apart for such form of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball or quoits is prohibited except on
the fields or areas provided therefor. (1958 Code, sec. 25-5(f); 1978 Code, sec. 20-9)
Sec. 14.04.009 Behavior
(a) Intoxication. No person shall enter or remain within any park while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(b) Fireworks and explosives. No person shall bring or have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecracker, torpedo,
rocket or other fireworks or explosives or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition shall not apply to a
fireworks display as authorized and for which a permit has been issued by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/376
(c) Dress. No person shall appear at any place in other than proper clothing. With the exception of the restricted bathing areas, “properly clothed” shall be construed to
prohibit the wearing of trunks or clothing that does not cover the upper portion of the body.
(d) Soliciting. No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.
(e) Fires. No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as made or designated by the director. No person shall drop,
throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park areas.
(f) Games of chance. No person shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
(g) Loitering and boisterousness. No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other park property; engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language; or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
(h) Alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, consume or possess any alcoholic beverage within any park of the city. The prohibition against sale, consumption or
possession of alcoholic beverages shall not apply as follows:
(1) Within Riverfront Park so long as the sale is to, and possession and consumption is by, persons who are attending functions which are sponsored by
groups or organizations and which are held in conjunction with the rental and use of facilities controlled by the Civic Center complex.
(2) Within the clubhouse of the Henry Homberg Golf Course or on the golf course itself, pursuant to the authorized sale of alcoholic beverages by the golf
course operators;
(3) Within any city park, so long as the sale, consumption, and possession of alcohol is only by and/or as a result of the purchase, dispensing or being given
in conjunction with a city-sponsored event.
(4) Within the facilities or premises located at the Beaumont Botanical Gardens, so long as the sale is to, and possession and consumption is by, persons who
are attending functions which are sponsored by groups or organizations and which are held in conjunction with the rental and use of facilities or premises
controlled by the Beaumont Council of Garden Clubs. Premises is defined to mean any building or portion of a building, public driveway, walkway, grounds,
parking lot or other parking areas.
(i) Glass beverage containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess, in any form, any glass beverage container in any area situated within a city park as
that term is defined in section 14.04.001 hereof.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply where such glass container is used or possessed inside or within any of the enclosed perimeters,
structures, or businesses within a park.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any business establishment or person situated within a park other than a business establishment located in those areas described in
subsection (1) above to sell or offer for sale any beverage in a glass container for on- or off-premises consumption use.
(j) Sound-producing devices. No person shall use, operate or allow to be used or operated any device for the reproducing or augmentation of sound in such manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of persons in a city park. The operation of any such sound-reproducing or augmentation device in such manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the source of the sound shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. For the sound to be “plainly audible,”
words or phrases need not be distinguishable and bass reverberations are sufficient. This prohibition shall not apply to city-sponsored entertainment events in parks.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-6; Ordinance 75-65, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/75; Ordinance 77-102, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/77; Ordinance 83-62, sec. 1, adopted 6/14/83; Ordinance 83-
143, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/83; Ordinance 84-114, sec. 1, adopted 9/11/84; Ordinance 85-25, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/85; Ordinance 92-52, sec. 1, adopted 7/14/92; Ordinance
96-25, secs. 1, 2, adopted 5/7/96; 1978 Code, sec. 20-10; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 3, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 15-026, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/15; Ordinance 16-008, sec. 1,
adopted 2/2/16)
Sec. 14.04.010 Merchandising; advertising; signs
(a) Vending and peddling. No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale
or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director.
(b) Advertising. No person shall announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
(c) Signs. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any signs, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
[erected] any sign whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public land or highway or roads adjacent to the park.
(1958 Code, sec. 25-7; 1978 Code, sec. 20-11)
Sec. 14.04.011 Sterling Pruitt Activity Center
Nonresidents of the city over the age of eighteen (18) years shall be charged a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per usage for the use of the Sterling Pruitt Activity Center. Those
wishing to use the Sterling Pruitt Activity Center will be required, upon request, to provide a photo identification card to verify their resident or nonresident status.
(Ordinance 03-077, sec. 1, adopted 9/23/03; 1978 Code, sec. 20-12; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 4, adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 14.04.012 Henry Homberg Golf Course
9 Holes 18 Holes
Green fees:
Weekday $10.00 $16.00
Weekend $13.00 $21.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/376
Senior (age 60+), military (valid ID
required) and youth (under 18)
Weekday $8.00 $9.00
Weekend $10.00 $12.00
9 Holes 18 Holes
Cart fees – daily: $8.00 $13.00
Driving range $4.00 per bag
Annual membership fees:
Age 60+ $325.00 plus tax
Under age 60 $525.00 plus tax
(Benefit: Unlimited green fees Monday
through Friday, cart not included; 1/2
price green fees on weekend)
Special rates: The city manager may approve other rates for tournaments, specials,
and online booking.
(Ordinance 08-091, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/08; Ordinance 13-048, sec. 1, adopted 8/13/13; Ordinance 18-063 adopted 10/23/18)
Sec. 14.04.013 Beaumont Municipal Tennis Center fees and charges
(a) Fees (tax included).
Resident Nonresident
(Open to 4:00 p.m.) Free $4.00 per player
After 4:00 p.m.) $4.00 per player $5.00 per player
Junior (under 18) and Seniors (65+) $2.00 per player $3.00 per player
* Rates per player are 1.5 hours of play. The fee for playing on the covered courts is an additional $2.00 per player.
* Special rates: The city manager may approve other rates for tournaments, specials, or other events.
(b) Annual memberships.
Resident Nonresident
Junior/senior $100.00 $200.00
Adult $200.00 $300.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/376
Family $350.00 $550.00
(c) Special rates. The city manager may approve other rates for tournaments, specials, or other events.
(Ordinance 14-062, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 18-069 adopted 12/18/18)
ARTICLE 14.05 EVENT FACILITIES
Sec. 14.05.001 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
After hours. When any of the event facilities are used between the hours of 12:00 a.m. through 8:00 a.m.
All day. Use of a facility from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
Commercial event. Any event hosted by a for-profit organization or business.
Event facilities. Beaumont Civic Center, Julie Rogers Theatre, Jefferson Theatre, Downtown Event Centre, Great Lawn, and grounds contiguous to those facilities, and the
Lakeside Center.
Gross receipts. All monies received from the sale of tickets.
Move-in/out. Facility rentals, used for the setup for an event or for moving out after an event, on any date other than the event day, where the facility is not available for
other rentals.
Noncommercial event. An event contracted by any of the following organizations or individuals:
(1) Nonprofit civic organizations;
(2) Nonprofit fraternal organizations;
(3) Nonprofit educational institutions;
(4) Nonprofit religious organizations;
(5) Charitable organizations;
(6) Individuals sponsoring weddings, birthdays, and all other private events as determined by the director of event facilities.
Rental period. Facility access times. All set up, event activities and tear down must take place within the rental period.
(1958 Code, sec. 9B-1; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 99-99, sec. 1, adopted 12/26/99; 1978 Code, sec.
20-20; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 6, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.002 Use rate schedule
The following rates will apply to the use of city event facilities:
(1) Civic Center.
(A) Commercial. Minimum rental shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city participation in
furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rate shall first be approved by the city
manager or his designee.
(B) Noncommercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city
participation in. furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rate shall first be
approved by the city manager or his designee.
(C) Auxiliary rental spaces in the civic center.
(i) Commercial/noncommercial. Hourly (minimum two-hour rental), per space: $100.00 per hour.
(2) Julie Rogers Theatre.
(A) Commercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city
participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rental shall first be
approved by the city manager or his designee.
(B) Noncommercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city
participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rate shall first be
approved by the city manager or his designee.
(C) Auxiliary rental spaces in the Julie Rogers Theatre.
(i) Commercial/noncommercial. Hourly (minimum two-hour rental) per space: $100.00 per hour.
(3) Jefferson Theatre.
(A) Commercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city
participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rental shall first be
approved by the city manager or his designee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/376
(B) Noncommercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city participation
in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rate shall first be approved by the
city manager or his designee.
(C) Auxiliary rental spaces in the Jefferson Theatre.
(i) Commercial/noncommercial. Hourly (minimum two-hour rental) per space: $100.00 per hour.
(4) Event Centre.
(A) Commercial. Minimum rental shall be one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.). In consideration for city
participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum rental shall be
approved by the city manager or his designee.
(B) Noncommercial (minimum rental). In consideration for city participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may
be negotiated. Minimum rate may be negotiated if an organization leases the facility ten (10) or more dates within a calendar year. Any deviation from
minimum rental shall first be approved by the city manager or his designee.
(i) Matinee (8:00 a.m.–3:00 p.m.): $500.00.
(ii) Evening (6:00 p.m.–12:00 a.m.): $900.00.
(iii) All day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.): $1,500.00.
(C) Meeting. Hourly (minimum two-hour rental between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Sunday through Wednesday): $100.00 per hour.
(5) Great Lawn. In consideration for city participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation
from minimum rental shall first be approved by the city manager or his designee.
(A) Commercial. All day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.): $1,000.00.
(B) Noncommercial. All day (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.): $500.00.
(6) Lakeside Center.
(A) Minimum rental shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour (8:00 a.m.–12:00 a.m.) for any rental space located within the Lakeside Center. In
consideration for city participation in furnishing facilities and other assistance, additional rates or fees may be negotiated. Any deviation from minimum
rental shall first be approved by the city manager or his designee.
(B) Nonresidents can utilize the Best Years Center located inside the Lakeside Center for four dollars ($4.00) per day if the facility is not at capacity as
determined by the department director or his/her designee.
(7) After hours. When any of the event facilities are used between the hours of 12:00 a.m. through 8:00 a.m., said use shall be at the following hourly rate.
All facilities, per hour: $300.00.
(8) Catering access.
(A) Event Centre: $250.00.
(B) Civic Center: $500.00.
(C) Julie Rogers Theatre: $250.00.
(D) Jefferson Theatre: $250.00.
(1958 Code, sec. 9B-2; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 79-85, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/79; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1 (exhibit A), adopted 9/27/83;
Ordinance 95-60, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/95; Ordinance 99-99, sec. 2, adopted 12/26/99; Ordinance 03-102, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 20-21; Ordinance 07-
055, sec. 7, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 08-007, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 09-013, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/09; Ordinance 10-044, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/10; Ordinance
14-059, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.003 Additional fees
(a) Facility rentals, used for the setup for an event or for moving out after an event, on any date other than the event day, where the facility is not available for other
rentals, will be fifty (50) percent of the contracted rental rate unless otherwise determined by the city manager or his designee.
(b) Additional fees may be charged for auxiliary labor, food service, security, license fees, booth equipment, electrical outlets, set-up and tear down, staging, draping,
tables, chairs, and service and any other special equipment necessary for the presentation of an event.
(1958 Code, sec. 9B-4; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 99-99, sec. 3, adopted 12/26/99; 1978 Code, sec.
20-22; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 3, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.004 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 14.05.004 “Additional charge if broadcast involved” was repealed and deleted by Ordinance 14-059, sec. 4, adopted 11/12/14. Prior to its deletion, this section derived from
the following: 1958 Code, sec. 9B-14; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 78-44, sec. 3, adopted 11/11/78; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-23.
Sec. 14.05.005 Times of payment of rental and charges
Fifty (50) percent of the total rental rate is payable at the time of execution of the contract of any city event facility. The balance of all rentals and fees must be paid seven
(7) days prior to the final use of any of the facilities unless authorized by the director of event facilities. If more than one rental request is received for the same facility on
the same date, the city may require full payment in advance upon demand. All payments shall be nonrefundable in the event of cancellation by the lessee unless notice is
received in writing 90 days prior to the event date or if authorized by the director of event facilities. Should any lessee fail to make the necessary payments as provided
herein, all monies previously paid by the lessee shall become the property of the city and shall not be refunded. Any deviation shall first be approved by the city manager
or his designee. (1958 Code, sec. 9B-9; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-24; Ordinance 14-059,
sec. 5, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/376
Sec. 14.05.006 Food and beverage concessionaire approval
Any concessions and alcohol served at the Civic Center, Julie Rogers Theatre, and Jefferson Theatre shall be served only by a concessionaire with whom the city has a
concessions and alcohol contract unless authorized by the director of event facilities. (1958 Code, sec. 9B-6; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121,
sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-25; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 6, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.007 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 14.05.007 “Use for convention” was repealed and deleted by Ordinance 14-059, sec. 7, adopted 11/12/14. Prior to its deletion, this section derived from the following: 1958
Code, sec. 9B-7; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 99-99, sec. 4, adopted 12/26/99; 1978 Code, sec. 20-26.
Sec. 14.05.008 Bond of commercial user
The city may require a bond of any person as a prerequisite to the rental of any city event facility for commercial use if said person has failed to perform in accordance
with its contract with any facility in the United States within the last forty-eight (48) months, or has never entered into and performed successfully under a contract with
any facility in the United States within the last twelve (12) months. Said bond shall be in a penal amount as determined by the city manager or his designee, and shall
guarantee that the principal shall well and faithfully perform every term and condition of his contract and shall comply with all the laws of the state and ordinances and
regulations of the city. Said bond shall be written by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and shall be subject to the approval of the city. (1958 Code,
sec. 9B-8; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-27; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 8, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 14.05.009 Box office rates and ticket sales
(a) Box office rates shall be as follows:
(1) Ticketing charge of $150.00;
(2) Applicable fees associated with credit card usage.
(b) Ticket sales: Individual ticket sales for commercial events held at the Downtown Event Centre or Lakeside Center are prohibited unless authorized by the city
manager or his designee.
(1958 Code, sec. 9B-10; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 99-99, sec. 5, adopted 12/26/99; 1978 Code,
sec. 20-28; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 8, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 9, adopted 11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.010 Prohibited uses
Any persons or activities which is contrary to the public health, safety, welfare, or morals, or not in the best interest of the city as determined by the city manager or his
designee, shall be prohibited, and any contract previously executed may be revoked for such cause and any unearned deposits may be refunded. Any performer or any
other person whose conduct is disorderly or disruptive to facility use or rental shall be refused a contract or entrance or shall be ejected from the premises as necessary.
(1958 Code, sec. 9B-11; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-29; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 10, adopted
11/12/14; Ordinance 19-015 adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 14.05.011 Advertising
No person shall advertise a performance or attraction to be held in any city event facility until the contract for said facility has been properly executed and all contracts
between all parties. Failure to comply with this section will result in forfeiture of all monies paid the city, and may result in refusal by the city to contract any facilities to
said person in the future. (1958 Code, sec. 9B-12; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-30; Ordinance
07-055, sec. 9, adopted 5/8/07; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 11, adopted 11/12/14)
Sec. 14.05.012 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 14.05.012 “Denial of rental request” was repealed and deleted by Ordinance 14-059, sec. 12, adopted 11/12/14. Prior to its deletion, this section derived from the following:
1958 Code, sec. 9B-12; Ordinance 76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-31; Ordinance 07-055, sec. 10, adopted 5/8/07.
Sec. 14.05.013 Promulgation of rules, regulations and documents; execution of documents
The city manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules, regulations and rental documents concerning the use and operation of the city event facilities. The city
manager or his designee is hereby authorized to execute all documents necessary for the rental or contract of the city event facilities. (1958 Code, sec. 9B-15; Ordinance
76-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/76; Ordinance 83-121, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; 1978 Code, sec. 20-32; Ordinance 14-059, sec. 13, adopted 11/12/14)
ARTICLE 14.06 LIBRARY*
Sec. 14.06.001 Library name; branches
The library of the city shall be known as the Beaumont Public Library System. Branches thereof may be established by the city council upon recommendation of the
library commission or city manager. (1958 Code, sec. 18-3; Ordinance 78-110, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/78; Ordinance 01-035, sec. 1, adopted 5/1/01; 1978 Code, sec. 16-3)
Sec. 14.06.002 Fees for nonresident cards
It shall be unlawful for a nonresident of the city to check out any item from the Beaumont Public Library unless such person holds a nonresident card issued under the
following terms and conditions:
(1) A nonresident individual card at a cost of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year will entitle the holder to check out a maximum of ten (10) items at any
one (1) time if otherwise allowed by existing rules for each item.
(2) A nonresident family card at a cost of forty dollars ($40.00) per year will entitle the holder to check out a maximum of fifteen (15) items at any one time
if otherwise allowed by existing rules for each item.
(1958 Code, sec. 18-9; Ordinance 75-54, sec. 1, adopted 9/2/75; Ordinance 78-110, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/78; Ordinance 91-17, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/91; Ordinance 03-103,
sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; Ordinance 05-011, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/05; 1978 Code, sec. 16-9; Ordinance 17-053, secs. 1–2, adopted 7/25/17)
Sec. 14.06.003 Failing to return materials
(a) Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return library materials borrowed from the Beaumont Public Library System.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/376
(b) Evidence of violation. In any prosecution charging a violation of subsection (a) of this section, proof that, (1) the library materials were to be returned on a date
specified, (2) notice was given by depositing in the United States mail said notice addressed to the person who borrowed the library materials sent to his address as shown
on the records of the library and stating that the materials were not returned on the date specified, and (3) the library materials are not returned to the Beaumont Public
Library within twenty (20) days, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie case establishing violation of subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Presumption of receipt of notice. If notice is given in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, it is presumed that the notice was received no later than five (5)
days after it was sent.
(d) Lack of possession no defense. In prosecutions under subsection (a) of this section it shall be no defense that the borrower of the library material no longer
possesses them.
(Ordinance 78-110, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/78; Ordinance 01-035, sec. 1, adopted 5/1/01; 1978 Code, secs. 16-10–16-13)
Sec. 14.06.004 Late charges; processing fee
(a) The library administrator shall charge a daily late charge to those persons whose cards are used to check out materials which are returned after the applicable loan
period. The loan period, daily late charge and maximum late charge for each item shall be as follows:
Item Loan Period Daily Late
Charge
Maximum Late
Charge
Books (all materials except
for DVDs)
Two weeks with one renewal
for two weeks
$0.15 Replacement cost
DVDs One week/nonrenewable $1.00 Replacement cost
(b) The loan periods may be renewed by staff as long as no holds are present on the item.
(c) The director shall, in addition to any late charge imposed by this section, charge a processing fee of five dollars ($5.00) for hardback books and two dollars ($2.00)
for paperback books, which is not refundable, for lost or damaged materials.
(Ordinance 80-8, sec. 1, adopted 1/29/80; Ordinance 82-92, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/82; Ordinance 83-131, sec. 1, adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 91-17, sec. 2, adopted
2/26/91; Ordinance 01-035, sec. 1, adopted 5/1/01; Ordinance 01-060, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/01; Ordinance 03-103, sec. 2, adopted 12/9/03; Ordinance 05-011, sec. 2,
adopted 1/25/05; 1978 Code, sec. 16-14; Ordinance 07-039, sec. 2, adopted 4/3/07; Ordinance 17-053, secs. 3–4, adopted 7/25/17)
Sec. 14.06.005 Rental for use of meeting room
The rental rate for the use of a meeting room shall be ten dollars ($10.00) an hour with a minimum use of one (1) hour. If food is to be served, a refundable deposit of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be paid in advance of the use. (Ordinance 83-131, sec. 1, adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 01-035, sec. 1, adopted 5/1/01; 1978 Code, sec.
16-15; Ordinance 17-053, sec. 5, adopted 7/25/17)
CHAPTER 15
RESERVED
CHAPTER 16
SIGNS
ARTICLE 16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 16.01.001 Carrying sign or placard; scattering handbills; placing handbills on vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or hold by hand or otherwise any billboard, showcard, placard or advertisement, or sign of any description for the purpose of
advertising; or to scatter or throw any handbills, circulars, cards, newspapers or any advertising device of any description, along or upon any street or sidewalk in the city;
or to place in or attach to any automobile any handbill, circular, card, newspaper, placard or other advertising device, without receiving permission from the owner of such
automobile. (1958 Code, sec. 33-20; 1978 Code, sec. 23-27)
Sec. 16.01.002 Placing posters, signs, etc., on street or sidewalk
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed upon any public street or sidewalk within the city's right-of-way, or on or against any pole, post, tree,
fireplug, trash receptacle or other property located in a public street or sidewalk, any poster, placard, handbill or sign; provided, however, this section shall not apply to
signs placed by officers or employees of the city, the state or the United States, in the performance of their official duties and functions. (1958 Code, sec. 33-20.1; 1978
Code, sec. 23-28; Ordinance 07-060, sec. 9, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 16.01.003 Painting signs or advertisements on curb
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/376
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or write signs or advertisements upon the sidewalks or the streets of the city; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for
persons to paint residence, business or other building numbers on curbs. (1958 Code, sec. 33-21; Ordinance 81-101, sec. 1, adopted 12/15/81; 1978 Code, sec. 23-29)
CHAPTER 17
RESERVED
CHAPTER 18
TAXATION
ARTICLE 18.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 18.01.001 Tax levy required
(a) The taxes of the city shall be levied and paid pursuant to article VIII of the charter.
(b) The city shall adopt a tax rate for the current tax year and notify the city's assessor of the rate adopted in accordance with section 26.05 of the Tax Code.
(1958 Code, sec. 34-4; 1978 Code, sec. 25-3; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 2, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 18.01.002 Payment of taxes prerequisite to receipt of money due from city
No money shall be paid by the city upon any account whatever to any person who is indebted to the city for taxes owed. (1958 Code, sec. 34-15; 1978 Code, sec. 25-4;
Ordinance 07-061, sec. 3, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 18.01.003 Bingo tax levied
There is hereby levied a two (2) percent tax on the gross receipts of bingo games conducted within the city. The tax is levied in accordance with chapter 2001 V.T.C.A.
Occupation Code. (Ordinance 83-152, sec. 1, adopted 11/22/83; 1978 Code, sec. 25-66; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 10, adopted 6/5/07)
State law reference–Bingo Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2001.
ARTICLE 18.02 AD VALOREM TAX†
Sec. 18.02.001 Homestead exemption for persons over sixty-five
(a) From and after January 1, 1981, seventeen thousand five hundred dollars ($17,500.00) of the assessed taxable value of all residence homesteads of married or
unmarried adults, male or female, including those living alone, who are age sixty-five (65) or over, shall be exempt from all taxation for all city purposes; provided,
however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for a payment of any debt the taxing officers of the city shall have the authority to continue to levy
and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the
obligation of the contract by which the debt was created.
(b) In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall file an exemption application form with the chief appraiser of Jefferson County Appraisal District.
(c) From and after January 1, 1981, seventeen thousand five hundred dollars ($17,500.00) of the market value of the residence homestead of any person who is disabled
shall be exempt from all taxation for city purposes.
(d) Disabled as used herein means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under federal old-age, survivors, and disability insurance.
(e) In order to secure the exemption, the disabled owner shall file an exemption application form with the chief appraiser of Jefferson County Appraisal District.
(f) An eligible disabled person who is also sixty-five (65) years of age older may not receive both the disability and the elderly exemption but may choose either.
(1958 Code, sec. 34-1.1; Ordinance 75-55, sec. 1, adopted 9/2/75; Ordinance 76-4, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/76; Ordinance 78-97, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/78; Ordinance 79-80,
sec. 1, adopted 10/2/79; Ordinance 79-95, sec. 1, adopted 11/20/79; Ordinance 81-61, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/81; 1978 Code, sec. 25-20; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 4, adopted
6/5/07)
State law reference–Homestead exemption for disabled persons and persons over 65 authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13(d) and (e).
Sec. 18.02.002 Delinquency penalties and interest
A person who fails to pay an ad valorem tax assessed by the city on or before its due date is subject to the delinquency [penalties and interest] provided in chapter 33
(Delinquency) of the Texas Tax Code. (1958 Code, sec. 34-10; 1978 Code, sec. 25-27; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 6, adopted 6/5/07)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 18.02.003 Taxation of leased motor vehicles
Leased motor vehicles, as defined in Tax Code section 11.252, leased within the city are subject to taxation. The exemption from taxation provided by Tax Code section
11.252 shall not apply to such vehicles and shall not apply to the city as provided in Tax Code section 11.252. (Ordinance 01-101, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/01; 1978 Code,
sec. 25-71; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 11, adopted 6/5/07)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on leased vehicles otherwise exempted, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.252.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/376
ARTICLE 18.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 18.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Consideration. The cost of the room in a hotel, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include but not be limited to hotels, motels,
bed and breakfast facilities, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for consideration, but
“hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel for any purpose.
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of
access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar
year or preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the
months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and
December.
(1958 Code, sec. 34-40; Ordinance 93-70, sec. 1, adopted 11/23/93; 1978 Code, sec. 25-50)
Sec. 18.03.002 Levy; rate; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars
($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(1958 Code, sec. 34-41; Ordinance 77-88, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/77; Ordinance 83-94, sec. 1, adopted 8/30/83; Ordinance 88-33, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/88; 1978 Code, sec. 25-
51)
Sec. 18.03.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in this article for the city. (1958 Code, sec. 34-42; 1978 Code, sec. 25-52)
Sec. 18.03.004 Reports; payment
Hotels that owe less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in hotel occupancy taxes to the city for any calendar month may report and remit the tax on the 20th of the month
following each calendar quarter. Hotels which owe more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) each month must file their hotel tax report and remittance on the 20th of the
month following each calendar month in which more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) is owed. Such hotel shall report and remit the tax to the city's cash management
division. The required report must show the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month or quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such
occupancies and any other information the city's cash management division may reasonably require. (1958 Code, sec. 34-43; Ordinance 01-079, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/01;
1978 Code, sec. 25-53)
Sec. 18.03.005 Rules and regulations
The city manager or his designee shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon
reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of
taxes due under the provisions of this article. (1958 Code, sec. 34-44; 1978 Code, sec. 25-54; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 7, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 18.03.006 Penalties
If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five (5) percent
of the tax amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days he shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax; provided, however, the penalty shall never
be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due. (1958 Code, sec.
34-45; 1978 Code, sec. 25-55; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 8, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 18.03.007 Reimbursement for collection costs
Those persons who are required to collect the tax imposed herein who report and pay the tax to the city in a timely manner, as required by section 18.03.004 herein, may
deduct and withhold from the payment to the city, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, an amount equal to one (1) percent of the amount of the tax
collected and required to be reported to the city. The reimbursement provided for herein shall be forfeited for failure to pay the tax or to file reports in a timely manner as
required by section 18.03.004. (Ordinance 82-11, sec. 1, adopted 1/26/82; 1978 Code, sec. 25-56)
ARTICLE 18.04 EXEMPTION FOR HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITES*
Sec. 18.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
Assessed value prior to preservation. The value assessed by the Jefferson County Appraisal District for the tax year of verification.
Certification. The attestation by the historical landmark commission that the structure in question is an “historically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage
preservation” and that the plans submitted will substantially rehabilitate or restore the structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/376
Certified applicant. An applicant pursuant to this article whose plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of a historic structure have been approved pursuant to section
18.04.004 herein.
Commercial building. A building whose use after rehabilitation or restoration will be for other than a single-family dwelling, duplex, or three- or four-family dwelling.
Commission. The city historical landmark commission.
Historically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage preservation. A structure, together with the land necessary for access and use of the structure, which is
determined pursuant to the terms of this article to be in substantial need of rehabilitation or restoration and located either in the National Register of Historic Places as
contributing to or compatible with a historic district or located in a H-C, Historical Cultural Landmark Preservation Overlay District designated by the city and certified
by the historical landmark commission as being of historic significance to the city.
Rehabilitation. The act or process of returning a structure to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an official contemporary use while
preserving those portions or features of the structure that are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values.
Residential building. A building whose use after rehabilitation or restoration will be for a single-family dwelling, or two-, three- or four-family dwelling.
Restoration. The act or process of aggregately recovering the form and details of a structure and its setting as it appeared at its significant historical, architectural or
cultural period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
Structure. A building located within the city.
Verification. The approval by the city historical landmark commission that the rehabilitation or restoration of an “historically significant site in need of tax relief to
encourage preservation” was substantially completed.
(Ordinance 83-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/83; Ordinance 85-33, sec. 1, adopted 3/26/85; Ordinance 88-76, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/88; 1978 Code, sec. 25-57)
Sec. 18.04.002 Historic structure preservation tax exemption for residential and commercial buildings
In accordance with the provisions of this article, a residential or commercial building which meets the definition of an “historically significant site in need of tax relief to
encourage preservation” and which is substantially rehabilitated and/or restored as certified by the commission shall have the assessed value for ad valorem taxation equal
to the assessed value prior to preservation for a period of ten (10) years. This exemption shall begin on the first day of the first tax year after verification of completion of
the preservation required for certification, provided that:
(1) The building shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations for its use and location; and
(2) The deed, grant, sale, bequest, devise, foreclosure or receivership, bankruptcy or other transfer of ownership in the property or any part thereof, other
than a lease of less than fifteen (15) years' duration, except the donation of an historic easement on an exempt structure which donation shall qualify as a
charitable contribution under section 170(f)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and its regulations as now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, shall cause
the exemption provided herein to terminate on the last day of the tax year on which such transfer occurs.
(Ordinance 83-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/83; 1978 Code, sec. 25-58)
Sec. 18.04.003 Application process
(a) Applications for an historic structure preservation tax exemption pursuant to this article are to be filed with the planning department for submission to the
commission. Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the owner of the property and shall:
(1) State the legal description of the property proposed for certification;
(2) Provide proof of title in the applicant to the property proposed for certification;
(3) Include an affidavit by the owner describing the historic significance of the structure in need of tax relief and its compliance with the requirements of
section 18.04.002 herein;
(4) Provide proof that taxes or other assessments are not delinquent on the property;
(5) Include a final complete set of plans for the historic structure's restoration or rehabilitation;
(6) Include a statement of costs for the restoration or rehabilitation work;
(7) Include a projection of the estimated construction time and predicted completion date of the historic restoration or rehabilitation;
(8) Authorize the members of the commission and city officials to visit and inspect the property proposed for certification and the records and books of the
owners as necessary to certify that the property in question is in substantial need of restoration or rehabilitation;
(9) Include a detailed statement of the proposed use for the property; and
(10) Provide any additional information to the board which the owner deems relevant or useful such as the history of the structure or access to the structure
by the public.
(b) Each application shall contain sufficient documentation confirming or supporting the information submitted therein.
(Ordinance 83-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/83; 1978 Code, sec. 25-59)
Sec. 18.04.004 Certification process
(a) Upon receipt of the sworn application, the commission shall make an investigation of the property and shall certify the facts to the planning manager of the city
within thirty (30) days along with the commission's documentation and recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application for exemption.
(b) Upon receipt of the application for tax exemption as well as the recommendation of the board, the city's planning manager shall immediately forward the application
to the city council and, within thirty (30) days, the council shall approve or disapprove eligibility of the property for tax relief pursuant to this article. Approval or
disapproval shall be provided in writing to the applicant. In determining eligibility, the city council shall first determine that all the requirements of this article have been
met and that only the historic structure and the land reasonably necessary for access and use thereof is to be provided favorable tax relief as provided in section 18.04.002
herein.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/376
(Ordinance 83-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/83; 1978 Code, sec. 25-60; Ordinance 07-061, sec. 9, adopted 6/5/07)
Sec. 18.04.005 Verification process
Upon completion of the restoration and rehabilitation, the certified applicant shall submit a sworn statement of completion acknowledging that the “historically significant
site in need of tax relief to encourage preservation” has been substantially rehabilitated or restored as certified by the commission. The commission upon receipt of the
sworn statement of completion, but no later than thirty (30) days thereafter, shall make an investigation of the property and shall approve or disapprove the fact that the
property has been substantially completed as required for certification. If verification of completion shall be deemed unfavorable, the certified applicant shall be required
to complete the restoration or rehabilitation in order to secure the tax exemption provided herein. If the verification of completion is favorable, the commission shall
notify the chief appraiser of the Jefferson County Appraisal District in writing of compliance. Thereafter, the chief appraiser of the Jefferson County Appraisal District
shall provide the property with the historic tax exemption provided in section 18.04.002 herein. (Ordinance 83-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/83; 1978 Code, sec. 25-61)
ARTICLE 18.05 REDEVELOPMENT AND TAX ABATEMENT ZONES*
Sec. 18.05.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The specific ordinances regarding redevelopment and tax abatement zones, as adopted by the city, are not included in the code, but they are specifically saved from repeal
and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 19
RESERVED
CHAPTER 20
TRANSPORTATION AND TRAFFIC
ARTICLE 20.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 20.01.001 Applicability of state law
State law relating to the regulation of pedestrian and motor traffic, codified in the state Transportation Code, together with the provisions of this chapter, shall govern
traffic on the streets and other public ways in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 26-1; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.01.002 Definitions
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Central business district. All streets and portions of streets within the area identified as the central business district on the official zoning map of the city.
Parking meter. Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter.
Parking meter space. Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by painted lines
or marks, or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
Parking meter zone. Any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-2; 1978 Code, sec. 26-2; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.01.003 Negligent collision
(a) If any person while driving or operating any vehicle within the corporate limits of the city shall cause, suffer, or permit the same to come into collision with any
other vehicle, animal, person, or property in, on, or near any street or highway, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Proof of a culpable state of mind, as defined
in chapter 6 of the Texas Penal Code, is not required to prove an offense under this section.
(b) Proof of no intent to injure shall not be deemed a defense to a charge of violating this section.
(c) The term “negligence,” as used in subsection (a) of this section, is defined to mean the want of care, attention, and caution as a person of ordinary prudence would
use under the same or similar circumstances, and shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Failure to maintain a proper lookout;
(2) Failure to apply brakes;
(3) Failure to maneuver right or left to avoid colliding with a fixed or stationary object.
(d) In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the driver or operator of a vehicle collided with the rear of another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction or with a fixed or stationary object shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such driver was negligent in the operation of such vehicle;
provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted by the person charged with violating this section with evidence to the contrary; and provided further that the
presumption established herein shall have the evidentiary consequences enumerated in chapter 2 of the Texas Penal Code.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-25; Ordinance 76-55, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/76; Ordinance 92-29, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/92; 1978 Code, sec. 26-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/376
Sec. 20.01.004 Authority for traffic control
Whenever and wherever the congestion of traffic, the dimensions of the streets and sidewalks and the use of property abutting the streets are such that the director of
public works finds it to be necessary for the free flow and the expeditious handling of traffic and the safety of persons and property, the director is authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway.
(2) To establish safety zones on any of the streets of the city.
(3) To mark lanes for traffic on the streets of the city.
(4) To place proper signs, signals, or markings prohibiting the making of turns at any intersection of streets in the city.
(5) To place signs, signals or markings within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections.
(6) To install or cause to be displayed signs, signals or markings for the direction of traffic near public or private schools, parks and public buildings.
(7) To determine the location of passenger zones and freight loading zones and to place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same.
(8) To designate spaces on the streets of the city for exclusive use as bus zones and to mark the same with appropriate signs or marks.
(9) To designate areas on the streets of the city which shall not be used as spaces for the parking of vehicles and to mark such areas with the appropriate
signs or markings.
(10) To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching the intersection on one or more of the intersecting streets must
bring such vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding into such intersection, and to install and maintain appropriate signs and markings directing such
drivers to stop at such intersections.
(11) To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching the intersection on one or more of the intersecting streets must
reduce the speed of such vehicle, and to install appropriate signs and markings directing such drivers to reduce the speed of their vehicles.
(12) To designate streets and portions of streets on which drivers of vehicles are prohibited from driving except in one direction and to designate the
direction in which driving is prohibited and that in which driving is permitted, and to install appropriate signs and markings designating such one-way streets.
(13) To designate “truck routes” which shall be followed by single unit trucks with tandem axles or truck tractor and semitrailer combinations, in using the
streets of the city; provided that no such vehicle shall be prohibited from using any street for the purpose of going directly to or from any residential,
commercial or industrial establishment abutting on such street for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials thereat.
(14) To determine and allocate parking time limits on streets and portions of streets and place appropriate signs, markings, or parking meters giving notice
thereof.
(15) To designate intersections, the crossing of which shall be controlled by red, green and amber lights and arrows as elsewhere herein provided, and to
determine the type of such lights or traffic-control devices to be installed at each intersection and to cause the same to be installed.
(16) To determine and fix the maximum axle loads of all vehicles to be operated over, on, or upon the streets within the city, taking into consideration the
width, condition and type of pavement structures, and other circumstances on such street. Such maximum axle load shall become effective and operative on
said streets within the city when appropriate signs, giving notice thereof, are erected. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or move, or for the
owner to cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved, upon any of the streets, any vehicle or combination of vehicles which in any respect exceeds the
maximum axle loads designated by said signs. Provided, however, that any person desiring to operate or move a vehicle on said streets in excess of the
maximum axle loads established shall first obtain a special permit from the director as set out in section 20.01.005 herein, and such permit shall not be issued
unless reasonably necessary. Any person moving or causing to be moved a load as set out in said permit shall be liable to the city for any damage done by any
such vehicle to the streets, bridges or culverts in the city and the acceptance of the aforesaid permit shall be conclusive evidence that the person to whom such
permit is issued agrees to pay all such damages upon demand thereof made by the city.
(17) To designate areas of the streets of the city to be known as “quiet zones” in the vicinity of any hospital area with appropriate signs directing the drivers
of vehicles not to sound the horn or other warning devices while traveling in the areas designated.
(18) To make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of traffic ordinances and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. He may test
traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
(19) To determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles,
horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(20) To designate the location and type of signs to be placed upon railroad property advising persons of the restrictions and prohibitions placed upon the use
of such railroad property by the public generally. The expense of such signs and the placing thereof shall be borne by the railroad company owning or
controlling the property where such signs are placed.
(21) To make such changes as changing conditions may require in any designation, determination or regulation he is herein authorized to make.
(22) To designate areas along the streets of the city which shall not be used for the parking of vehicles and to provide that vehicles parked in such areas may
be removed. Said areas shall be clearly marked so as to sufficiently notify persons that the area is a “tow away zone.”
(23) To designate along the streets of the city, and on any property owned by the city, areas which shall be used only for parking of vehicles operated by
handicapped persons in accordance with state law.
(24) To establish “temporary” reduced speed zones, based on engineering and traffic investigations, along portions of roadways within the city that are under
construction or repair. Such reduced speed zones will terminate upon completion of the roadway improvements.
(Ordinance 83-03, sec. 3, adopted 1/18/83; Ordinance 03-049, sec. 1, adopted 7/1/03; Ordinance 03-097, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; Ordinance 04-022, secs. 1, 2, adopted
4/6/04; 1978 Code, sec. 26-13; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 6, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.01.005 Oversize loads
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/376
It shall be unlawful for a person to move an oversize load within the city without first obtaining a special permit from the city. An oversize load is defined as a load in
excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds total weight, or twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on any axle, or thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds on any tandem axle, or
more than eight (8) feet six (6) inches in width, or above fourteen (14) feet in height, or above sixty-five (65) feet in total length including the vehicle. Permit
requirements are as follows:
(1) As a prerequisite to the issuance of an oversize load permit, the applicant shall file either a two hundred thousand dollar ($200,000.00) surety bond with
the public works director or his designee which bond would protect the city against damages to its property, including but not limited to streets, curbs, gutters
and sidewalks; or, in the alternative, provide insurance coverage in the minimum amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) covering damage to
the same properties.
(2) The oversize load permit must accompany each oversize load and be available at all times while the load is operating within the city limits.
(3) A separate permit shall be required from the state department of transportation when transporting over state-maintained highways within the city.
(4) Permits shall be issued for the following time periods at the following fees:
Time Period Fee
Single move $50.00
1 month $150.00
3 months $250.00
6 months $350.00
1 year $500.00
(5) The public works director or his designee is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations and forms concerning application, times of operation, escort
requirements, notification of utility companies and other relevant requirements, and may issue permits with specific requirements related to the load and its
proposed route of travel.
(Ordinance 04-022, sec. 3, adopted 4/6/04; 1978 Code, sec. 26-14)
State law references–General provisions relating to vehicle size and weight, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 621; municipal regulation of loads and equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
621.303.
Sec. 20.01.006 Large trucks in central business district
It shall be unlawful for drivers of vehicles with an oversize load or vehicles with three (3) or more axles to travel within the central business district of the city except for
deliveries and pickups made in accordance with a permit for same issued under section 20.01.005. (1958 Code, sec. 37-26; 1978 Code, sec. 26-5; Ordinance 07-069, sec.
3, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.01.007 Towing and impoundment of uninsured vehicles
(a) It is an offense for a person to operate a motor vehicle without financial responsibility established for that vehicle.
(b) Acting under a policy established by the police chief, a police officer is authorized to order the towing and impounding of a vehicle that is not insured or otherwise
covered for financial responsibility in accordance with state law.
(Ordinance 09-027, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/09)
ARTICLE 20.02 RAILROADS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 20.02.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Dangerous railroad crossing. The intersection of any railroad tracks upon and over which may be moved any railroad train, with, on, or through a public street under such
circumstances that such crossing is dangerous to pedestrians or vehicular traffic using such public streets and that safety precautions are necessary to protect pedestrians
and vehicular traffic.
Railroad train. Locomotive engine, car, train of cars, or any other conveyance, by whatever means propelled, designed to move over fixed tracks or rails.
Switching. The pulling up and backing across, or the backing across and pulling up, of any freight or passenger cars or railroad engine across any street crossing or
intersection of two (2) streets within the city, or upon or along any street within the city; provided, however, nothing contained in this article shall be construed as an
exception to or exemption from compliance with section 20.02.004.
Vehicle. Any device in or by which any person or property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a public street or thoroughfare, except devices moved only by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/376
(1958 Code, sec. 31-1; 1978 Code, sec. 22-1)
Sec. 20.02.002 Blowing whistles; blowing out boilers
It shall be unlawful to blow the railroad engine whistle, horn or siren, or cause the same to be blown, within the city during the period of time between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., except when there is imminent danger of an accident. All persons are prohibited from blowing off or blowing out a railroad engine boiler when crossing any public
street, alley or other thoroughfare within the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-2; 1978 Code, sec. 22-2)
Sec. 20.02.003 Climbing through or under trains; disobedience by pedestrians to signals
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized railroad employees, to climb through, under or over any train of cars, whether such train of cars is moving or at a
standstill, or for any person to disobey any train approach warning signal, sign or barricade. (1958 Code, sec. 31-5; 1978 Code, sec. 22-3)
State law reference–Obedience to signal indicating approach of train, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.251.
Sec. 20.02.004 Standing of trains
(a) Blocking streets at crossings; time limit. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or causing to be operated any railroad train within the city to obstruct the
crossing, or any portion of the width thereof, of any street in the city by any railroad engine, car or cars, of any description, for a longer time than five (5) consecutive
minutes, and whenever such crossing shall have been obstructed, or any portion of its width, by any such engine, car or cars, for five (5) or more consecutive minutes at
any one time, it shall be left entirely free and unobstructed for at least five (5) consecutive minutes, except that this section shall not apply to any through train passing
over such crossing and kept in constant forward motion while passing the crossing and engaged in interstate or intrastate commerce.
(b) Between crossings, maximum period. It shall be unlawful for any railroad engineer, train conductor or other person to cause or allow any railroad locomotive,
engine, car or train of cars to stop in or remain upon any street between crossings within the city for a longer period than thirty (30) minutes at any one time.
(c) Unblocking in case of fire. If any railroad crossing is blocked when the fire alarm indicates there is a fire, it shall be the duty of the yardmaster in charge of the
railroad train blocking the crossing, and the engineer in charge of the engine, and the watchman in charge of the crossing, to cause the crossing to be cleared of railroad
trains at once, and to be kept clear for a space of fifteen (15) minutes, and the failure on the part of any of the aforementioned persons in charge of their respective duties
to clear such crossing of railroad trains at once, and keep same clear for a space of fifteen (15) minutes, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(1958 Code, secs. 31-8–31-10; 1978 Code, secs. 22-4–22-6)
State law reference–Obstruction of railroad crossing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 471.007.
Sec. 20.02.005 Penalty; persons responsible for violation
Whoever shall violate, or cause or permit to be violated, any provision of this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of this
code, and the penalty herein prescribed shall extend to the president, vice-president, and general manager of any corporation so offending and to all persons in actual
control of such engine, car or cars, to all persons having direction over the movement of such engine, car or cars, and to all general or division officers of any corporation
owning or controlling such engines or cars, who shall have the authority to give orders in relation to the disposition of such engines or cars in the city, who shall fail to
give the necessary orders or fail to enforce such orders when given. (1958 Code, sec. 31-11; 1978 Code, sec. 22-7)
Sec. 20.02.006 Burden of establishing exceptions
Whenever any person shall be charged with violation of any provision of this article, it shall not be necessary that the complaint shall negative any of the exceptions
contained in this article, and this article shall be construed so that such exceptions shall be deemed to be defenses to conviction of any person charged with violation of
this article so that the burden of establishing any of such exceptions in any case shall be upon the defendant. (1958 Code, sec. 31-12; 1978 Code, sec. 22-8)
Secs. 20.02.007–20.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Switching*
Sec. 20.02.041 Restrictions at certain Texas and New Orleans Railway Company crossings
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or causing to be operated any railroad train within the city, or any locomotive engineer, fireman, foreman, switchman,
yardmaster, conductor or any other agent or employee for the railroad company, operating or participating in any manner in the operation, control or management of any
locomotive or switch engine, or other train or engine of whatever character, to switch freight or passenger cars on any railroad in the city at any point east of the west line
of Park Street and the east line of Cypress Street along or upon the right-of-way of the Texas and New Orleans Railway Company at its intersection with any public street,
and south of the north line of College Street across the intersection of College Street with Railroad Avenue, except where such switching across College Street is
necessary for the interchange of railway cars from one railway company to another, if such interchange is accomplished by movement of such cars to the place of
interchange and returned without more than one reverse movement each way, and provided such College Street intersection is cleared of railway cars and engines to
permit vehicular traffic to pass such crossing before such reverse movement is made. (1958 Code, sec. 31-13; 1978 Code, sec. 22-20)
Sec. 20.02.042 Hours prohibited at certain crossings
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or causing to be operated any railroad train within the city and for any foreman of a switching crew, engineer or conductor of
a railroad train, or other person in charge of a railroad train, or car, or railroad engine, to switch freight or passenger cars on any railroad in the city along, upon or across
any public street or across any street crossing or intersection of two (2) streets within the city, at the following places during the hours stated:
(1) At any point between the west line of Neches Street and the east line of Main Street along or upon Gilbert Street and Blanchette Street, between the
hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(2) On any railroad track crossing Wall Street between Railroad Avenue and Victoria Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(3) Along any railroad track at the intersection of Crockett Street and Avenue C, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the hours of
4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(4) Along any railroad track crossing Fourth Street between Angelina Street and Crockett Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between
the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/376
(5) Along any railroad track crossing North Street between Gulf Street and First Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the hours
of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(6) Along any railroad track crossing Liberty Street between Gulf Street and First Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m.
(7) Along any railroad track crossing Laurel Street between Gulf Street and First Street, between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(8) Along any railroad track crossing Crockett Street between Victoria Street and Railroad Avenue, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and
between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(9) Along any railroad track crossing Orange Street between Cedar Street and Bonham Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(10) Along any railroad track crossing Franklin Street at its intersection with Railroad Avenue, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between
the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(11) Along any railroad track crossing Irving Street at its intersection with Fulton Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(12) Along any railroad track crossing Gulf Street between Long Avenue and Harrison Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(13) Along any railroad track crossing Crockett Street between Avenue C and Short Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(14) Along any railroad track crossing Crockett Street between Avenue B and Avenue C, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the
hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(15) Along any railroad track crossing Franklin Street between Archie Street and Trinity Street, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between
the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(16) Along any railroad track at any point between the west line of Gulf Street and the east line of Pine Street along or upon Long Avenue, between the
hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(17) Along any railroad track crossing Villiva Lane at its intersection with the Kansas City Southern Railroad, between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m.,
and between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(1958 Code, sec. 31-14; 1978 Code, sec. 22-21)
Sec. 20.02.043 Time limit generally
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or causing to be operated any railroad train within the city, and for any foreman of a switching crew, engineer or conductor of
a railroad train, or other person in charge of a railroad train or car or railroad engine, to switch freight or passenger cars on any railroad in the city across any street
crossing or intersection of two (2) streets within the city for a continuous period in excess of three (3) minutes without clearing such crossing for a period of three (3)
minutes so as to permit vehicular traffic to clear or pass such crossing, unless such vehicular traffic clears or passes such crossing in less time than three (3) minutes, in
which case switching operations may be resumed at the time such crossing is cleared of vehicular traffic; or to switch cars for any period of time during the hours and at
the intersections specified in section 20.02.042. (1958 Code, sec. 31-15; 1978 Code, sec. 22-22)
Sec. 20.02.044 Exceptions
There is excepted from the provisions of sections 20.02.005, 20.02.006, 20.02.041 and 20.02.042 the movement of switch engines and cars necessary for the purpose of
carrying freight cars to and from the different business industries located in the city, and there is also excepted from the provisions of sections 20.02.005, 20.02.006,
20.02.041 and 20.02.042 movements of trains necessary for the interchange of railroad cars from one railroad company to another, if such interchange is accomplished by
a movement of such cars to the place of interchange and returned without more than one reverse movement each way. (1958 Code, sec. 31-16; 1978 Code, sec. 22-23)
Secs. 20.02.045–20.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Train Approach Signals
Sec. 20.02.071 Designation of dangerous crossings
(a) The following crossings of public streets and thoroughfares with tracks upon which railroad trains of the Kansas City Southern Railway Company System operate
are declared to be dangerous railroad crossings:
(1) Main.
(2) Pearl.
(3) Orleans.
(4) Neches.
(5) Trinity.
(6) Wall.
(7) College.
(8) Railroad at Doucette.
(9) Madison.
(10) Van Buren.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/376
(11) Fulton at Irving.
(b) The following crossings of public streets and thoroughfares with tracks upon which railroad trains of the Missouri Pacific Lines System operate are declared to be
dangerous railroad crossings:
(1) Crockett Street.
(2) Avenue C.
(c) The following crossings of public streets and thoroughfares with tracks upon which railroad trains of the Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Company System
operate are declared to be dangerous railroad crossings:
(1) Lucas.
(2) Woodlawn.
(3) Voth Road.
(4) Delaware.
(5) North.
(6) McFaddin.
(7) Calder.
(8) Broadway.
(9) Liberty.
(10) Laurel.
(11) Railroad.
(d) The following crossings of public streets and thoroughfares with tracks upon which railroad trains of the Southern Pacific Lines System operate are declared to be
dangerous railroad crossings:
(1) Cypress.
(2) Travis.
(3) Main.
(4) Pearl.
(5) Orleans.
(6) Park.
(7) Crockett.
(8) Fourth.
(9) Crockett.
(10) College.
(11) Washington Boulevard.
(12) Florida.
(13) Port Arthur Road.
(1958 Code, sec. 31-17; 1978 Code, sec. 22-30)
Sec. 20.02.072 Duty to have signals installed and in operation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit to be operated, a railroad train over any of the above-named dangerous railroad crossings in the city without
having installed and in operation at such railroad-street crossings, train-approach signals to warn pedestrians and operators of vehicles using such public streets and
thoroughfares of any approaching railroad train.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever there shall be in existence at, or in proximity to, any of such dangerous crossings a vehicular traffic-control signal, any
person operating or permitting another to operate a railroad train over such dangerous crossing shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this section if it shall
bond the rails over which the train operates and provide the necessary actuating apparatus so as to connect said vehicular traffic-control signal to said bonded rails for the
purpose of providing signal protection at said crossing upon approach of trains.
(1958 Code, sec. 31-18; 1978 Code, sec. 22-31)
Sec. 20.02.073 Exception during construction
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 20.02.072, train-approach signals or flagmen are not required at, and section 20.02.072 shall not be applicable to, any railroad
crossing during construction at such crossing under the grade-separation program of the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-18.1; 1978 Code, sec. 22-32)
Sec. 20.02.074 Type and location of signals
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/376
The train-approach signals provided for in section 20.02.072 shall be of the flashing-light signal type in which indication of the approach of the train is given by two (2)
horizontal red lights flashing alternately at predetermined intervals. The flashing-light train-approach signals may be controlled manually or automatically through track
circuits arranged so that the flashing-light signals will operate until the rear of the train reaches or clears the crossing, and so that the signals will operate upon the
approach of trains from either direction on the track for which protection is provided. One train-approach signal shall be placed on each side of the track on standards so
that the lamp shall be not less than seven (7) nor more than nine (9) feet above the surface of the street. The location of the standard shall be approved by the traffic
engineer of the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-19; 1978 Code, sec. 22-33)
Sec. 20.02.075 Shutoff devices; maximum time of operation
At such dangerous railroad crossings, if automatic train-approach signals are installed and maintained, a feature shall be included in the track circuits that will permit the
signals to be turned off when a train, which has placed such signals in operation, has come to a complete stop and remains stopped for thirty (30) seconds without having
covered the crossing for which the signal is intended, or with a device by which the signal may be disconnected when the crew operating such railroad train does not
intend moving the train over the crossing. When movement is again resumed in the direction of covering the crossing, the signal shall be placed in operation immediately
upon commencement of such movement. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a railroad train to remain standing at or near, but not upon, any of the above-named
crossings with the train-approach signals in operation for more than thirty (30) seconds. (1958 Code, sec. 31-20; 1978 Code, sec. 22-34)
Sec. 20.02.076 “Cross bucks,” where required
Railroad crossing signs, commonly known as “cross bucks,” shall be erected on the standard carrying the electric train-approach signals where same are provided, and, at
railroad crossings where electric train-approach signals are not provided, a cross buck shall be provided on each side of such crossing at its intersection with the railroad
track. (1958 Code, sec. 31-22; 1978 Code, sec. 22-35)
Secs. 20.02.077–20.02.100 Reserved
Division 4. Street Crossing Installation, Construction and Repair
Part I. In General
Sec. 20.02.101 Lighting of streets
It shall be the duty of each railroad company to keep the streets over which it operates lighted at such points and at such times and with such kind of lights as the city
manager may designate. (1958 Code, sec. 31-23; 1978 Code, sec. 22-40)
Sec. 20.02.102 Ordering construction or reconstruction
(a) When given.
(1) Any railroad company occupying any paved street or portion thereof in the city shall, when ordered by the city council, raise or remove its tracks from
such paved street or portion thereof and reconstruct its roadbeds upon concrete foundations according to the plans and specifications prepared by the city
engineer. No railroad company shall hereafter occupy any paved street or portions thereof in the city without constructing its roadbed as provided in this
division.
(2) Any railroad company granted a right-of-way over, along or upon any street or portion thereof in the city, when such street is ordered paved by the city
council, before the track of such railroad company shall have been laid, shall not occupy such street or portion thereof without constructing its roadbed in the
manner provided for in this division.
(3) Such construction or reconstruction of roadbed of any railroad company shall be under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
(b) Failure to obey, procedure. If any railroad company shall fail or refuse to raise or remove its tracks from any streets paved, or ordered to be paved, by the city
council, as provided in this division, the city council shall order the removal of the tracks and appurtenances thereto from such streets, or portions thereof, and such
railroad company shall not have the right to occupy the streets or portions thereof until it shall have complied with the provisions of this division. But the city council
may, at its option, have such work done under the supervision of the city engineer and charge the costs thereof to such railroad company, and recover such costs from such
company by suit, in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(1958 Code, secs. 31-30, 31-31; 1978 Code, secs. 22-47, 22-48)
Sec. 20.02.103 Elevation of track and switches
Whenever the track of any railroad crosses a street or alley in this city, the top rail shall be even with the surface of the street, for the full width of the street, and the street
crossings shall be so fixed by the railroad company or its agents. The same shall be observed where they have switches on any street. (1958 Code, sec. 31-32; 1978 Code,
sec. 22-49)
Sec. 20.02.104 Map and profile of grades
No right-of-way over any of the streets within the city shall be granted to any railroad unless a map and profile of the grades along the streets named shall accompany the
application and ordinance, and it shall be the duty of the city engineer to inspect any and all such maps and profiles, and report the result of his investigation as soon
thereafter as possible to the city council, and no right-of-way shall be granted until such examination shall be made and reported upon, in order to better protect the rights
of property owners along the several streets; provided, however, that there shall be no costs attached to the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-33; 1978 Code, sec. 22-50)
Sec. 20.02.105 Permit to lay tracks
No railroad company shall lay down additional tracks within the limit of the city without a special permit from the city council being first had and obtained. It shall be the
duty of the city engineer to examine and report on such application as to the advisability of granting such special permit. (1958 Code, sec. 31-34; 1978 Code, sec. 22-51)
Sec. 20.02.106 Permit to construct switches
No railroad company shall construct any switch along or across any street in the city without having first received a permit from the city council. (1958 Code, sec. 31-35;
1978 Code, sec. 22-52)
Secs. 20.02.107–20.02.130 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/376
Part II. Maintenance and Repair
Sec. 20.02.131 Maintenance of streets in repair and unobstructed
It shall be the duty of each railroad company whose lines of road are constructed, or may hereafter be constructed, within the city to keep that portion of the streets over
which they operate, between their tracks and switches and for two (2) feet on the outside thereof, in good condition and repair, and to keep the same free from obstructions
of every kind, which repairs shall be made and constructed under the direction and supervision of the city engineer. (1958 Code, sec. 31-24; 1978 Code, sec. 22-41)
Sec. 20.02.132 Bridges, ditches, sewers and culverts
It shall be the duty of each railroad company to construct and keep in repair all bridges and crossings from curbline to curbline at the intersection of streets with the line of
such railroad and over all ditches, sewers and culverts, on the line of its railroad, and to fill up and grade all sinks and gullies adjacent to or on the line of its road, which
work and improvements shall be done and made under the direction of the city engineer, and in such manner and of such material and at such points as may be required by
him. (1958 Code, sec. 31-25; 1978 Code, sec. 22-42)
Sec. 20.02.133 Drainage of streets required
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies whose lines of road are now constructed or which may hereafter be constructed on or over any street or part of a street in the
city, to make, construct and maintain, under the supervision of the city engineer, and in accordance with the plans and specifications to be furnished by him, all such
drains, culverts, waterways and ditches and such other connections as shall be deemed necessary by the city engineer to properly drain the streets through or over which
such railroad line may be constructed, and to conduct the water outside the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-26; 1978 Code, sec. 22-43)
Sec. 20.02.134 Condition of gutters and culverts
Where any railroad has gutters or culverts, the same shall be so constructed or covered up and maintained as not to interfere with free passage and convenient travel along
the street, and so as not to convey water into any street or lot in the city, and the railroad company, or its agents, shall see that the same are constructed accordingly. (1958
Code, sec. 31-27; 1978 Code, sec. 22-44)
Sec. 20.02.135 Preparation of plans, resolution
It shall be the duty of the city council, whenever in its judgment any action is necessary to enforce the provisions of sections 20.02.131 through 20.02.134, to cause to be
prepared by the city engineer plans and specifications for such improvements of the character contemplated by sections 20.02.131 through 20.02.134, as it may deem
necessary to be made by any person owning or operating a line of railroad within the city. Such plans and specifications, when so prepared, shall be submitted to the city
council, together with a resolution declaring such improvements to be necessary, and directing that such person be notified to construct the same without delay, the same
to be approved and passed by the city council. Such plans and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (1958 Code, sec. 31-28; 1978 Code, sec. 22-45)
Sec. 20.02.136 Notice to construct
After such plans and specifications shall have been approved by the city council and such resolution passed, it shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be notified
such person, by written notice, to begin such improvement within ten (10) days from the service of such notice. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of such
resolution, and shall contain a reference to the specifications, filed as aforesaid, and the same shall be authenticated by the certificate of the city clerk. In case of a
corporation, such notice shall be delivered to its chief officer or agent residing in the city. (1958 Code, sec. 31-29; 1978 Code, sec. 22-46)
ARTICLE 20.03 SPEED REGULATIONS*
Sec. 20.03.001 State speed limits applicable except as otherwise provided
(a) The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this chapter, as authorized by state law, hereby
declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas,
in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving
notice thereof.
(b) Proof of a culpable mental state of mind, as defined in chapter 6 of the Texas Penal Code, is not required to prove an offense under this section.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-57; Ordinance 92-30, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/92; 1978 Code, sec. 26-21)
Sec. 20.03.002 Prima facie speed limit
Upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, the prima facie speed limit on all streets within the city shall be thirty (30) miles per hour unless signed otherwise
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1958 Code, sec. 37-57.1; 1978 Code, sec. 26-22)
State law reference–Prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 20.03.003 Maximum and minimum speeds established in certain zones
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the streets or portions thereof described in the
schedule below is greater in some cases and less in some cases than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets or portions thereof, and it is
hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof described in the schedule below shall be as therein stated, when signs are erected
giving notice thereof.
SCHEDULE
In accordance with this section, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth in this schedule, at all times, upon those
streets or portions thereof specified herein:
Speed In
Miles Per
Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of Max. Min.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/376
Travel
4th Street From a point 310 feet south of the
centerline of College Street to a
point 235 feet north of the centerline
of Cardinal Drive north frontage
road.
North and south 35
11th Street (a) From the centerline of Blackmon
Lane to a point 325 feet north of
Sweetgum.
North and south 45
(b) From a point 325 feet north of
Sweetgum to a point 185 feet north
of the centerline of Ashley Street.
North and south 40
(c) From a point 185 feet north of
the centerline of Ashley Street to a
point 485 feet south of the centerline
of College Street (U.S. 90).
North and south 35
(d) From a point 485 feet south of
the centerline of College Street (U.S.
90) to the centerline of Fannett
Road.
North and south 35
23rd Street (a) From the centerline of College to
a point 400 feet north of the
centerline of Bolivar.
North and south 35
(b) From a point 400 feet north of
the centerline of Bolivar to a point
300 feet south of the centerline of
Cartwright.
North and south 30
(c) From a point 300 feet south of
the centerline of Cartwright to the
centerline of Washington Boulevard.
North and south 35
Avenue A (a) From a point 110 feet south of
the centerline of Lavaca to a point
140 feet south of the centerline of
Florida.
North and south 35
(b) From a point 140 feet south of
the centerline of Florida to the
centerline of the U.S. 69 north
frontage road.
North and south 45
Speed In
Miles Per
Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
Bigner Road From a point 220 feet north of the
centerline of East Lucas to a point
North and south 35
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/376
480 feet north of the centerline of
Roland Road.
Brooks From a point 50 feet west of the
centerline of Fannett Road to a point
50 feet east of the centerline of
Major Drive.
East and west 45
Broussard Road From a point 220 feet west of the
centerline of Tram Road to the west
city limits.
East and west 30
Calder Avenue (a) From a point 230 feet west of the
centerline of Caldwood Cut-off
Bridge to a point 610 feet west of
the centerline of Arlington.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 2,800 feet west of
the centerline of FM 364 (Major
Drive) to the west city limits.
East and west 50
Cardinal Drive
main lanes
(U.S. Hwy. 69,
96, 287)
From the intersection with Interstate
10, said point being 4,330 feet
northwest of the centerline of the
A.T. and S.F. Railroad Bridge, to the
south city limits.
Northwest and
southeast
55 45
Cardinal Drive
(north and
south frontage
road)
From the intersection with Interstate
10, said point being 4,330 feet
northwest of the centerline of the
A.T. and S. F. Railroad Bridge, to
the centerline of Spur 380 (Port
Arthur Road).
Northwest and
southeast
50
College Street
(U.S. Hwy 90)
(a) From a point 90 feet east of the
centerline of the Santa Fe Railroad
tracks to a point 30 feet west of the
centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 30 feet west of the
centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou to a
point 60 feet west of the centerline
of 23rd Street.
East and west 45
(c) From a point 60 feet west of the
centerline of 23rd Street to a point
200 feet west of the centerline of
FM 364 (Major Drive).
East and west 50
Speed In
Miles Per
Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
(d) From a point 200 feet west of the
centerline of FM 364 (Major Drive)
East and west 55
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/376
to a point 60 feet east of the
centerline of Wescalder.
(e) From a point 60 feet east of the
centerline of Wescalder to the west
city limits.
East and west 60
Concord Road (a) From the centerline of Gulf
Street to the centerline of S.H. 105
(Sour Lake Road).
North and south 35
(b) From the centerline of S.H. 105
(Sour Lake Road) to a point 250 feet
east of the centerline of Eastex east
frontage road.
North and south 30
(c) From the centerline of Gulf
Street to the centerline of Plum
Street.
North and south 40
(d) From the centerline of Plum
Street to the centerline of East
Lucas.
North and south 35
Crow Road From a point 210 feet north of the
centerline of Folsom to a point 200
feet south of the centerline of Odom
Road.
North and south 35
Delaware (a) From a point 50 feet west of the
centerline of 19th Street to a point
600 feet east of the centerline of
Oak Trace Drive.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 600 feet east of the
centerline of Oak Trace Drive to a
point 900 feet west of Dowlen Road
East and west 40
(c) From a point 900 feet west of
Dowlen Road to the centerline of
F.M. 364 (Major Drive)
East and west 45
Dowlen Road (a) From a point 150 feet west of the
centerline of Eastex west frontage
road to a point 2,090 feet west of the
centerline of Crow Road.
North and south 40
(b) From a point 2,090 feet west of
the centerline of Crow Road to a
point 560 feet north of the centerline
of Gladys.
North and south 45
(c) From a point 560 feet north of
the centerline of Gladys to a point
150 feet north of the centerline of
College.
North and south 35
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/376
Street Limits of Zones Direction of Travel Max. Min.
Eastex
Freeway
(U.S. 69, 96,
287)
From the north city limits
(centerline of Pine Island
Bayou) to the intersection
of Interstate 10 (660 feet
north of the centerline of
Gladys).
North and south 55 45
Eastex
Freeway
(U.S. 69, 96,
287) west
frontage
road
(a) From the Hardin
County line to the north
bank of the L.N.V.A.
Canal.
South 55
(b) From the south bank of
the L.N.V.A. Canal to a
point 215 feet north of the
centerline of Blackmon
Lane.
South 45
(c) From a point 215 feet
north of the centerline of
Blackmon Lane to a point
750 feet south of the
centerline of Kenwood
Drive.
South 35
Eastex
Freeway
(U.S. 69, 96,
287) east
frontage
road
(a) From a point 150 feet
west of the centerline of
Eleventh Street to a point
235 feet south of the
centerline of Delaware.
North 45
(b) From a point 235 feet
south of the centerline of
Delaware to the centerline
of Blackmon Lane (dead
end).
North 35
(c) From a point 100 feet
north of the centerline of
Delaware to the south bank
of the L.N.V.A. Canal.
North 45
(d) From the north bank of
the L.N.V.A. Canal to the
Hardin County line.
North 55
Erie From a point 200 feet
south of the centerline of
West Cardinal south
frontage road to the south
city limits.
North and south 35
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/376
Fannett Road
(State Hwy.
124)
(a) From a point 250 feet west of the
centerline of Fourth Street to a point
175 feet west of St. James
Boulevard.
East and west 40
(b) From a point 175 feet west of the
centerline of St. James Boulevard to
a point 620 feet east of the centerline
of the L.N.V.A. Canal Bridge.
East and west 45
(c) From a point 620 feet east of the
centerline of the L.N.V.A. Canal
Bridge to a point 115 feet west of
the centerline of Parkview Drive.
East and west 50
(d) From a point 115 feet west of the
centerline of Parkview Drive to the
west city limits.
East and west 55
Florida From a point 100 feet west of the
centerline of Spur 380 (Port Arthur
Road) to a point 200 feet east of the
centerline of West Cardinal north
frontage road.
East and west 35
Folsom Road (a) From a point 150 feet east of the
centerline of West Lucas to a point
1,000 feet west of the centerline of
Dowlen Road.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 1,000 feet west of
the centerline of Dowlen Road to the
centerline of FM 364 (Major Drive).
East and west 45
Gladys Avenue (a) From the west right-of-way line
of IH-10 to a point 50 feet east of
the centerline of Central Drive.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 155 feet west of the
centerline of Howell to a point 320
feet east of the centerline of Major
Drive.
East and west 35
Gulf Street From the centerline of the Interstate
10 north service road to Concord
Road.
North and south 40
Helbig Road From a point 150 feet north of the
centerline of East Lucas to a point
200 feet south of the centerline of
the L.N.V.A. Canal Bridge.
North and south 40
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/376
Highland
Avenue
From a point 25 feet north of the
centerline of Euclid to the south city
limits.
North and south 35
IH-10 Seventh to College Street East/west 45
Interstate 10 (a) From a point 1300 feet west of
the centerline of Calder to a point
350 feet west of the centerline of
Harrison.
East and west 60 45
(b) From a point 350 feet west of the
centerline of Harrison to a point
1400 feet east of the centerline of
Eleventh Street.
East and west 55 45
Interstate 10
(north frontage
roads) (Study:
6/14/82)
(a) From a point 150 feet east of the
centerline of Pine Street to a point
200 feet east of the centerline of
Grand Street.
West 35
(b) From a point 200 feet east of the
centerline of Grand Street to the
centerline of St. Helena Street (dead
end).
West 40
(c) From a point 720 feet east of the
centerline of Seventh Street to the
centerline of Eleventh Street.
West 40
Interstate 10
(west frontage
road) (Study:
6/14/82)
(a) From a point 750 feet south of
the centerline of Kenwood Street to
a point 774 feet north of the
centerline of Harrison Street.
South 35
(b) From a point 774 feet north of
the centerline of Harrison Street to a
point 105 feet northeast of the
L.N.V.A. Canal.
South 40
(c) From a point 95 feet southwest
of the L.N.V.A. Canal to a point
0.512 miles southwest of the
centerline of Walden Road.
Southwest 45
(d) From a point 1,631 feet northeast
of the centerline of Major Drive to
the west city limits.
Southwest 40
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/376
Interstate 10
(south frontage
road) (Study:
6/14/82)
(a) From a point 150 feet east of the
centerline of Pine Street to a point
200 feet east of the centerline of
Grand Street.
East 35
(b) From a point 200 feet east of the
centerline of Grand Street to the
centerline of St. Helena.
East 40
(c) From a point 720 feet east of the
centerline of Seventh Street to a
point 697 feet west of the centerline
of Eleventh Street.
East 40
Interstate 10
(east frontage
road) (Study:
6/14/82)
(a) From a point 697 feet east of the
centerline of Eleventh Street to a
point 564 feet southeast of the
centerline of Washington Blvd.
Northeast 40
(b) From a point 95 feet southwest
of the L.N.V.A. Canal to a point
1,800 feet southwest of the
centerline of Walden Road.
Northeast 45
(c) From a point 1,631 feet northeast
of the centerline of Major Drive to
the west city limits.
North 40
IH-10 north
frontage road
(a) From a point 150 feet east of the
centerline of Pine Street to a point
200 feet east of the centerline of
Grand Street.
West 35
(b) From a point 200 feet east of the
centerline of Grand Street to the
centerline of St. Helena Street (dead
end).
West 40
(c) From a point 720 feet east of the
centerline of Seventh Street to a
point 150 feet west of the centerline
of Eleventh Street.
West 40
IH-10 west
frontage road
(a) From a point 750 feet south of
the centerline of Kenwood Street to
a point 774 feet north of the
centerline of Harrison Street.
South 35
(b) From a point 774 feet north of
the centerline of Harrison Street to a
point 105 feet northeast of the
L.N.V.A. Canal.
South 40
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
(c) From a point 95 feet southwest
of the L.N.V.A. Canal to a point
Southwest 45
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/376
0.512 miles southwest of the
centerline of Walden Road.
(d) From a point 1,631 feet
northeast of the centerline of Major
Drive to the west city limits.
Southwest 40
IH-10 south
frontage road
(a) From the centerline of Miller
Street to a point 200 feet east of the
centerline of Grand Street.
East 35
(b) From a point 200 feet [east] of
the centerline of Grand Street to the
centerline of St. Helena.
East 40
(c) From a point 720 feet east of the
centerline of Seventh Street to a
point 697 feet west of the centerline
of Eleventh Street.
East 40
IH-10 east
frontage road
(a) From a point 697 feet west of the
centerline of Eleventh Street to a
point 564 feet southeast of the
centerline of Wash. Blvd.
Northeast 40
(b) From a point 95 feet southwest
of the L.N.V.A. Canal to a point
1,800 feet southwest of the
centerline of Walden Road.
Northeast 45
(c) From a point 1,631 feet
northeast of the centerline of Major
Drive to the west city limits.
North 40
Irving From a point 150 feet south of the
centerline of Madison to a point 150
feet north of the centerline of
Washington Boulevard.
North and south 35
Irving
(Highland
Connector)
From a point 150 feet north of the
centerline of Washington Boulevard
to the centerline of East Alma.
North and south 35
Keith Between Calder and College North and south 40
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
Langham Road From a point 125 feet north of the
centerline of Washington Boulevard
to a point 260 feet south of the
centerline of College.
North and south 45
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/376
Laurel Avenue (a) From the centerline of Magnolia
Street to the centerline of Eleventh
Street.
East 35
(b) From the centerline of Eleventh
Street to a point 70 feet west of the
centerline of Fourteenth Street.
East and west 35
Lindbergh
Drive
From a point 125 feet north of the
centerline of Washington Boulevard
to a point 410 feet south of the
centerline of College.
North and south 40
East Lucas (a) From a point 140 feet west of the
centerline of Pine Street to a point
60 feet east of El Paso.
East and west 40
(b) From a point 60 feet east of El
Paso to the centerline of Eastex
Freeway.
East and west 35
West Lucas From the centerline of Eastex
Freeway to a point 100 feet north of
the centerline of Calder Avenue.
North and south 35
Magnolia From a point 310 feet north of the
centerline of Calder to a point 140
feet south of the centerline of East
Lucas.
North and south 35
Major Drive
(Study: 5/6–
8/96, 1/27/98,
and 5/8/98)
(a) From the centerline of Tram
Road to a point 740 feet north of the
centerline of Willis Lane.
North and south 60
(b) From a point 740 feet north of
the centerline of Willis Lane to the
centerline of State Highway [105].
North and south 55
(c) From the centerline of State
Highway 105 to a point 225 feet
north of the centerline of Folsom
Drive.
North and south 60
(d) From a point 225 feet north of
the centerline of Folsom Drive to a
point 158 feet south of the centerline
of Dishman Road.
North and south 50
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
(e) From a point 158 feet south of North and south 50
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/376
the centerline of Dishman Road to a
point 470 feet north of the centerline
of Manion Drive.
(f) From a point 470 feet north of
the centerline of Manion Drive to a
point 74 feet south of the centerline
of White Road.
North and south 45
(g) From a point 74 feet south of the
centerline of White Road to a point
265 feet north of the centerline of
Brighton Street.
North and south 35
(h) From a point 265 feet north of
the centerline of Brighton Street to a
point 300 feet south of the centerline
of Washington Boulevard.
North and south 45
(i) From a point 300 feet south of
the centerline of Washington
Boulevard to a point 58 feet north of
the centerline of IH-10 west
entrance and exit ramps.
North and south 55
(j) From a point 58 feet north of the
centerline of IH-10 west entrance
and exit ramps to the centerline of
S.H. 124 (Fannett Road).
North and south 45
East Major
Drive
From a point 150 feet south of the
centerline of State Highway 105 to a
point 265 feet northeast of the
centerline of Major Drive.
Northeast and
southwest
45
S. Major Dr.
(S.H. 364)
(a) From the centerline of College
Street to a point 1072 feet south of
the centerline of College Street.
North and south 40
(b) From 1072 feet south of the
centerline of College Street to a
point 259 feet south of the centerline
of Washington Blvd.
North and south 50
(c) From a point 259 feet south of
Washington Blvd. To a point 4652
feet south of the centerline of
Brooks Road.
North and south 60
(d) From a point 4652 feet south of
the centerline of Brooks Road to the
centerline of Fannett Road.
North and south 50
Maury Meyers
Bridge
(a) From the centerline of Phelan to
a point 50 feet west of the centerline
of 13th Street
Westbound 35
(b) From the centerline of Phelan to
a point 80 feet east of the centerline
of 12th Street
Eastbound 35
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/376
M.L. King, Jr.
Parkway South
(Spur 380)
(Study: 8/8/96)
(a) From the centerline of the
Interstate 10 north frontage road to a
point 140 feet south of the centerline
of the SP R.R. crossing.
North and south 40
(b) From a point 140 feet south of
the centerline of the SP R.R.
crossing to the centerline of Royal
Street.
North and south 45
(c) From the centerline of Royal
Street to a point 1320 feet south of
Sulphur Plant Road.
North and south 55
(d) From the centerline of the
Interstate 10 north service road to
Gulf Street.
North and south 40
Northwest
Parkway
(a) From a point 530 feet west of the
centerline of Old Dowlen Road to a
point 850 feet east of the centerline
of Old Dowlen Road.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 530 feet west of the
centerline of Old Dowlen Road to a
point 246 feet east of the centerline
of FM 364 (Major Drive).
East and west 45
(c) From a point 246 feet east of the
centerline of FM 364 (Major Drive)
to the centerline of FM 364 (Major
Drive).
East and west 35
Old Dowlen
Road
(a) From a point 150 feet west of the
centerline of Dowlen Road to a point
470 feet south of the centerline of
Cole Road.
North and south 45
(b) From a point 470 feet south of
the centerline of Cole Road to a
point 135 feet south of the centerline
of S.H. 105 (Sour Lake Road).
North and south 35
Old Voth Road From a point 400 feet north of the
centerline of R.F.D. Road to a point
310 feet south of the centerline of
Broadoak.
North and south 45
Old Voth Road (a) From a point 400 feet north of the
centerline of RFD Rd. to the
centerline of Guess Road.
North and south 35
(b) From the centerline of Guess
Road to a point 310 feet south of the
centerline of Broadoak
North and south 45
Phelan
Boulevard
(a) From a point 300 feet west of the
centerline of Calder to a point 2,800
East and west 40
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/376
feet west of the centerline of Major
Drive (FM 364)
(b) From a point 2,800 feet west of
the centerline of Major Drive (FM
364) to the west city limits.
East and west 45
Plant Road From a point 195 feet east of the
centerline of Eastex east frontage
road to a point 260 feet west of the
centerline of Helbig Road.
East and west 35
Pine Street (a) From a point 85 feet north of the
centerline of Interstate 10 north
frontage road to a point 50 feet south
of Coleman Road.
North and south 35
(b) From a point 50 feet south of the
centerline of Coleman Road to a
point 350 feet south of the north city
limits (Neches River).
North and south 40
Pointe Parkway (a) From a point 75 feet north of the
centerline of Folsom Drive to a point
295 feet south of the centerline of
Northwest Parkway.
North and south 35
Sarah Street From the centerline of Fannett Road
to a point 200 feet west of the
centerline of Fatima.
East and west 35
Spur 93 (a) From the centerline of the U.S.
69 north frontage road to the north
property line of the L.N.V.A. Canal.
North and south 45
(b) From a point 4,350 feet north of
the centerline of FM 3514 to a point
600 feet north of the centerline of
FM 3514.
North and south 60
Spur 380 (Port
Arthur Road)
(a) From a point 40 feet south of the
centerline of Euclid to a point 200
feet south of the centerline of Elgie
Street.
North and south 45
(b) From a point 200 feet south of
the centerline of Elgie Street to the
south city limits (Spindletop Road).
North and south 50
Spur 380 (west
frontage road)
From a point 260 feet south of the
centerline of Adams Street to a point
170 feet south of the centerline of
Alabama.
South 40
Spur 380 (east From a point 70 feet north of the North 40
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/376
frontage road) centerline of Alabama to a point 280
feet north of the centerline of Villiva
Lane.
State Highway
105 (Study:
9/19/83)
(a) From the centerline of U.S. 69 to
a point 148 feet west of the
centerline of East Major Drive.
East and west 45
(b) From a point 148 feet west of the
centerline of East Major Drive to a
point 292 feet west of the centerline
of FM 364 (Major Drive).
East and west 50
(c) From a point 292 feet west of the
centerline of FM 364 (Major Drive)
to the west city limits.
East and west 55
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
Tram Road (a) From a point 260 feet west of the
centerline of Old Voth Road to a
point 150 feet west of the centerline
of Major Drive.
East and west 40
(b) From a point 150 feet west of
the centerline of Major to the west
city limits.
East and west 50
Tyrrell Park
Road
(a) From the centerline of the
Hillebrandt Bayou Bridge to the
centerline of Babe Zaharias Drive.
North and south 40
(b) From the centerline of Babe
Zaharias Drive to the centerline of
Fannett Road (SH 124).
North and south 35
University
Drive
From a point 70 feet south of the
centerline of East Lavaca to a point
150 feet north of the centerline of
Cardinal Drive north frontage road.
North and south 35
U.S. 69 Delaware to IH-10 North/south 45
U.S. 90
Business (west
frontage road)
From a point 150 feet east of
Louisiana to the centerline of North
Street.
South 35
U.S. 90
Business (east
frontage road)
From the centerline of North Street
to the centerline of Pine Street.
North 35
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/376
Walden Road (a) From a point 350 feet west of the
centerline of Interstate 10 to a point
1,900 feet west of the centerline of
Interstate 10.
East and west 35
(b) From a point 1,900 feet west of
the centerline of Interstate 10 to a
point 3,900 feet west of the
centerline of Interstate 10.
East and west 40
(c) From a point 3,900 feet west of
the centerline of Interstate 10 to the
centerline of FM 364 (Major Drive).
East and west 45
Speed In
Miles Per Hour
Street Limits of Zones Direction of
Travel
Max. Min.
Washington
Blvd.
(a) From a point 210 feet west of the
centerline of M.L. King to a point
160 feet west of the centerline of
Santa Fe Railroad tracks.
East/west 35
(b) From a point 160 feet west of
the centerline of Santa Fe Railroad
tracks to a point 160 feet west of the
centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou
Bridge.
East and west 40
(c) From a point 160 feet west of the
centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou
Bridge to a point 600 feet west of
the centerline of Burbank Street.
East and west 45
(d) From a point 600 feet west of
the centerline of Burbank Street to a
point 90 feet east of the centerline of
Major Drive (FM 364).
East and west 40
(1958 Code, secs. 37-58, 37-58.2, 37-58.3, 37-59; Ordinance 76-65, secs. 1, 2, adopted 5/25/76; Ordinance 76-69, secs. 1, 2, adopted 6/8/76; Ordinance 76-102, secs. 1, 2,
adopted 9/21/76; Ordinance 77-126, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/77; Ordinance 78-29, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/78; Ordinance 78-61, sec. 1, adopted 5/30/78; Ordinance 79-35, sec. 1,
adopted 5/1/79; Ordinance 79-56, sec. 1, adopted 7/17/79; Ordinance 80-69, sec. 1, adopted 7/22/80; Ordinance 82-118, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/82; Ordinance 83-133, sec. 1,
adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 84-23, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/84; Ordinance 84-27, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-28, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-29, sec. 1,
adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-30, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/84; Ordinance 84-74, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/84; Ordinance 84-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/8/85; Ordinance 86-04, secs. 1,
2, adopted 1/14/86; Ordinance 86-68, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/86; Ordinance 87-48, sec. 1, adopted 6/23/87; Ordinance 88-63, sec. 1, adopted 6/28/88; Ordinance 89-20, sec.
1, adopted 4/11/89; Ordinance 89-34, sec. 1, adopted 6/6/89; Ordinance 89-56, sec. 1, adopted 8/8/89; Ordinance 89-57, sec. 1, adopted 8/8/89; Ordinance 90-5, sec. 1,
adopted 1/23/90; Ordinance 90-24, sec. 1, adopted 4/10/90; Ordinance 90-41, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/90; Ordinance 91-56, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/91; Ordinance 91-58, sec. 1,
adopted 7/23/91; Ordinance 91-87, sec. 1, adopted 10/22/91; Ordinance 94-12, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/94; Ordinance 97-32, sec. 1, adopted 7/8/97; Ordinance 97-50, sec. 1,
adopted 9/23/97; Ordinance 98-1, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/98; Ordinance 98-40, sec. 1, adopted 6/23/98; Ordinance 98-74, sec. 1, adopted 12/15/98; Ordinance 99-80, sec. 1,
adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 99-88, sec. 1, adopted 11/9/99; Ordinance 00-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/4/00; Ordinance 00-102, sec. 1, adopted 12/12/00; Ordinance 01-021, sec.
1, adopted 3/6/01; Ordinance 01-049, sec. 1, adopted 7/3/01; Ordinance 03-027, sec. 1, adopted 4/8/03; Ordinance 05-094, sec. 1, adopted 12/20/05; 1978 Code, sec. 26-
23; Ordinance 09-044, sec. 1, adopted 8/25/09; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 11-088, sec. 1, adopted 11/22/11; Ordinance 12-037, sec. 1, adopted 6/26/12;
Ordinance 14-040, sec. 1, adopted 8/19/14; Ordinance 18-058 adopted 10/2/18; Ordinance 18-065 adopted 11/20/18; Ordinance 19-020 adopted 4/16/19; Ordinance 19-
037 adopted 6/18/19)
Sec. 20.03.004 Speed limits decreased in school zones
It is hereby determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed permitted by state law upon those streets, or portions of streets, described in the
following schedule is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon those streets or
portions thereof described in the following schedule shall be decreased as therein stated and the limits so declared shall be effective at the times specified therein when signs are erected
giving notice thereof.
In accordance with this section, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour for each school zone between the hours
below, Monday through Friday on school days:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/376
School Street Direction of
Travel
Description Schedule
All Saints Episcopal
School Delaware Street E&W
From a point 30 feet east of the centerline of
Briarcliff Drive to a point 280 feet east of
the centerline of West Lucas Drive.
6:45 a.m.–8:00 a.m.
&
3:00 p.m.–3:45 p.m.
Amelia Elementary Major Drive N&S
From a point 50 feet north of the centerline
of Braeburn Lane to a point 100 feet north
of the centerline of Morgan Lane.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Beaumont United High
School Fourth Street N&S
From a point 100 feet north of the centerline
of Southerland Street to a point 90 feet
south of the centerline of Glenwood
Avenue.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:25 p.m.–3:10 p.m.
Beaumont United High
School
Fannett Road
(S.H. 124) N&S
From a point 650 feet west of the centerline
of Westmoreland Street to a point 250 feet
east of the centerline of Fifth Street.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:25 p.m.–3:10 p.m.
Bingham Head Start Pre-K Florida Avenue E&W
From a point 65 feet west of the centerline
of Kenneth Street to a point 375 feet east of
the centerline of Highland Avenue.
7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
2:15 p.m.–3:00 p.m.
Bingham Head Start Pre-K
Highland
Avenue N&S
From a point 375 feet north of the centerline
of Florida Avenue to a point 375 feet south
of the centerline of Florida Avenue.
7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
2:15 p.m.–3:00 p.m.
Bingham Head Start Pre-K
South Kenneth
Street N&S
From a point 35 feet south of the centerline
of Florida Avenue to a point 50 feet north of
the centerline of Winfree Street.
7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
2:15 p.m.–3:00 p.m.
Blanchette Elementary Lela Street E&W
From a point 25 feet west of the centerline
of Usan Street to a point 150 feet west of
the centerline of Goliad Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Blanchette Elementary &
Odom Academy Goliad Street N&S
From a point 180 feet north of the centerline
of Lela Street to a point 180 feet south of
the centerline of Sarah Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Blanchette Elementary &
Odom Academy Sarah Street E&W
From a point 250 feet east of the centerline
of Usan Street to a point 250 feet west of
the centerline Goliad Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.- 4:35p.m.
Blanchette Elementary &
Odom Academy Usan Street N&S
From the centerline of West Virginia Street
to a point 50 feet north of the centerline of
Lela Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/376
Bob Hope School Park North
Drive
E&W From a point 1,400 feet east of the
centerline of Eastex Freeway Feeder Road
to a point 160 feet south of the centerline of
Sunbird Lane.
7:00 a.m.–8:15 a.m.
&
3:45 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
Caldwood Elementary Berkshire Lane N&S
From the centerline of North Caldwood
Drive to a point 65 feet north of the
centerline of Stratton Lane.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:15 p.m.
Caldwood Elementary
N. Caldwood
Drive E&W
From a point 300 feet east of the centerline
of East Caldwood Drive to the centerline of
Berkshire Lane.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:15 p.m.
Charlton-Pollard
Elementary Brooklyn Street N&S
From a point 40 feet north of the centerline
of Cuniff Avenue to a point 225 feet north
of the centerline of Lincoln Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:20 p.m.
Charlton-Pollard
Elementary Cuniff Avenue E&W
From the centerline of Irving Street to the
centerline of Brooklyn Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:20 p.m.
Charlton-Pollard
Elementary Irving Street N&S
From a point 50 feet north of the centerline
of Cuniff Avenue to a point 50 feet north of
the centerline of Schwarner Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:20 p.m.
Charlton-Pollard
Elementary Jackson Street E&W
From a point 45 feet west of the centerline
of Brooklyn Street to the centerline of
Irving Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:20 p.m.
Dishman Elementary
Champions
Drive E&W
From a point 95 feet north of the centerline
of Walden Road to a point 220 feet north of
the centerline of Laurelwood Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Dishman Elementary Walden Road E&W
From a point 500 feet west of the centerline
of Champions Drive to a point 500 feet east
of the centerline of Champions Drive.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Dr. Mae E. Jones-Clark
Elementary Arthur Street E&W
From a point 65 feet west of the centerline
of Overbrook Lane to the centerline of
Cleveland Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Dr. Mae E. Jones-Clark
Elementary Cleveland Street E&W
From a point 225 feet south of the centerline
of Ives Street to a point 225 feet north of the
centerline of Arthur Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Dr. Mae E. Jones-Clark
Elementary
Taft Street E&W From a point 220 feet west of the centerline
of Cleveland Street to the centerline of
Cleveland Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/376
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Middle School Avenue A N&S
From a point 250 feet north of the centerline
of Blanchette Street to a point 250 feet north
of the centerline of Craig Street.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Middle School Avenue C N&S
From a point 250 feet north of the centerline
of Blanchette Street to a point 250 feet north
of the centerline of Craig Street.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Middle School Blanchette Street E&W
From a point 45 feet west of the centerline
of Avenue A to a point 45 feet east of the
centerline of Avenue C.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Middle School Craig E&W
From a point 45 feet west of the centerline
of Avenue A to a point 45 feet east of the
centerline of Avenue C.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Early College High School Austin Street N&S
From a point 170 feet west of the centerline
of Driskill Street to a point 30 feet west of
the centerline of Eastex Freeway west
service road.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:25 p.m.–3:10 p.m.
Ehrhart School Fannin Street E&W
From a point 450 feet east of the centerline
of 8th Street to a point570 feet west of the
centerline of 8th Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:15 a.m.
&
3:00 p.m.–3:45 p.m.
Fehl-Price Elementary Blanchette Street E&W
From a point 35 feet east of the centerline of
6th Street to a point 50 feet west of the
centerline of Condon Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fehl-Price Elementary Corley Street E&W
From a point 425 feet east of the centerline
of Eight Street to a point 330 west of the
centerline of Eight Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fletcher Elementary Avenue E N&S
From a point 200 feet north of the centerline
of Gilbert Street to the centerline of Gilbert
Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fletcher Elementary Avenue F N&S
From a point 40 feet north of the centerline
of Gilbert Street to a point 40 feet north of
the centerline of Franklin Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fletcher Elementary College Street E&W
From a point 40 feet east of the centerline of
Avenue E to a point 295 feet west of the
centerline of Avenue F.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/376
Fletcher Elementary Franklin Street E&W From a point 40 feet west of the centerline
of Avenue E to a point 275 feet west of the
centerline of Avenue F.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fletcher Elementary Gilbert Street E&W
From a point 35 feet east of the centerline of
Avenue F to a point 50 feet west of the
centerline of Avenue E.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Fletcher Elementary Milam Street E&W
From a point 65 feet east of the centerline of
Avenue E to a point 40 feet east of the
centerline of Avenue F.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Harmony Science
Academy Calder Avenue E&W
From a point 200 feet east of the centerline
of Twenty-Fourth Street to a point 445 feet
west of the centerline of Twenty-Fourth
Street.
6:45 a.m.–7:45 a.m.
&
2:50 p.m.–3:35 p.m.
Homer Drive Elementary Homer Drive N&S
From a point 40 feet east of the centerline of
House Road to the Beaumont Independent
School District boundary of Homer
Elementary.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Homer Drive Elementary White Oak Lane E&W
From a point 40 feet east of the centerline of
Lawrence Drive to the Beaumont
Independent School District Boundary of
Homer Elementary School.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
John P. Odom Academy Fourth Street N&S
From a point 220 feet north of the centerline
of West Virginia Street to a point 180 feet
south of the centerline of West Virginia
Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
John P. Odom Academy
W. Virginia
Street E&W
From a point 180 feet west of the centerline
of Goliad Street to a point 295 feet west of
the centerline of Beale Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Legacy Christian
Academy SH 105 E&W
From a point 280 feet east of the centerline
of Deerfield Drive to a point 785 feet west
of the centerline of Windswept Drive.
7:20 a.m.–8:30 a.m.
&
2:30 p.m.–3:40 p.m.
Lucas Pre-K Center E. Lucas Drive E&W
From a point 420 feet east of the centerline
of Windsor Street to a point 325 feet west of
the centerline of Windsor Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:45 a.m.
&
2:00 p.m.–4:15 p.m.
Lucas Pre-K Center
Magnolia
Avenue N&S
From a point 400 feet south of the centerline
of Trinidad Street to a point 50 feet south of
the centerline of East Lucas Drive.
7:00 a.m.–8:45 a.m.
&
2:00 p.m.–4:15 p.m.
Marshall Middle School Dowlen Road N&S From a point 165 feet north of the centerline
of Gladys to a point 300 feet south of the
centerline of Westgate.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/376
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Marshall Middle School Gladys Avenue E&W
From the centerline of Dowlen Road to a
point 175 feet east of Wood Park Street.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Marshall Middle School Westgate Drive E&W
From a point 100 feet west of the centerline
of Ivy Lane to a point 295 feet west of the
centerline of Dowlen Road.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Martin Elementary
Magnolia
Avenue N&S
From a point 80 north of the centerline of
Delaware Street to a point 50 south of the
centerline of Prince Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Martin Elementary Martin Street E&W
From a point 65 feet east of the centerline of
Pine Street to a point 50 feet west of the
centerline of Taliaferro Drive.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Martin Elementary Pine Street N&S
From a point 50 feet south of the centerline
of Pollard Street to a point 30 feet south of
the centerline of Hill Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Pathways Learning Center Lyle Street E&W
From a point 35 feet east of the centerline of
Victoria Street to a point 40 feet east of the
centerline of Avenue A.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:05 p.m.–2:50 p.m.
Pathways Learning Center Orange Street N&S
From a point 250 feet south of the centerline
of Emma Street to a point 180 feet north of
the centerline of Bolivar Street.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:05 p.m.–2:50 p.m.
Pathways Learning Center Victoria Street N&S
From a point 35 feet south of the centerline
of Lyle Street to a point 220 feet north of
the centerline of Bolivar Lane.
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:05 p.m.–2:50 p.m.
Paul A. Brown Credit
Recovery Center Jaguar Street N&S
From the centerline of South Street to the
centerline of Smart Street.
6:50 a.m.–7:55 a.m.
&
2:55 p.m.–3:40 p.m.
Paul A. Brown Credit
Recovery Center South Street E&W
From a point 250 feet west of the centerline
of Oxford Street to a point 300 feet east of
the centerline of Jaguar Street.
6:50 a.m.–7:55 a.m.
&
2:55 p.m.- 3:40 p.m.
Pietzsch-MacArthur
Elementary Lavaca Street E&W
From a point 50 feet west of the centerline
of Sullivan Street to a point 50 feet east of
the centerline of Lakner Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/376
Pietzsch-MacArthur
Elementary
Woodrow Street E&W From the centerline of Grandberry Street to
a point 30 feet west of the centerline of
Maddox Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Pietzsch-MacArthur
Elementary & South Park
Middle School
Highland
Avenue N&S
From a point 150 feet south of the centerline
of Nolan Street to a point 50 feet south of
the centerline of Clark Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
Regina-Howell
Elementary Howell Street N&S
From a point 50 feet north of the centerline
of Derby Street to a point 125 feet south of
the centerline of Regina Lane.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Regina-Howell
Elementary Regina Lane E&W
From a point 275 feet east of the centerline
of Howell Street to a point 650 feet west of
the centerline of Howell Street.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Roy Guess Elementary Griffing Road E&W
From the centerline of Old Voth Road to a
point 1,005 feet west of Old Voth Road.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Roy Guess Elementary Old Voth Road N&S
From a point 150 feet north of the centerline
of Lawrence Drive to a point 100 feet south
of the centerline of Griffing Road.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Sallie Curtis Elementary N. Circuit Drive E&W
From the centerline of Peyton Drive to a
point 225 feet east of the centerline of
Belvedere Parkway.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Sallie Curtis Elementary Peyton Drive N&S
From a point 50 feet south of the centerline
of Wynden Way to the centerline of North
Circuit Drive.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
Sallie Curtis Elementary Westgate Drive E&W
From the centerline of Peyton Drive to a
point 100 feet west of the centerline of Ivy
Lane.
7:00 a.m.–8:20 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–3:55 p.m.
South Park Middle School
E. Virginia
Street E&W
From the centerline of Highland Avenue to
a point 225 feet west of the centerline of
Hartel Street.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
St. Anne Catholic School Liberty Avenue W
From a point 50 feet west of the centerline
of Eleventh Street to a point 50 feet west of
the centerline of Thirteenth Street.
6:30 a.m.–8:00 a.m.
&
2:50 p.m.–3:40 p.m.
St. Anthony Cathedral
Basilica School
Forsythe Street E&W From a point 115 feet east of the centerline
of Jefferson Street to a point 170 feet west
of the centerline of Archie Street.
6:45 a.m.–8:05 a.m.
&
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/376
.2:45 p.m.–3:30 p.m.
Vincent Middle School Drennan Road E&W
From a point 80 feet east of the centerline of
Major Drive to the centerline of Trojan
Drive.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10–4:35 p.m.
Vincent Middle School Eldridge Drive N&S
From a point 45 feet south of the centerline
of McLean Street to a point 70 feet north of
the centerline of Coburn Drive.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10–4:35 p.m.
Vincent Middle School McLean Street E&W
From a point 225 feet west of the centerline
of Trojan Drive to a point 35 feet east of the
centerline of Eldridge Drive.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10–4:35 p.m.
Vincent Middle School Trojan Drive N&S
From the centerline of McLean Street to the
centerline of Drennan Road.
7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:10–4:35 p.m.
Westbrook High School
Phelan
Boulevard E&W
From a point 1,150 feet west of the
centerline of Major Drive (FM 364) to a
point 2,830 feet west of Smart Street
6:30 a.m.–7:35 a.m.
&
2:25–3:10 p.m.
Willie Ray Smith Middle
School Carlisle Drive N&S
From a point 55 feet south of the centerline
of Concord Road to a point 40 feet north of
French Road.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50–4:35 p.m.
Willie Ray Smith Middle
School Concord Road N&S
From a point 400 feet north of the centerline
of Carlisle Drive to a point 225 feet south of
the centerline of Pinkston Street.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
&
3:50 p.m.–4:35 p.m.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-58.1; Ordinance 74-69, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/74; Ordinance 77-97, sec. 1, adopted 9/6/77; Ordinance 82-31, sec. 1, adopted 3/30/83; Ordinance 82-91, sec. 1,
adopted 8/17/82; Ordinance 82-139, sec. 1, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 83-85, sec. 1, adopted 7/26/83; Ordinance 84-105, sec. 1, adopted 8/14/84; Ordinance 84-111, sec. 1, adopted
9/4/84; Ordinance 85-08, sec. 1, adopted 1/22/85; Ordinance 86-04, secs. 3–6, adopted 1/14/86; Ordinance 86-17, sec. 1, adopted 2/25/86; Ordinance 87-24, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/87;
Ordinance 87-70, sec. 1, adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 87-86, sec. 1, adopted 10/27/87; Ordinance 88-50, sec. 1, adopted 5/17/88; Ordinance 90-43, sec. 1, adopted 8/7/90; Ordinance 90-46,
sec. 1, adopted 8/21/90; Ordinance 90-50, sec. 1, adopted 8/28/90; Ordinance 90-71, sec. 1, adopted 11/20/90; Ordinance 91-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/23/91; Ordinance 91-78, secs. 1–3,
adopted 10/1/91; Ordinance 91-86, sec. 1, adopted 10/15/91; Ordinance 92-20, sec. 1, adopted 2/25/92; Ordinance 92-56, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/92; Ordinance 93-14, sec. 1, adopted
3/2/93; Ordinance 93-60, sec. 1, adopted 10/19/93; Ordinance 93-67, sec. 1, adopted 11/9/93; Ordinance 94-63, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/94; Ordinance 95-11, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/95;
Ordinance 95-45, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/95; Ordinance 95-49, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/95; Ordinance 95-58, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/95; Ordinance 95-67, sec. 1, adopted 10/24/95; Ordinance 95-
77, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/95; Ordinance 97-21, sec. 1, adopted 4/8/97; Ordinance 98-9, sec. 1, adopted 2/17/98; Ordinance 98-54, sec. 1, adopted 8/11/98; Ordinance 98-75, sec. 1,
adopted 12/15/98; Ordinance 99-7, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/99; Ordinance 99-67, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/99; Ordinance 00-64, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/22/00; Ordinance 05-086, sec. 1, adopted
10/11/05; 1978 Code, sec. 26-24; Ordinance 07-081, sec. 1, adopted 8/14/07; Ordinance 09-045, sec. 1, adopted 8/25/09; Ordinance 11-079, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/11; Ordinance 11-088,
secs. 2–3, adopted 11/22/11; Ordinance 12-087, sec. 1, adopted 10/30/12; Ordinance 14-010, sec. 1, adopted 3/4/14; Ordinance 16-035, sec. 1, adopted 7/5/16; Ordinance 16-058 adopted
11/22/16; Ordinance 18-064, sec. 1, adopted 11/20/18; Ordinance 19-021 adopted 4/16/19)
Sec. 20.03.005 School zone speed limits; time applicable
(a) In accordance with this section, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, Monday through
Friday on school days, at locations designated yearly [by] the Beaumont Independent School District.
(b) School zone times during the summer session shall be set at thirty (30) minutes prior to the first activity and fifteen (15) minutes after the beginning of the school
day, and fifteen (15) minutes prior to and thirty (30) minutes after the end of the school day.
(c) These times shall coincide with the commencement and dismissal times provided by the Beaumont Independent School District.
(Ordinance 88-62, sec. 1, adopted 6/28/88; 1978 Code, sec. 26-24.1; Ordinance 18-064, sec. 2, adopted 11/20/18)
Sec. 20.03.006 Unreasonably slow movement
It shall be unlawful for any person to so operate or drive any motor or other vehicle upon the public highways, roads or streets of this city so as to willfully obstruct or
impede the normal, reasonable and safe movement of traffic. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce the foregoing provision by directions to drivers, and a willful
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/376
disobedience to this provision shall be a violation of law punishable as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1958 Code, sec. 37-60; 1978 Code, sec. 26-25)
ARTICLE 20.04 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 20.04.001 Presumption
In any prosecution charging a violation of any section within this article, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any section
within this article together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute in
evidence a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in violation. (Ordinance 92-31, sec. 1,
adopted 3/24/92; 1978 Code, sec. 26-51)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 20.04.002 Parking for more than 48 hours prohibited; impoundment of vehicle
The streets, alleys, or other public places of the city are not intended for storage of vehicles; therefore, any vehicle standing, parked or remaining unattended within the
same two (2) blocks of any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or upon any property of the city for forty-eight (48) or more continuous hours, even though the vehicle
is moved from one place to another within such blocks or city property, is hereby declared to be illegally parked. If the vehicle remains within the same two (2) blocks of
any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or upon any property of the city for an additional forty-eight (48) continuous hours, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance per
se, and any such vehicle when so found shall be removed summarily by any police officer of the city to any storage area designated or maintained by the police
department and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, “vehicle” means a device in or by which a person or
property is or may be transported or drawn on a public highway, other than a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. (Ordinance 99-1, sec. 1, adopted
1/12/99; 1978 Code, sec. 26-41; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 7, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.003 Parking beyond time limit
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street in excess of parking time limits determined for that location and posted in accordance with section
20.01.004(14). (Ordinance 92-31, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/92; 1978 Code, sec. 26-50)
Sec. 20.04.004 Angle parking prohibited
No angle parking shall be permitted on any of the streets of the city, except as authorized in section 20.04.005. (1958 Code, sec. 37-107; 1978 Code, sec. 26-42)
Sec. 20.04.005 Loading and unloading at angle, permit therefor
The public works director is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and
shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or
conditions of any such permit. (1958 Code, sec. 37-109; 1978 Code, sec. 26-43; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 8, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.006 Stopping on railroad tracks
It shall be unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, upon,
along or across any railroad track within the city so as to interfere with the normal movement of railroad cars along such track. (1958 Code, sec. 37-112; 1978 Code, sec.
26-44)
Sec. 20.04.007 Night parking of commercial vehicles
No person shall park any truck, bus or other commercial vehicle on any street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. (1958 Code, sec. 37-114; 1978 Code, sec.
26-45)
Sec. 20.04.008 Parking in city parking lots
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park a vehicle in any city parking lot for a period of two (2) hours or more unless the person is conducting business or
attending an event at an affiliated venue. (Ordinance 77-69, sec. 1, adopted 6/28/77; 1978 Code, sec. 26-45.1; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 9, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.009 Prohibited purposes
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street right-of-way for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(3) Using such vehicle or trailer for advertising purposes or displaying large signs therefrom containing pictures or reading matter.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-115; 1978 Code, sec. 26-46; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 10, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.010 Use of public carrier stops and zones restricted
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or bus zone, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab zone, when any such stop or zone has been
officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (1958 Code, sec. 37-121; 1978
Code, sec. 26-47)
Sec. 20.04.011 Standing or parking of buses
(a) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stop or bus zone so designated as provided herein.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus
stop, bus zone or passenger-loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/376
(c) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus zone or passenger-loading zone on a public street in such manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-122; 1978 Code, sec. 26-48; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 11, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.012 Persons with disabilities
The owner or operator of a vehicle is exempt from the payment of a fee or penalty for parking in a parking garage or lot or in a space with a limitation on the length of
time for parking if:
(1) The vehicle is being operated by or for the transportation of a person with a disability; and
(2) There are:
(A) Displayed on the vehicle special license plates issued under Transportation Code Section 504.201; or
(B) Placed on the rearview mirror of the vehicle's front windshield a disabled parking placard.
(Ordinance 12-023, sec. 1, adopted 5/22/12)
Secs. 20.04.013–20.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Parking Meters
Sec. 20.04.041 Times regulations applicable
The regulations provided for in this division shall apply between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all days other than Saturdays, Sundays and the following
holidays: the first day of January, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, Thanksgiving Day, and the twenty-fifth day of December. (1958 Code, sec. 37-
123; Ordinance 79-25, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/79; 1978 Code, sec. 26-60; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 13, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.042 Installation; coins; time limits; legend
(a) The public works director shall install parking meters in the parking meter zones established as provided in this article upon the curb immediately adjacent to each
designated parking space. Such meters shall be capable of being operated, either automatically or mechanically, upon the deposit therein of an appropriate coin of United
States currency. The public works director shall time the meters upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation to best aid in the regulation, control and
inspection of the parking of vehicles. The timing and type of operation shall be one (1) of the following:
(1) One-hour time limit. Parking shall be lawful for up to sixty (60) minutes upon deposit of five cents for each six-minute increment.
(2) Two-hour limit. Parking shall be lawful for up to two (2) hours upon deposit of five cents for each six-minute increment.
(b) Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set that, upon the expiration of the time period registered by the deposit of one or more coins, as
provided herein, it will indicate by an appropriate signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired, and during such period of time, and prior to the expiration
thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of such period.
(c) Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the value of the coins to be
deposited, and the limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which such meter is located.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-125; Ordinance 79-25, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/79; Ordinance 02-009, sec. 1, adopted 1/29/02; 1978 Code, sec. 26-62; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 15,
adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.04.043 Spaces
(a) The designated parking space for each parking meter shall be bounded as follows: The front edge of the designated parking space along the roadway shall be at the
point the meter is located; the rear edge of the designated parking space shall be the next adjacent parking meter located along the roadway in a direction opposite to the
flow of traffic on that side of the street; in locations without adjacent meters to define the rear edge of the space, the rear edge shall be defined as a point twenty (20) feet
along the roadway in a direction opposite to the flow of traffic on that side of the street. The meter that is located at the front edge of the designated parking space shall be
applicable for the space. The above definition shall be superseded by signs and markings that define the bounds of the parking space for each meter or areas in which
parking is restricted.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such
meter is located so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too large to be parked within a single
designated parking space shall be permitted to occupy two (2) adjoining parking meter spaces when coins shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space so
occupied as is required in this division for the parking of other vehicles in such space.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-126; Ordinance 92-31, sec. 2, adopted 3/24/92; 1978 Code, sec. 26-63)
Sec. 20.04.044 Deposit of coins; exceeding time limit
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed during the restricted and
regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is located unless a coin or coins of United States currency of the appropriate denomination, as
provided in this division, shall have been deposited therein, or shall have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time and such meter has been
placed in operation.
(b) No person shall permit a vehicle when in his control to be parked in any such parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking
meter zone in which such meter is located while the parking meter of such space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. This provision
shall not apply to the act of parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins in such meter.
(c) No person shall park a vehicle in any such parking meter space for a consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for which parking is lawfully
permitted in the parking meter zone in which such meter is located, irrespective of the number or amounts of the coins deposited in such meter.
(d) Minimum fines. The minimum fines to be assessed for parking violations are as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/376
(1) Over-parking: $10.00 ($20.00 after five days);
(2) No parking zone: $15.00 ($30.00 after five days);
(3) Fire zone: $40.00 ($70.00 after five days);
(4) Other parking violations: $15.00 ($30.00 after five days).
(e) The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this division and the state vehicle code
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-127; Ordinance 02-002, sec. 1, adopted 1/22/02; 1978 Code, sec. 26-64)
Sec. 20.04.045 Tampering with meter
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (1958 Code, sec. 37-129; 1978 Code, sec. 26-
66)
Sec. 20.04.046 Use of proceeds; collection of coins, disposition; bond of collector
(a) The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division are levied and assessed as needed to cover the regulation and control of parking
upon public streets; the cost of parking meters, their installation, inspection, supervision, operation, repair and maintenance; control and use of parking spaces and
regulating the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones.
(b) The coins deposited in parking meters shall be collected by qualified employees of the city designated by the city manager. Such persons so designated shall take
from such parking meters the coins deposited in the meters and deliver same in the locked containers to the director of finance or to someone designated by him, where
such money shall be counted, and same shall be deposited to the credit of the city. Each person so designated to collect such coins from the meters and deliver same as
provided for herein shall execute a fiduciary bond in the sum of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duties in collecting and delivering all such coins and moneys, which bond shall be executed by a corporate surety which has been duly authorized under the laws of the
state to execute such bond. The premium for such bond shall be paid by the city. The duties prescribed to the employees under the terms of this section may be in addition
to other regular duties which they may be performing.
(1958 Code, sec. 37-130; 1978 Code, sec. 26-67)
Sec. 20.04.047 Reserved metered parking spaces
(a) The director of public works or his designee is hereby authorized to reserve metered parking spaces for special purposes. If the director of public works or his
designee deems the reservation of metered parking spaces in the public interest, he shall mark such meters appropriately to notify the general public that use of such
meters is unlawful by unauthorized vehicles and shall collect from the person or firm requesting the reserved use the following fees:
(1) The single charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per meter shall be made as an administrative charge for each trip to a single block location for the purpose of
designating reserved meter spaces; and
(2) An additional fee of four dollars ($4.00) per meter per day shall be charged for each day that the designated spaces remain reserved.
(b) Persons or firms who are performing renovations and/or improvements which would endanger the safety and welfare of the citizens if parking spaces are not
reserved will be granted a waiver of all reserved use fees by the director of public works. To obtain the waiver provided herein, a written request must be received by the
director of public works at least ten (10) days prior to the date the reserved meters are required. The written request shall additionally contain the meter location and dates
for which the reservations are needed. The waiver will be granted only for those meters abutting the property being renovated or improved.
(Ordinance 83-124, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/83; Ordinance 87-89, sec. 1, adopted 11/24/87; 1978 Code, sec. 26-68; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 17, adopted 6/19/07)
ARTICLE 20.05 MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS
Sec. 20.05.001 Definitions
After dark. A time thirty (30) minutes or more before sunrise or thirty (30) minutes or more after sunset.
Child. Any individual less than thirteen (13) years of age.
Helmet. Properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American
Society of Testing and Materials, or any applicable at the time of manufacture of the helmet.
Motor-assisted scooter. Shall have the same meaning assigned by Texas Transportation Code section 551.301(2) as it exists or may be amended, and includes a selfpropelled
device with at least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation, a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating
conditions, a gas or electric motor forty (40) cubic centimeters or less, a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device, and the ability to be
propelled by human power alone.
Parent. The natural or adoptive parent, court-appointed guardian or conservator of the child.
Public way. Real property owned, leased, or controlled by a political subdivision of the state, a governmental entity or agency, or similar entity, and dedicated to public
use and is also a path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway.
Wearing a helmet. The person has a helmet fastened securely to his/her head with the straps on the helmet securely tightened in the manner intended by the manufacturer
to provide maximum protection.
(Ordinance 04-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04; 1978 Code, sec. 26-11(a); Ordinance 07-069, sec. 6, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.05.002 Restrictions on location and use
(a) It is unlawful to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter on any street, access road or highway any part of which has a speed limit greater than thirty (30) miles per
hour.
(b) It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter on any path, trail, street, alley or public way within the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/376
(c) It is presumed that a parent allowed a child to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter in a prohibited area.
(d) A person may not operate a motor-assisted scooter after dark within the city.
(e) It is unlawful to operate a motor-assisted scooter with a passenger on the scooter.
(Ordinance 04-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04; 1978 Code, sec. 26-11(b))
Sec. 20.05.003 Helmet required
(a) It is unlawful for any person sixteen (16) years of age or under to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter unless such person is wearing a helmet.
(b) It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a person who must wear a helmet to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter unless the person is wearing a helmet.
(c) It is presumed that a parent allowed such a person to operate or ride a motor-assisted scooter without wearing a helmet.
(Ordinance 04-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04; 1978 Code, sec. 26-11(c))
Sec. 20.05.004 Exemption
The regulations and limitations placed on motor-assisted scooters and neighborhood electrical devices in this article do not apply to those operators of certain mobility
devices as outlined in Texas Transportation Code section 542.009 (Operators of certain mobility devices). (Ordinance 04-019, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04; 1978 Code, sec.
26-11(d))
ARTICLE 20.06 PARADES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 20.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Applicant. A person who has filed a written application for a parade permit.
Chief of police, fire chief, public works director, and city manager. Include their designees.
Commercial parade. A parade sponsored other than by a nonprofit organization, the purpose of which is to advertise a product, whether tangible or intangible, to advertise
or promote an exhibition or theatrical performance, or otherwise operate to the pecuniary benefit of the sponsor.
Parade. An assembly of three (3) or more persons gathering for the common design of moving in or upon any public street from one location to any other location,
whether on foot, on horseback, by mechanical conveyance, or otherwise, as part of a procession, march, pageant, ceremony, or like event.
Parade permit. A written consent or permit to conduct a parade or street or block closure issued pursuant to written application and approval hereunder.
Permittee. A person to whom a parade permit has been granted under this article.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every road or way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for vehicular traffic.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-90; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 18, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 09-002, sec. 1, adopted 1/13/09)
Sec. 20.06.002 Enforcement
(a) Any person conducting, commencing, aiding or engaging in a parade without a parade permit, or otherwise violating any provision of this article, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) The chief of police, his authorized designee, any officer of the city police department, and the fire chief or his authorized designee are hereby authorized to issue
summons and citations, as applicable, for violations of this article.
(c) Anyone involved in or participating in a parade without first receiving a permit as outlined herein or after being directed to cease and desist and informed that the
parade is unlawful because it is without a permit shall individually be in violation of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(d) This section shall not apply to members of the police, fire, or public works department in processing any parade permit application.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-98; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 25, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.06.003 Interference with parade; driving through parade; parking on parade route
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere in any form or manner with the progress of any parade or the persons, vehicles or animals
comprising the parade from the point of commencement to the point of disassembly.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive through or between the persons, vehicles, or animals comprising a parade from the point of commencement to the point
of disassembly.
(c) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle along a public street constituting a portion of the parade route and conspicuously marked as such; in this connection, the
chief of police and the public works director are authorized to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles as needed along the parade route and to cause the route to be
conspicuously marked as such.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the preceding subsection that the place where the vehicle was parked was not conspicuously designated as a parade route
at the time of parking.
(e) This section shall not apply to any member of the city police or fire department acting in the course and scope of their duties in monitoring, regulating and policing
parade activity or otherwise.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/376
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-96; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 23, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 08-028, sec. 1, adopted 4/29/08)
Secs. 20.06.004–20.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 20.06.031 Required; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful to commence, conduct, aid, or engage in a parade upon any public street without having first secured a parade permit therefor from the chief of
police.
(b) The following activities shall be exempt from the requirement of a permit hereunder:
(1) Funeral processions supervised by a licensed mortuary proceeding by a reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of a deceased to a
memorial service or place of interment;
(2) Picketing or other peaceful demonstrations at a fixed location that is not a street;
(3) Sidewalk processions conducted in accordance with all traffic regulations and other applicable laws and ordinances;
(4) Processions, convoys, marches or similar activities conducted by members of the armed forces of the United States or the state while acting in the regular
course and scope of their duties;
(5) Processions, convoys, or the like conducted by members of the city fire or police department while acting in the regular course and scope of their duties;
(6) Wedding processions proceeding by a reasonable route between the residence of a member of the matrimonial party, the place of performance of the
matrimonial service, and/or the place of reception or matrimonial celebration;
(7) Motorcades escorted by members of the city police department as a part of their assigned duties.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-91)
Sec. 20.06.032 Application
(a) Applications for a parade permit must be filed with the chief of police no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date and time for commencement of such parade.
(b) Each application for a parade permit must be made on a form provided for this purpose by the chief of police.
(c) Each application for a parade permit shall be signed by the applicant and contain the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of any organization, firm, association, corporation, or other entity on whose behalf application is made;
(3) Date and time proposed for commencement of the parade;
(4) A statement of the anticipated duration of the parade;
(5) A description of the specific parade route listing all streets to be utilized and the direction of flow from the point of commencement to termination;
(6) The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade;
(7) The estimated number of vehicles, floats, animals, motorized displays and the like to be utilized in the parade;
(8) The estimated number of marching units, bands, color guards, drill teams and the like to participate in the parade.
(d) If the applicant is acting on behalf of a corporation, association, firm or other organization sponsoring the parade, the application must be accompanied by a letter
indicating the organization's sponsorship of such parade and authorizing the applicant to act in its behalf in securing a permit therefor.
(e) Upon receipt of an application for a parade permit, the chief of police shall forward a true copy of same to the fire chief and public works director with a request for
comments thereon.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-92; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 19, adopted 6/19/07)
Sec. 20.06.033 Fees; reimbursement of costs
(a) An application for a permit to conduct a commercial parade shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to reimburse
the city for administrative costs incurred as a result of the conduct of such parade. The applicant for a commercial parade permit will also be responsible for police costs,
cleanup expenses, and other service costs identified by the city. An estimate of these costs will be provided when the permit is secured.
(b) An application for a permit to conduct a noncommercial parade shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to
reimburse the city for administrative costs incurred as a result of the conduct of such parade. Police, cleanup, and other services may be paid by the city. Parades
sponsored or co-sponsored by the city, as determined by the city manager, will not be subject to permit fees or the reimbursement of costs as stated above. Examples of
city-sponsored or co-sponsored parades presently include the Christmas Parade, MLK Parade and Neches River Parade.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; Ordinance 86-112, sec. 1, adopted 11/4/96; 1978 Code, sec. 26-97; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 24, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance
08-028, sec. 1, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance 09-002, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/09; Ordinance 10-015, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 20.06.034 Standards for issuance; action on application
(a) The chief of police may, in consultation with the public works director and fire chief, approve an application for a parade permit subject to reasonable terms and
conditions relating to the time, place or manner for conduct of the parade, including, but not limited to:
(1) The establishment of an alternate time for conduct of the parade;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/376
(2) The establishment of an alternate route for conduct of the parade;
(3) Reasonable regulations regarding the width and length of the parade.
(b) The chief of police, or his designee, may, in consultation with the public works director and fire chief, approve an application for a street or block closure subject to
reasonable terms and conditions relating to the time, place, or manner for the proposed closure. Approval of street or block closures shall be limited to noncommercial
and/or civic events. No approval shall be granted for any requested closure of a public residential street where the access or egress to or from privately owned residential
property would be adversely affected.
(c) A parade permit shall either be issued or denied within seven (7) days after the application therefor being filed with the chief of police.
(d) Upon issuance of a parade permit by the city, all appropriate departments shall be notified. A copy of said permit shall be maintained on file for review.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-93; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 20, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 08-028, sec. 1, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance
09-002, sec. 3, adopted 1/13/09)
Sec. 20.06.035 Denial or revocation
(a) It is the policy of the city that the constitutional rights of citizens be fully considered in determining the granting or denying of parade or street closure permits.
Therefore, the chief of police shall consider the following, in denying, revoking or modifying permits:
(1) If the information contained in the application for a permit is found to be false or incomplete in any material aspect;
(2) If the public peace, health, safety, or welfare will be endangered by the conduct of the parade or street closure or that conduct of the same is reasonably
likely to engender a riot, civil disturbance, or other public calamity;
(3) The permittee has conducted or is conducting a parade or street closure in violation of this article or other applicable laws and ordinances affecting such
activity;
(4) If the permittee fails to obey any lawful order of the chief of police, fire chief, or their respective designees respecting the conduct of the parade or street
closure, or any term or condition to which the approval of the parade permit is made subject;
(5) If the parade or street closure fails to commence within thirty (30) minutes of the appointed time for commencement;
(6) If the conduct of the parade or street closure at the time and place or in the manner proposed will substantially disrupt the safe and orderly movement of
traffic contiguous to the parade route or area of the street closure;
(7) The parade or street closure will require diversion of so great a number of police officers that the provision of adequate police service to the remainder of
the city will be rendered impossible;
(8) If the concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at points of assembly and disassembly is reasonably likely to interfere with the provision of
adequate fire, police, and other emergency services to other parts of the city;
(9) Conduct of the parade or street closure is reasonably likely to result in harm to persons or property; or
(10) If emergency conditions or other exigent circumstances then existing within the city require that the public streets remain open to the free and
unencumbered transportation of emergency crews, equipment and materials.
(b) In the event of denial or revocation hereunder, the chief of police shall provide, at the time of denial or revocation, such oral or written notice of denial or revocation
that is feasible under the circumstances then existing and, in addition, within three days thereafter, shall provide written notice to the permittee or applicant setting forth
the specific reasons forming the basis for denial or revocation. Such written notice shall be mailed to the permittee or applicant.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-94; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 21, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 08-028, sec. 1, adopted 4/29/08; Ordinance
09-002, sec. 3, adopted 1/13/09)
Sec. 20.06.036 Appeal procedure; final decision
(a) Any applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council. Such appeal may be accomplished by requesting the city manager, or whoever is
acting in his place, to place such appeal upon the agenda of the next available regular council meeting. This shall be done so long as it does not have to be placed on such
agenda as an emergency item. If circumstances prevent such appeal from being considered by the city council, then such appeal shall be considered by the city manager or
whoever is acting in his place. The decision hereby rendered shall be final. If a decision is not rendered prior to three (3) full days before the commencement of the
parade, such failure to act shall conclusively be presumed an approval of the decision of the chief of police. The lack of a decision shall be conclusively presumed an
approval of the decision of the chief of police. In the absence of an appeal made in accordance with the procedures above described, the decision of the chief of police
shall be final.
(b) An appeal from the decision of the chief of police shall include a copy of the application for a permit and a statement of the action complained of. It shall be
delivered to the office of the city manager together with applicant's request for an appeal. Such appeal shall not be considered as requested or filed without such material.
(Ordinance 85-115, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; 1978 Code, sec. 26-95; Ordinance 07-069, sec. 22, adopted 6/19/07; Ordinance 08-028, sec. 1, adopted 4/29/08)
ARTICLE 20.07 PUBLIC TRANSIT
Sec. 20.07.001 Definitions
Adult. A person 19 years of age or older.
Child. A person under 6 years of age.
Disabled. A disabled person registered with the Beaumont Municipal Transit System who has been issued a transit identification card indicating same, based on
certification by a government agency or physician, or otherwise presenting a Medicare card.
Seniors. A person 65 years of age or older.
Special transit services (STS). Transit services for persons disabled by medical conditions that make the use of regular transit services ineffective, who are registered with
the Beaumont Municipal Transit System and have been issued a transit identification card indicating same based on physician-provided proof of disability as defined
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/376
under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Youth. A person between the ages of 6 and 18 years of age.
(Ordinance 12-088, sec. 1, adopted 11/6/12)
Sec. 20.07.002 Administration
The director responsible for the Beaumont Municipal Transit System will develop the forms, procedures, and guidelines needed to issue identification cards and
implement the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 12-088, sec. 1, adopted 11/6/12)
Sec. 20.07.003 Schedule of fares
(a) Regular fixed route fares.
(1) Adult fares: $1.50; day pass: $3.00; weekly pass: $12.00; monthly pass: $40.00.
(2) Seniors, disabled, and youth fares: $0.75; day pass: $2.25; weekly pass: $9.00; monthly pass: $30.00.
(3) Child fares: Free. A child must be accompanied by a fare-paying passenger.
(4) Transfers: $0.25.
(5) If requested by the driver, proof of eligibility for other than an adult fare must be presented upon boarding.
(b) Special transit service (STS) fares.
(1) STS identification card holder fares: $2.50; monthly pass: $80.00.
(2) Medical attendant accompanying STS passenger: Free.
(3) Companion accompanying STS passenger: $2.50.
(4) Proof of eligibility must be presented upon request when purchasing a pass card.
(5) Additional companions may be allowed subject to available space at the companion rate.
(6) Contracted service provided to social service agencies shall be priced based on the cost of such service.
(1958 Code, sec. 9-1; Ordinance 75-56, sec. 1, adopted 7/16/75; Ordinance 81-20, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/24/81; Ordinance 81-90, secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/17/81; Ordinance
82-95, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/24/82; Ordinance 83-22, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/83; Ordinance 83-146, sec. 1, adopted 11/1/83; Ordinance 83-154, sec. 1, adopted 12/6/83;
Ordinance 86-31, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/86; Ordinance 87-69, sec. 1, adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 91-61, sec. 1, adopted 8/6/91; Ordinance 94-60, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/94;
Ordinance 00-24, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/00; Ordinance 01-076, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/01; Ordinance 01-089, sec. 1, adopted 10/23/01; Ordinance 03-055, secs. 1, 2, adopted
7/22/03; 1978 Code, secs. 28-5, 28-6; Ordinance 12-088, sec. 1, adopted 11/6/12)
ARTICLE 20.08 VULNERABLE ROAD USERS
Sec. 20.08.001 Definitions
Vulnerable road user.
(1) A pedestrian, including a runner, physically disabled person, child, skater, highway construction and maintenance worker, tow truck operator, utility
worker, other worker with legitimate business in or near the road or right-of-way, or stranded motorist or passenger;
(2) A person on horseback;
(3) A person operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a bicycle, handcycle, horse-driven conveyance, or unprotected
farm equipment; or
(4) A person operating a motorcycle, moped, motor-driven cycle, or motor-assisted scooter.
(Ordinance 11-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 20.08.002 Operating at a safe distance
(a) An operator of a motor vehicle approaching or passing a vulnerable road user on a highway or street shall:
(1) When passing, vacate the lane in which the vulnerable road user is located if the highway or street has two or more marked lanes running in the same
direction; or
(2) Approach or pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a)(2) above, when road conditions allow, safe distance is at least:
(1) Three feet if the operator's vehicle is a passenger car or light truck; or
(2) Six feet if the operator's vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor vehicle as defined by Texas Transportation Code section
522.003.
(Ordinance 11-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 20.08.003 Turning requirements
(a) An operator of a motor vehicle that is making a left turn at an intersection, including an intersection with an alley or private road or driveway, shall yield the rightof-
way to a vulnerable road user who is approaching from the opposite direction and is in the intersection, or is in such proximity to the intersection as to be an immediate
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/376
hazard.
(b) An operator of a motor vehicle may not overtake a vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and subsequently make a right-hand turn in front of the
vulnerable road user unless the operator is safely clear of the vulnerable road user, taking into account the speed at which the vulnerable road user is traveling and the
braking requirements of the motor vehicle making the right-hand turn.
(Ordinance 11-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 20.08.004 Intimidation prohibited
An operator of a motor vehicle may not maneuver the vehicle in a manner that:
(1) Is intended to cause intimidation or harassment to a vulnerable road user; or
(2) Threatens a vulnerable road user.
(Ordinance 11-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 20.08.005 Due care
An operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any vulnerable road user on a roadway or in an intersection of roadways. (Ordinance 11-
001, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 20.08.006 Affirmative defense
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that at the time of the offense the vulnerable road user was acting in violation of the law. (Ordinance 11-001,
sec. 1, adopted 1/11/11)
CHAPTER 21
RESERVED
CHAPTER 22
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 22.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 22.01.001 Tampering with apparatus; placing posters thereon
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, molest or use in any manner the poles, wires, crossarms, lamps, hoods, switches, cutoffs, connections, or any part of the
lines or apparatus belonging to the city or any person within the city, and no person shall have the right to place upon the poles belonging to the city or such person any
handbills, notices, cards, advertising bills, placards or any written, printed or painted matter, either by posting, tacking, suspending or any other mode of fastening. (1958
Code, sec. 39-1; 1978 Code, sec. 28-1)
State law reference–Criminal mischief by tampering with public communications, public water, gas, or power supply, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.03.
Sec. 22.01.002 Interference of installations with private property
It shall be unlawful for any person, in the erection, repair and maintenance of his wires, poles or other appliances, to, without consent, interfere with, injure, molest,
damage or fasten to, and connect with, the shade trees, buildings and improvements of any property holder within this city. (1958 Code, sec. 39-2; 1978 Code, sec. 28-2)
Sec. 22.01.003 Underground installations; furnishing plan, permission to lay
Companies having an underground pipage system or underground wires shall be required to furnish the city engineer with the map showing streets, alleys and sidewalks
occupied by the pipage or underground wire system and the dimensions of the pipes used, and no such company shall be allowed to repair or put in new pipes or wires
without first obtaining permission of the city engineer, and first filing in the office of the city engineer a map showing the territory to be occupied by the pipage or wire
system and the dimensions of the pipe to be used. No such company shall be allowed to continue the occupancy of the streets of the city unless it complies with the above
provisions. (1958 Code, sec. 39-3; 1978 Code, sec. 28-3)
Sec. 22.01.004 Cable television or community antenna system operation without franchise prohibited
(a) No person, partnership, corporation or association shall construct, operate or maintain in, upon, along, across, over and under the streets, alleys, easements and
public places located within the city a cable television system or community antenna system or any other related system for the interception, transmission and distribution
of audio and video signals, including television, without first obtaining a franchise from the city council.
(b) In case any cable television system or community antenna system is operated or attempts to operate in, upon, along, across, over and under any of the streets, alleys,
easements and public places of the city, then in addition to other remedies available the city council shall have the authority to institute on behalf of the city and in the
name of the city any proper action or proceeding to correct or abate such violations as outlined above.
(1958 Code, sec. 23-5.1; 1978 Code, sec. 28-4)
Sec. 22.01.005 Watershed protection regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/376
The watershed protection regulations as on file with the city clerk are hereby adopted as the watershed protection regulations of the city. (Ordinance 01-099, sec. 1,
adopted 12/11/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-141)
State law reference–Sanitary standards of drinking water and protection of public water supplies and bodies of water, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 341.031 et seq.
ARTICLE 22.02 WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22.02.001 Water service rates
(a) Effective October 1, 2016, the following rates per month shall be the rates charged for water service furnished to customers within and outside of the corporate
limits of the city except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
Meter Size/Inches Inside City Rate Outside City Rate
5/8 $13.04 $19.60
1 $14.45 $21.66
1-1/2 $15.85 $23.75
2 $19.78 $29.67
3 $40.18 $60.30
4 $48.71 $73.07
6 $87.82 $131.71
8 $120.77 $181.13
10 $166.19 $249.31
12 $207.19 $310.79
Usage rate first 1,000 gallons Minimum Minimum
Over 1,000 gallons $ per 1,000 gallons $4.41 $6.63
(b) Senior citizens who comply with subsection (c) below will receive a discount equivalent to one thousand (1,000) gallons of water ($4.41).
(c) Eligible senior citizens shall mean customers residing in a single-family residence inside the city who are over the age of sixty-five (65) years. To obtain the
monthly minimum charge deduction, persons eligible must file a sworn application on a form provided therefor, with water customer services. Upon approval of the
application the senior citizen's monthly minimum charge shall be applicable for the life of the applicant.
(d) Apartment complexes and mobile home parks with four (4) or more units shall be billed a minimum monthly water service rate for 75% of the number of units at the
5/8-inch meter rate. Additional usage above and beyond the minimum usage will be billed-based on rates set by this section.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; Ordinance 89-79, sec. 1, adopted 10/24/89; Ordinance 90-68, sec. 1, adopted 11/13/90; Ordinance 92-81, sec. 1, adopted
12/8/92; Ordinance 00-45, sec. 1, adopted 5/30/00; Ordinance 00-56, sec. 1, adopted 6/27/00; Ordinance 04-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/04; 1978 Code, sec. 28-50;
Ordinance 07-093, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance 08-075, sec. 1, adopted 9/9/08; Ordinance 09-018, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/09; Ordinance 09-053, sec. 1, adopted
9/22/09; Ordinance 10-074, sec. 1, adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance 11-069, sec. 1, adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 12-070, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 13-053, sec. 1,
adopted 9/10/13; Ordinance 14-030, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/14; Ordinance 16-049, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/16; Ordinance 17-050, secs. 1–2, adopted 7/25/17)
Sec. 22.02.002 Wastewater service rates
(a) Effective October 1, 2016, the following rates per month shall be the rates charged for wastewater services furnished to customers within and outside of the
corporate limits of the city where the wastewater produced by such customers is a normal strength wastewater (150 mg/1 lb) except as provided in subsection (b) of this
section:
Meter Size/Inches Inside City Rate Outside City Rate
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/376
5/8 $8.34 $12.48
1 $8.48 $12.71
1-1/2 $8.62 $12.92
2 $9.36 $14.02
3 $10.59 $15.87
4 $15.51 $23.30
6 $25.44 $38.09
8 $31.08 $46.64
10 $42.39 $63.56
12 $53.67 $80.47
Usage rate first 1,000 gallons Minimum Minimum
Over 1,000 gallons $ per 1,000 gallons $3.96 $6.01
(b) Senior citizens who comply with subsection (c) below will receive a discount which is equivalent to one thousand (1,000) gallons of water ($3.96).
(c) Eligible senior citizens shall mean customers residing in a single-family residence inside the city who are over the age of sixty-five (65) years. To obtain the
monthly minimum charge deduction, persons eligible must file a sworn application, on a form provided therefor, with water customer services. Upon approval of the
application the senior citizen's monthly minimum charge shall be applicable for the life of the applicant.
(d) Residential sewer charges shall be based on the average water bill invoiced for the month of November, December, January and February. The monthly individual
sewer bill shall not exceed that average. Where no preceding November through February monthly average bill is available, water customer service will use an average
bill based on six thousand (6,000) gallons per month at a 5/8-inch meter rate as the cap.
(e) Commercial and industrial sewer usage charges shall be based on one hundred (100) percent of the metered water usage. In circumstances where a commercial or
industrial customer desires a credit for metered water being consumed but not being returned to the sanitary sewer, it shall be the responsibility of the user to furnish to the
director of water utilities an engineering report, certified by a professional engineer, that justifies and supports the discharge reduction as being a continuous normal part
of the process. Based on the data provided, the director of water utilities may estimate said return or require submetering of the process water. Meters used for
submetering shall be furnished at the customer's expense and shall be approved by the director of water utilities.
(f) Apartment complexes and mobile home parks with four (4) or more units shall be billed a minimum monthly water service rate for 75% of the number of units at the
5/8-inch meter rate. Additional usage above and beyond the minimum usage will be billed based on rates set by this section.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; Ordinance 89-79, sec. 2, adopted 10/24/89; Ordinance 90-68, sec. 2, adopted 11/13/90; Ordinance 92-81, sec. 1, adopted
12/8/92; Ordinance 00-45, sec. 2, adopted 5/20/00; Ordinance 00-56, sec. 2, adopted 6/27/00; Ordinance 04-042, sec. 2, adopted 6/22/04; 1978 Code, sec. 28-51;
Ordinance 07-093, sec. 2, adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 24, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 08-075, sec. 2, adopted 9/9/08; Ordinance 09-018, sec. 2, adopted
4/7/09; Ordinance 09-053, sec. 2, adopted 9/22/09; Ordinance 10-074, sec. 2, adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance 11-069, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 12-070, sec. 2,
adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 13-053, sec. 2, adopted 9/10/13; Ordinance 14-030, sec. 2, adopted 7/15/14; Ordinance 16-049, sec. 2, adopted 9/27/16; Ordinance 17-050,
secs. 3–5, adopted 7/25/17)
Sec. 22.02.003 Payment of charges and deposits
(a) All bills shall be computed at the herein described rates and shall be payable within thirty (30) days from the date of such bills.
(b) Failure or refusal by any customer to pay any bill to the city, upon demand, shall constitute a breach of contract, and water and sewer service may, within ten (10)
days from notice of such failure, be discontinued to the customer, and, at the discretion of the finance officer, such services shall not be renewed until the customer has
paid all delinquent bills, plus the following applicable service charges:
(1) Field collection: $20.00.
(2) Disconnection: $25.00.
(3) Unauthorized use: $35.00.
(4) Meter removed: $50.00.
(5) Service killed at the main line: $300.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/376
(6) Second trip on service turn-on: $15.00.
(7) Turn-on fee: $15.00.
(8) Returned check: $25.00.
(9) Late fee: $5.00.
(10) Tampering fee: $100.00.
(c) The notice to the user of failure or refusal to pay for water, sewer and sanitation service shall provide for a hearing if requested by the user. A user may request and
receive a hearing concerning termination of water service and termination shall not occur until a determination of the merits of the user's appeal is made by the person
conducting the hearing.
(d) The finance officer may require from any applicant for water service a cash deposit to secure payment of water, sewer and sanitation charges or any other charges
that may accrue, and when such deposit is made it shall be not less than ninety dollars ($90.00); provided, however, additional deposits may be required from any
applicant to pay charges accrued or to accrue for the services. Failure to pay the additional deposit will forfeit the right to water, sewer and sanitation services and the
same may be discontinued five (5) days after notice to pay such additional deposit.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; Ordinance 00-46, sec. 1, adopted 5/30/00; Ordinance 03-105, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-52; Ordinance 11-080,
sec. 1, adopted 9/27/11)
Sec. 22.02.004 Connection to water and sewer systems and fees
(a) Required. All property owners owning property within the city which is within three hundred (300) feet of a city sanitary sewer or water line measured from the
property line of such property to such utility line shall be required to connect to same.
(b) Connections to be made by water utilities department; tampering, etc., prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or agent of any company to make connections with or any opening into the city sanitary sewer or water system.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person or agent of any company to open, close or tamper with water system appurtenances. All water and sanitary sewer
connections shall be made by water utilities department personnel or persons authorized by the water utilities director.
(c) Each detached dwelling unit shall be served by a separate meter. At the option of the owner, a building containing more than one dwelling unit or a mobile home
park may be served by a single meter of a size to be determined by the water department. Accessory buildings, including servants' quarters, may be served by the same
meter that serves the main building. Where a residential dwelling and commercial business are served by a single meter, the account shall be considered as a commercial
account for billing purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person or company to furnish water to a separate detached business or dwelling unit by means of a water hose or
other similar hose connection.
(d) Meter and tap fees.
(1) A charge shall be made by the water utilities department for each new tap of the water and sewer main for a connection, said charge to be determined by
the size of the connection and size of the meter. A fee shall be charged, according to the schedule established by the director of water utilities annually. The fee
shall be sufficient to cover cost of materials and labor necessary to make such connection, plus ten (10) percent for overhead.
(2) All meters used for measuring the flow of water or sewer shall be approved by the director of water utilities.
(e) Connection permits required; applications. Application for connection permits shall be made in writing to the building official by the property owner or his
authorized agent.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; 1978 Code, sec. 28-53; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 25, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.005 Testing water meters
(a) Any customer to whom water is furnished through a meter shall have the right to demand that his water be tested for accuracy, and when the customer wishes such
test made, he shall deposit with the water department thirty dollars ($30.00) for each meter he desires to be tested.
(b) If any meter through which a customer is being supplied water is found, upon test, to be inaccurate by more than two (2) percent plus, the amount deposited for
making such test is to be returned to the customer and all charges against the customer shall be credited for the proportionate amount the bill is increased because of overregistration
of the meter.
(c) If, upon such test, the meter if found accurate, the deposit of the customer shall be retained as a fee for making such test. If the meter is found slow by more than two
(2) percent, then it will be the duty of the director to charge the customer for any amount that may be due the water department because of under-registration of the meter.
(d) Any customer shall have the privilege of witnessing the test of his meter, and for that purpose shall be given notice of the time when such test is to be made.
(e) Should a dispute arise between a consumer and the water department as to the amount of any bill and as to the number of gallons of water used by such consumer,
the consumer, complying with subsection (a), may have his meter tested. If, however, the consumer fails or refuses to have his meter tested, it shall be the duty of the
water department to make such test to determine whether the customer is being overcharged and shall advise the consumer that such test is to be made and the time
thereof, and if such test is made and it is found the meter is correctly registering within a range of two (2) percent plus or minus, then the customer's bill, together with the
testing charge above specified, shall become due and payable, and upon his refusal to pay same, the customer's water shall be cut off and no further services rendered until
delinquent bills are paid.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; 1978 Code, sec. 28-54; Ordinance 11-080, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/11)
Sec. 22.02.006 Water and sewer service outside city
No water or sewer service shall be furnished any subdivision outside the city unless and until a plan, plat or replat shall have been first approved in the manner provided
by law. If such a plan, plat or replat shall have been so approved in accordance with the state statutes, the city may, if it is deemed advisable, furnish water service to
premises outside the city limits, under the following rules:
(1) Any person residing outside of the city desiring to use city utilities shall make application to the water department requesting service, which shall state
the location of the premises to be served and the purpose for which service is to be used. Such application shall be made upon blanks furnished by the city and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/376
shall be signed by the agent or owner of the property to be served, and he will become liable for charges for water furnished under such services, and subject to
the same remedial action as for service inside the city.
(2) Water services to customers outside the city limits shall be rendered at a rate that is equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the rate established inside
the city limits.
(Ordinance 88-72, sec. 1, adopted 8/9/88; 1978 Code, sec. 28-55; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 26, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.007 Fluoridation of water supply
(a) A source of fluoride ion approved by the department of state health services shall be added to the water supply of the city, under the rules and regulations of the state
commission on environmental quality, such addition to be administered by the director of water utilities of the city in a manner approved by the health officer of the city.
(b) The addition of fluoride shall be in amounts recommended by the department of state health services, not to exceed more than one (1) part of fluoride to every
million parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of the city.
(Ordinance 70-50, secs. 1–3, adopted 8/18/70; Ordinance 88-72, sec. 2, adopted 8/9/88; 1978 Code, sec. 28-56; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 27, adopted 5/13/08)
Secs. 22.02.008–22.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Cross-Connection Control and Prevention*
Sec. 22.02.051 Purpose
The purpose of this division is:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal
distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system(s) and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping systems.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(a))
Sec. 22.02.052 Cross-connections prohibited
(a) No installation of potable water supply, piping, or part thereof shall be made in such a manner that allows used, unclean, polluted, or contaminated water, mixtures,
gases, or other substances to enter any portion of such piping by reason of backsiphonage, backpressure, or any other cause.
(b) No person shall install any water-operated equipment or mechanism or use any water-treating chemical or substances, if it is found that such equipment, mechanism,
chemical, or substance may cause pollution or contamination of the public potable water supply.
(c) No person shall connect to the public potable water system any mechanism(s) or system(s) designed to return used water to the public potable water system through
any measures.
(d) No person shall connect to the public potable water system an auxiliary water system without the approval of the city.
(e) No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the public water supply is protected
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) and this division. Water service shall be discontinued by the city if
a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained, and tested in accordance with TCEQ rules and this division.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(b); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.053 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to this division:
Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing
fixture, receptor, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply
outlet, never less than one (1) inch (25 mm).
Auxiliary supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources, such as, but not limited to, a well, spring, river, stream, used waters, or industrial fluids. These
waters constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a cross-connection.
Backflow prevention device or assembly. Any mechanical or physical means to prevent backflow into the potable water system, including reduced pressure backflow
assemblies, double check valve assemblies, atmospheric vacuum breakers, pressure vacuum breaker assemblies, or air gap. All backflow prevention assemblies must be
approved by the city and shall have been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association and have met
completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California established by “Specification of Backflow Prevention Assemblies” of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
City or the city. The City of Beaumont or its authorized representative, which, for the purposes of implementation and enforcement of the backflow prevention program,
shall normally mean representatives of water utilities.
Commission or TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality, the regulatory agency of the state.
Cross-connection. Any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle
equipment or device, through which it may be possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other contaminant, to enter into any part
of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Double check valve assembly. A backflow prevention assembly which consists of two internally loaded check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed
as a unit between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves and fittings with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/376
Person. Any individual, partnership, associations, corporations, firms, clubs, trustees, receivers, and bodies politic and corporate.
Plumbing code. The city's plumbing code as adopted under section 24.02.151 of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Public water system or supply. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs,
facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. For the purposes of this division, this shall
normally mean the public water supply maintained by the city.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it.
Recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. An individual meeting the requirements of the most recent revisions to title 30, Texas Administrative Code section
290.44(h)(4), and holding a current endorsement from the state commission on environmental quality or its designated agent, for the type of assembly being tested.
Reduced pressure principle assembly. A backflow prevention assembly consisting of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between
two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.
Water utilities director. The person in charge of the city water utilities department or his/her designated representative.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(c); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.054 Applicability
The rules and regulations set forth herein are intended to limit backflow potential at residential, commercial and industrial facilities as well as all wholesale customers and
all other connections to the city's public water system. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from requiring appropriate backflow prevention,
including disconnection from service, for any water service that presents a backflow potential where plumbing code requirements are not sufficient to protect the city's
public water system. (Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(d))
Sec. 22.02.055 Responsibility for costs of compliance
The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees. These costs include but are not limited to the purchase,
installation, testing, and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. These costs shall also include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. (Ordinance 01-032, sec.
1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(e); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.056 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city. (Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted
3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(f))
Sec. 22.02.057 Thermal expansion
It is the sole responsibility of any user who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the
installation of a backflow prevention assembly. (Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(g))
Sec. 22.02.058 Rental properties
Any person who owns or controls rental property is responsible for the installation, testing, and repair of any necessary backflow prevention assemblies on that property.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(h))
Sec. 22.02.059 Right of entry
(a) Upon presentation of proper identification, authorized representatives from the city shall have the right to enter any building, structure, or premises during normal
business hours, or at any time during the event of an emergency, to perform any duty imposed by this division. These duties may include sampling and testing of water, or
inspections and observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Where a consumer has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the consumer shall make necessary arrangements with the security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. Refusal to allow entry for these
purposes may result in discontinuance of water service.
(b) On request, the consumer shall furnish to the city any pertinent information regarding the potable water supply system on such property where cross-connections
and backflow are deemed possible.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(i))
Sec. 22.02.060 Abatement by city
(a) The city shall conduct a plumbing inspection or customer service inspection on any residential or commercial establishment served by the city's public water supply
prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the water utilities director has reason to believe that cross-connections or
other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the customer's private distribution facilities. The purpose of the inspection is
to determine compliance with this division and applicable portions of the city's plumbing code relating to cross-connection control and unsafe plumbing practices. Upon
determination by the city that the residential or commercial establishment falls under the provisions of this division and requires a backflow prevention assembly, the
water utilities director shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the establishment to install the proper backflow prevention assembly(ies) commensurate with the
degree of hazard. A copy of the notice which is issued or caused to be issued by the water utilities director shall be forwarded to the chief plumbing inspector of the city.
(b) An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line or point of delivery to a consumer's water system whenever the following
conditions exist:
(1) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not
acceptable as an additional source by the TCEQ or the city, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard.
(2) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential
hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/376
assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city's
public water system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
(3) In the case of premises having (i) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against, or (ii) intricate plumbing and
piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the city's public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing
an approved backflow prevention assembly in each service line.
(c) Using the city's plumbing code, TCEQ regulations and guidelines, and American Water Works Association (AWWA) recommendations, the water utilities director
shall designate the type of backflow prevention assembly required for each type of establishment or hazard. In the case of conflict between these references, the more
stringent standard shall apply.
(d) Any backflow prevention assembly required by this division shall be of a model and size approved by the water utilities director.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(j); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.061 Fire hydrant protection
An approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant
water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to the city's public water
supply. A reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly must be installed if any contaminant other than the potable water can be introduced into the system.
(1) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this division. All fire
hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current requirements as provided for by the customer service section and water distribution section.
(2) Only fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used on fire hydrants in the city public water supply
system. All fire hydrant meters shall be obtained from the city water utilities department.
(3) A deposit is required to ensure the return of all water meters and backflow prevention assemblies to the water distribution section. Failure to return the
assemblies will result in forfeiture of the deposit and enforcement action may be taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in the penalty section of
this division.
(4) Non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city's public water system will be confiscated and not returned. Enforcement action
may be taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in the enforcement section of this division.
(5) It shall be a violation of this division for anyone other than authorized employees of the city to open, tamper with, or use water from any fire hydrant
without the express written permission of the city water utilities department.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(k); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.062 Installation requirements
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements, to ensure their proper operation and accessibility:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the city's plumbing code and the manufacturer's instructions. All backflow
prevention assemblies installed in accordance with this division shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. The test
report shall be sent to the water utilities department within ten (10) days of the installation. The assembly installer shall obtain the required plumbing permits
prior to installation as required by the city's plumbing code.
(2) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be located in water or installed in a pit or other location subject to flooding.
If a double check valve assembly is installed in a vault, brass plugs shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall be provided.
(3) When a backflow prevention assembly is installed to serve an entire establishment, the assembly shall be installed at the service connection of the water
supply, before any branch in the line, and on private property located just inside the boundary of the city's right-of-way. The water utilities director may specify
additional areas for installation of assemblies if needed.
(4) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(5) All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the water utilities director prior to installation.
(6) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing. Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall
have at least six-inch clearance on all sides of the assembly. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on
the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, twelve (12) inches below the assembly, and thirty-six (36) inches above the assembly. “Y” pattern
double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward.
(7) If an assembly is installed five (5) feet or higher above the ground or floor, it shall be equipped with a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance
personnel. This installation shall meet all applicable Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations and occupational safety and health
laws of the state.
(8) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be installed.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(l); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.063 Annual inspections and maintenance
(a) Regular inspections and testing of mechanical backflow prevention assemblies shall be conducted at least once per year by a recognized backflow prevention
assembly tester on backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards, as defined by TCEQ rules, AWWA standards, or as
determined by the water utilities director. The water utilities director may also require more frequent testing in certain applications to protect against high health hazards.
If, upon inspection of the backflow prevention assembly, it is deemed to not be operating properly, it is the responsibility of the establishment to immediately make all
necessary repairs. It is the responsibility of the tester to report all assemblies found not to be operating correctly to the water utilities department. Test reports shall be
submitted to the water utilities department within ten (10) working days of the test. Only tests conducted by recognized backflow prevention assembly testers and which
are reported correctly on city report forms shall be in compliance with this division.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/376
(b) The maintenance and repair of any backflow prevention assembly shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the premises, the lessee of the premises, or
both. The backflow prevention assembly is to be installed and maintained in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All maintenance and repair of
assemblies or assemblies [sic] shall be in accordance with all applicable regulations of the TCEQ and with acceptable industry practice. In the event that the water to an
establishment may not be turned off for testing of the backflow prevention assembly, the establishment shall be equipped with dual backflow prevention assemblies of the
same type so that testing, repair, and maintenance may be performed.
(c) No backflow prevention assembly shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly substituted without the approval of the water utilities director. Whenever
an existing backflow prevention assembly is moved from its present location or cannot be repaired, the assembly shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly in
compliance with this division. The new assembly shall be installed and tested in compliance with this division.
(d) Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with the American Water Works Association's
Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14) or the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection
Control. The water utilities director may require calibration reports or other documentation of compliance with this requirement.
(e) City personnel may perform inspections and request testing of backflow prevention assemblies while they are present to verify proper testing and to determine the
proper operation of assemblies. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(m); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.064 Emergency suspension of water utility service
(a) The water utilities director may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
backflow which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and/or substantial danger to the city's public water supply.
(b) As soon as is practical after the suspension of service, the water utilities director shall notify the owner or person in charge of the premises of the suspension, in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order such person to correct the cross-connection which allowed the backflow to occur. When time permits,
the water utilities director should also notify the owner or person in charge prior to suspending water service.
(c) The water utilities director shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the water utilities director, that the hazard has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the backflow or threatened backflow; and
(3) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(d) A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement action to the water utilities director, in writing, within ten (10) days of notice of the
suspension.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to the premises suspended pursuant to this section, without the prior written approval of the water
utilities director.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(n); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.065 Non-emergency termination of water utility service
(a) The water utilities director may terminate the city-provided water supply of any user who violates the following conditions:
(1) Refusing the water utilities director reasonable access to the water user's premises for the purpose of inspection;
(2) Hindering or denying the water utilities director access to backflow prevention assemblies;
(3) Failing to install, maintain, or test backflow prevention assemblies as required by the water utilities director and this division; or
(4) Failing to install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the city's plumbing code.
(b) The water utilities director will notify a water user in writing of the proposed termination of its water supply by certified mail, return receipt requested. The water
user may petition the water utilities director for a reconsideration of the decision.
(c) Exercise of this enforcement option by the water utilities director shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user.
(d) The water utilities director shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the water utilities director, that the condition has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the backflow or threatened backflow; and
(3) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to the premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior written approval of the water
utilities director.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(o); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 28, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.066 Penalties
(a) Criminal penalty. A person who violates a provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), in accordance with section 54.001, Texas Local Government Code.
(b) Civil penalty. The city attorney is authorized to commence an action for appropriate equitable or injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance
with section 54.012, Texas Local Government Code. Such relief may include:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/376
(1) A civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day;
(2) Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a violation of this division;
(3) Injunction to prevent a violation of this division; and
(4) All other damages, costs, and remedies to which the city may be entitled.
(Ordinance 01-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-57(p))
Secs. 22.02.067–22.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Grease and Grit Traps
Sec. 22.02.101 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of wastewaters containing oil and grease and/or solids in amounts which may cause stoppages or obstruction of flow, or in any
other way prevent or inhibit operation of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), including the sanitary sewer collection system and the treatment plant.
(2) Protect the environment, and the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the POTW workers.
(3) Set forth uniform requirements for the maintenance of grease traps, grit traps, interceptors, and separators.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(a))
Sec. 22.02.102 Definitions
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty (20) degrees Celsius.
Bioremediation media. Bacterial cultures, enzymes, or other media which are designed to eliminate or reduce the need for the mechanical cleaning of grease traps.
City or the city. The City of Beaumont, or its authorized representative, which, for the purposes of implementation and enforcement of the grease and grit trap program,
shall normally mean representatives of water utilities.
Commercial grease generator. All commercial food preparation and food service establishments that may discharge grease, including but not limited to bakeries, caterers,
butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, delicatessens, hospitals, hotels, restaurants, schools, institutions, or similar places where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products, fried
foods or other foods are prepared or served, but shall not apply to any residence not used for the commercial preparation and sale of food items or to an exempt
establishment.
Commercial/industrial grit generator. All commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste containing petroleum-based oil and grease wastes, and inorganic solids,
including but not limited to automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. Those facilities monitored under the city's federally and state approved
pretreatment program shall be exempted from the provisions of this division.
Director. The person in charge of water utilities for the city, or his/her authorized representative.
Exempt establishment. A commercial establishment that:
(1) Operates for a maximum duration of ten (10) days in connection with an annual event such as a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other public
gathering;
(2) Sells or serves prepackaged or precooked foods that would require warning only or served without additional processing, no cooking;
(3) Serves only snow cones, drinks, or ice cream products;
(4) Bars and clubs serving drinks only and where no food is prepared;
(5) Produce markets without food grinders;
(6) Grocery or convenience stores without food preparation, meat cutting, or packaging, delicatessens, or bakeries;
(7) Day care centers that primarily serve microwave dishes, using single-service items.
Food. Any substance, whether solid or liquid, and whether of animal, vegetable, or fruit origin, intended to be used or commonly used as a food for human consumption.
Food establishment. Any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, prepared, or served for commercial, public, or facility resident consumption.
The term includes any such place regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. The term does not include private homes where food is prepared for individual
family consumption.
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, stores, or otherwise produces liquid waste or owns property upon which liquid waste is caused, created, generated,
stored, or produced, including but not limited to grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and food waste as a byproduct of a domestic or nondomestic activity other than merely
as a result of mere residence at a nonbusiness location. “Generator” as used in this division includes both a commercial grease generator and a commercial/industrial grit
generator.
Grease trap. A receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect, and restrict the passage or organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty
liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes into both public and private sanitary sewers to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
Grease trap waste. Any organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes collected by and ultimately removed from a grease trap for proper
disposal.
Grit trap. A receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect, and restrict the passage of petroleum-based oil and grease
wastes and inorganic or other solids into private and public sanitary sewers to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/376
Grit trap waste. Oil and grease wastes and inorganic solids generated by commercial, industrial, automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities that are
collected by and ultimately removed from a grit trap for disposal.
Manifest. The written multi-part documentation detailing the generator of the grease trap waste, who the transporter is, and the disposal facility for the waste.
POTW. Publicly owned treatment works as defined in 40 CFR section 403.3, including any amendments thereto; the municipal wastewater treatment system including the
sanitary sewer system.
Sampling port or sample well. An approved device or manhole installed in the facility sewer specifically designed to facilitate sampling of the wastewater discharge.
Sanitary sewer. The system of pipes, conduit, manholes, and treatment facilities owned or operated by the city which collect, transport, and treat sanitary sewage, and to
which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally or normally admitted.
Separator truck. A truck equipped with a tank or other liquid-holding container designed to separate the grease portion from the waste removed from a grease trap and to
return the other liquid portion to the trap.
Total suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removed by laboratory
filtering.
Water quality manager. The person in charge of the city's approved pretreatment program.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(b); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.103 Prohibitions
(a) It shall be unlawful for a generator to introduce, or cause to be introduced, into a grease or grit trap or public sanitary sewer the following:
(1) A generator shall not allow any frying vats to discharge into a grease trap, grit trap, or sanitary sewer or allow waste oil or grease to discharge to any
drain or grease trap, grit trap, separator, interceptor, or sanitary sewer. Such waste shall be placed in a container specifically designed to hold such waste and
either utilized by industry or disposed of at a suitable location;
(2) A generator shall not discharge or cause to be discharged plastics, paper, nonbiodegradable oils or other nonbiodegradable materials;
(3) Any wastewaters with an oil and grease level in excess of 200 mg/l or ppm.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a generator to divert wastewater around a collection point into the sanitary sewer or to a storm drainage system.
(c) The use of separator trucks to pump grease traps and return the liquid portion to the grease trap is prohibited.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(c))
Sec. 22.02.104 Responsibilities of generator
(a) A generator shall provide grease traps or grit traps when, in the opinion of the water quality manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater.
Appeals of the decision of the water quality manager shall be handled as provided for other appeals under section 22.02.106(c) hereof.
(b) Grease and grit traps shall be constructed to prevent fats, oils, or greases from entering the sanitary sewer in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l and shall be
located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspection. The installation of grease traps or grit traps shall comply with the requirements of the
city's plumbing code.
(c) A generator shall properly install a sample port or sample well for ease in sampling the wastewater discharge from the grease or grit trap. Sample ports shall meet
the following criteria:
(1) The sample port shall be installed and maintained at the generator's expense;
(2) The sample port shall be installed as close as possible to the connection to the city sanitary sewer main within the bounds of the facility property;
(3) The port shall be installed according to the specifications obtained from city water utilities. It shall be installed perpendicular to the effluent flow to allow
visual observation and sampling;
(4) The port shall be accessible for monitoring authorities;
(5) New facilities being constructed shall have the sample port installed before opening for business. Established generators must install a sample port within
six (6) months of approval of this division;
(6) Exempt establishments may be required to install a sample port for inspection purposes.
(d) A generator of grease trap or grit trap waste shall have the trap serviced as frequently as necessary to prevent bypass or overflow, and to insure proper operation of
the trap. Such generators, at a minimum, shall have the grease or grit trap cleaned once every three (3) months.
(e) If the city determines that quarterly cleaning of a grease or grit trap is not sufficient to prevent the discharge of oil and grease in quantities less than 200 mg/l, the
city will require more frequent cleaning of the grease trap.
(f) A manifest shall be generated every time the grease or grit trap is pumped or cleaned. The generator shall sign a copy of the manifest as well as the driver. It shall be
the responsibility of the generator to insure they receive a copy of the manifest from the hauler after the grease or grit trap has been cleaned and that they receive a final
copy of the manifest after the waste has been disposed of at the final disposal site and the disposal facility has signed the manifest. A copy of the completed manifest shall
be sent to city water utilities every time the facility's grease or grit trap is serviced. The manifest must be submitted within twenty-one (21) days of the servicing of the
trap.
(g) The generator shall keep copies of the completed grease or grit trap waste manifests for three (3) years.
(h) A generator shall have his trap serviced by a transporter having a valid registration with the state.
(i) Grease and grit traps shall be inspected for seepage into the surrounding media whenever the trap has been pumped. The generator shall repair, replace, or install
apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure the proper operation and function of the trap.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/376
(j) A generator shall supervise the servicing of their grease or grit traps and shall ensure they are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing. The
transporter shall not return any material to the grease or grit trap once the trap has been cleaned.
(k) A generator shall clean up or cause to be cleaned up all spills of liquid or solid waste and shall have the waste properly disposed of by the transporter.
(l) A generator that is located in a multi-user building may be required to separate sanitary sewer flows from adjacent sites and install a water submeter to measure
individual water consumption or utilize some other method approved by the water quality manager or his designee.
(m) The cost of complying with all sections of this division shall be the responsibility of the property owner and their lessees. These costs include but are not limited to
any maintenance, analysis, grease or grit trap cleaning, repair, replacement, or modification, and installation of sample wells or ports.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(d); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.105 Bioremediation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any generator to introduce, cause, or permit the introduction of any bioremediation media into a grease trap except as authorized by the water
quality manager.
(b) Bioremediation media may be used with the water quality manager's approval if a generator proves to the water quality manager's satisfaction that:
(1) The media will be a pure, live, bacterial product and will not contain any surfactants, emulsifiers, or substances which act as a solvent for fats, oils, or
greases;
(2) The amount of oil and grease discharged to the sanitary sewer after the use of the media will not exceed the discharge limits for oil and grease of 200
mg/l;
(3) The pH of the discharge will not be less than 6.0 or greater than 11.0;
(4) The use of the media will not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and will not increase the potential of oil and grease to be
discharged to the sanitary sewer;
(5) The media will not be destroyed by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents or hot water;
(6) Any waste pumped from the grease or grit trap after use of the media must be acceptable at disposal sites for the waste;
(7) The use of the bioremediation media will not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.106 Request for exemption
(a) If a generator believes that quarterly pumping of their grease or grit trap is not justified, that generator must request in writing an exemption to the requirement. To
qualify for the exemption:
(1) The generator must have an independent laboratory sample and analyze a monthly grab wastewater discharge sample for oil and grease;
(2) The samples shall be collected from the sample port or well;
(3) When analyzed the oil and grease must be less than 200 mg/l.
(b) If a generator believes that they do not need a grease or grit trap and do not fall into any of the exempted categories they must submit to the water quality manager
the following information to prove their exemption:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the business;
(2) The name of the manager or other contact at the business;
(3) A description of the business;
(4) The type, size, and maintenance schedules of any wastewater pretreatment devices;
(5) The names of all haulers of any waste and recycled products who have hauled from the business in the previous year;
(6) A statement of whether employees are trained in waste disposal practices;
(7) A plan showing the locations of all water and sewer connections, fixtures, sample ports, backflow prevention devices, and any other treatment devices;
(8) A copy of all printed menus if it is an eating establishment;
(9) A description of any changes planned to the structure;
(10) Any planned significant changes to the user's operation or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater;
(11) A statement as to why the generator believes it qualifies for an exemption;
(12) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the water quality manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge.
(c) The water quality manager shall make a decision in regard to all requests. Should the generator disagree with the decision of the water quality manager, the
generator may appeal such decision in writing within five (5) days after the written decision of the water quality manager. The appeal shall be to the water utilities director
and shall include any evidence the generator wishes to provide to prove that the required pumping of grease or grit traps is not necessary. The decision of the water
utilities director shall be final.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(f); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.107 Monitoring and surcharges for BOD/TSS concentrations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/376
Generators shall, once a year, submit to the water utilities department an analytical report documenting the BOD and TSS concentration discharged to the sanitary sewer.
Samples will not be taken within one week of having the grease or grit trap cleaned; exceptions shall be granted if the trap is being pumped out on a weekly basis.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.108 Right of entry, inspection and sampling
(a) It shall be unlawful for a generator to refuse to allow the water quality manager or their authorized representative to enter their premises during business hours to
determine whether the generator is complying with all the requirements of this division. A generator shall allow the water quality manager or their authorized
representative access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, copying, and the performance of all other duties.
(b) If the water quality manager or their authorized representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division, to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, or to protect the
wastewater collection system or POTW, then the water quality manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(h); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.109 Penalties
(a) If the city determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line, the generator shall owe a civil penalty of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first violation, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second violation, and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the third violation within
a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may also result in termination of services. The
determination shall be made by inspecting the grease or grit traps in the area, noting their condition, and taking wastewater discharge samples from the sample ports.
Those facilities which have discharges with an oil and grease above 300 mg/l, or have not had their grease or grit traps pumped out quarterly (or the documentation to
prove the pumping of the grease or grit trap was not necessary), shall be considered responsible for the blockage.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty
for the second violation, a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) civil penalty for the third violation, and a one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) civil penalty for the
fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a five hundred dollar ($500.00) increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of
services.
(c) The water quality manager may suspend water service and/or wastewater service to a generator to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or to the environment, or causes interference to the POTW and/or the sanitary sewer
system. Service may also be suspended if the generator refuses to abide by this division or pay any penalty issued.
(d) If a generator is penalized, they may file a written appeal to the water utilities director. The appeal must include evidence proving that the generator did not violate
this division and the appeal must be filed within five (5) city working days of the generator receiving the penalty. The decision of the water utilities director shall be final.
(Ordinance 01-042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58(i); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 29, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.110 Adjustment of standards
The technical standards set out in this division shall be automatically adjusted to conform to any amendment to state or federal law which changes such standards. The
technical standards applicable to generators in the city shall always be the same as the standards for such generators established by state or federal law. (Ordinance 01-
042, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-58)
Secs. 22.02.111–22.02.140 Reserved
Division 4. Water and Sewer Line Extensions
Sec. 22.02.141 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Boundary sanitary sewer lift station. A sanitary sewer lift station built for serving a specific development, which can also serve property not included in the development
but adjacent to it that may develop in the future.
Boundary sewer. A sewer installed in a street bounding a development or faced on only one side by a development, which can also serve property not included in the
development on the opposite side of the street.
Boundary water line. A water line, installed in a street bounding a development or faced on only one side by a development, which can also serve property not included in
the development on the opposite side of the street.
Department. The water utilities department of the city.
Development. A subdivision, as defined in the city's subdivision regulations.
Director. The director of the water utilities department or his appointed representative.
Engineer. A professional engineer licensed by the state.
Lot. Land occupied or intended for occupancy by a main building together with its accessory buildings, and the yard and parking spaces required, and having its principal
frontage upon a street as defined herein.
Owner's front footage. Owner's front footage, for purposes of determining pro rata charges to be paid by the owner of a lot for sewer service or water service and for
which there will be no reimbursement, shall be determined by the owner's lot condition, as follows:
(1) Regular lot. A lot generally rectangular in shape. Front footage of a regular lot shall be measured along the property line facing the street.
(2) Irregular lot. Any lot of a nonrectangular shape, except the radial lot defined below. The front footage of an irregular lot shall be equal to one front foot
for each one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of lot area, but shall never exceed the maximum measured width of the lot at any depth of the lot, parallel to
the street line.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/376
(3) Radial lot. A lot abutting a curved street and in general having sides which are radial to the street. Front footage of a radial lot shall be measured as the
chord distance at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line.
(4) Corner lot. A lot situated on the corner of a block and having more than one side facing a street. Front footage shall be measured along the side of the lot
to which service connection is made.
Pro rata. The charge per front foot of abutting land to be paid by the lot owner or owner of a development to aid in defraying the cost of supplying sewer service or water
service (as the case may be) to their lot or site. The amount of the charge will be determined by the department.
(1) Single pro rata. The charge based on the front footage of abutting land on only one side of the street or easement.
(2) Double pro rata. The charge based on the front footage of abutting land on both sides of the street or easement.
Street. A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use, which has been officially approved by the governing body of the city, and
which affords the principal means of access to property abutting it.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-2; 1978 Code, sec. 28-80; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 31, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 09-065, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/09)
Sec. 22.02.142 Purpose and scope
The purpose of this article is to establish a policy for the city for extending sanitary sewer and water lines and for the sewer and water service connections to such
extensions, and to establish rules governing such extensions and connections. The article also establishes rules governing the construction of sanitary sewer lift stations. It
is not the intention of this article to obligate, and the city shall not be obligated to participate in or proceed with any construction covered by this article when funds are
not available or when, in the discretion of the director of water utilities, the construction is not practical. It is not the intention of this article to limit the right of the city to
extend sanitary sewer or water lines at its own cost and collect the charges herein set forth from the applicants for sewer or water service, and such right is herein reserved.
The city shall own all sewer lines, water lines, and sanitary sewer lift stations, including service connections, constructed and accepted under the terms of this article.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-1; 1978 Code, sec. 28-81; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 32, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 09-065, sec. 2, adopted 11/17/09)
Sec. 22.02.143 General rules for extensions
Sanitary sewer lines or water lines will be extended in the city in accordance with the following rules:
(1) Individual lots. Sanitary sewers and water lines of proper size will be extended by the city in its easements and streets to serve individual lots, according
to the following rules:
(A) For the first three hundred (300) feet of the extension (not including the width of street intersections and alleys), the lot owner requesting extension
shall pay single pro rata for the distance of the extension. This pro rata is reimbursable as hereinafter provided, except for the pro rata paid on the owner's
front footage.
(B) For the remainder of the extension required to install the sewer or water line across the total width of the lot of the owner requesting extension, the
lot owner shall pay double pro rata. This pro rata is reimbursable as hereinafter provided, except for the pro rata paid on the owner's front footage.
(C) Should the lot owner requesting extension require a sewer or water line in excess of the size required by the city, the owner shall pay all additional
costs for the oversize sewer or water line.
(D) In addition to the payments specified above, the lot owner or customer must pay the appropriate service connection charges before service
connections can be made.
(E) No construction shall be scheduled nor begun by the city until all extension charges have been paid to the city.
(2) Developments. The owner of a development shall pay for and install all sewer and water lines and necessary appurtenances thereto within the boundaries
of the development.
The city will extend sewers or water lines of proper capacity outside the boundaries of the development to service the development after the following
applicable requirements have been satisfied:
(A) The owner of the development shall pay all costs for installation of sewer or water line extensions required to extend services to the boundary of
the development.
(B) Should the extension involve the construction of a boundary sewer or boundary water line, the owner of the development shall pay double pro rata
to the city based on the footage of the development property abutting the boundary sewer or boundary water line, as applicable.
(C) Should the city require water line extensions or interior water lines larger in size than required for the development so long as said water lines are
between the sizes of six (6) inches and sixteen (16) inches, inclusive, the city shall pay one and one-half (1.5) times the difference in cost of materials for
said water lines. Also, due allowance shall be made to the owner of the development for intersections and alleys crossed, outside the development.
Should the city require sewer line extensions or interior sewers larger in size than required for the development, the city shall pay for that portion of
material cost over and above such requirements. Also, due allowance shall be made to the owner of the development for intersections and alleys crossed,
outside the development.
(D) No sewer or water line extension shall be scheduled until all charges specified herein have been paid by the owner of the development to the city.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-3; Ordinance 75-46, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/75; 1978 Code, sec. 28-82; Ordinance 09-065, sec. 3, adopted 11/17/09)
Sec. 22.02.144 Charges for sewer and water service
When no extension of sanitary sewer or water lines (as the case may be) is necessary to serve an applicant for service, the applicant shall pay pro rata on the owner's front
footage in addition to the service connection charge before connection is made to the sewer or water line. However, if the sewer or water line is within a development, or
if the connection is to be made to a sewer or water line existing on the date of passage of this division, only the service connection charge shall be paid. (1958 Code, sec.
40A-4; 1978 Code, sec. 28-83)
Sec. 22.02.145 Exemption
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/376
After October 22, 1968, the city shall not collect pro rata on the owner's front footage from any applicant for water or sewer service to a lot upon which the main building
or structure was completed and in existence on October 22, 1968, nor from any applicant for service to a lot upon which a main building or structure exists for five (5)
years after October 22, 1968, without being provided a sewer and water line upon which connection could be made. Service connection charges shall, however, be paid by
such applicants. (1958 Code, sec. 40A-4.1; 1978 Code, sec. 28-84)
Sec. 22.02.146 Reimbursement
(a) Owners of lots or developments who participate under this policy in the cost of sewer or water line extensions to their lots or sites are eligible for certain
reimbursement of such cost, as specified herein, from the city. Except as provided in subsection (b) below, such owners are eligible for reimbursement to be made from
pro rata collected by the city from connections to the sewer extension or water line extension (as the case may be) during the period of five (5) years after completion of
the extension, according to the following rules:
(1) No reimbursement shall be made to a lot owner for the owner's front footage pro rata. No reimbursement shall be made to a development owner for the
cost of sewers or water lines within the boundaries of the development.
(2) Upon written application of the owner, reimbursements shall be made once each year during the month of October to cover reimbursable charges
collected during the preceding fiscal year.
(3) A lot owner will be reimbursed one-half the amount of pro rata collected from connections to that portion (the first three hundred (300) foot section
provided for in section 22.02.143(1)(A)) up to the boundary of the owner's lot.
(4) A lot owner will be reimbursed the amount of double pro rata collected from connections to extensions in excess of the three hundred (300) foot section
provided for in section 22.02.143(1)(A), up to the boundary of the owner's lot.
(5) A lot owner will be reimbursed the amount of single pro rata collected for connections from the owner's opposite frontage.
(6) Owners of developments will be reimbursed the amount of pro rata collected from connections to off-site extensions (outside the development) and
boundary sewers and boundary water lines for which they have made payment.
(7) An owner will never be paid more than one hundred (100) percent of the amount actually paid by such owner for extensions along frontage other than his
own property.
(8) No reimbursements shall be made by the city to an owner after one year from the end of the five (5) year period of eligibility.
(b) In addition to the reimbursements provided for above, the owner of a lot used for an industrial or commercial establishment, who has paid additional costs for
oversized water lines, as provided in section 22.02.143(1)(C), shall be eligible for additional reimbursement from water revenues from said water line extension, in the
amount of forty (40) percent of the annual gross revenue, for a period of five (5) years from the date of completion of the extension, provided that the additional
reimbursement shall never exceed eighty (80) percent of the total additional cost of the extension.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-5; 1978 Code, sec. 28-85)
Sec. 22.02.147 Extensions outside of city
The city may, with specific approval of the city council, extend sewer or water service outside of the city, according to the following rules:
(1) The provisions of section 22.02.143, with the exception of the reimbursement provisions, shall apply to sewer and water line extensions outside the city
limits.
(2) Any lot owner applying for service connections to sewers or water lines extended under the terms of this division shall pay single pro rata on the owner's
front footage.
(3) All applicants for sewer or water service shall pay double the service connection charge applicable within the city.
(4) There shall be no reimbursement for extensions outside the city.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-6; 1978 Code, sec. 28-86)
Sec. 22.02.148 Construction requirements
(a) Before work begins under a contract for construction of sewers or water lines in a development, proof of the following must be submitted to the director by the
owner of the development:
(1) All construction will be in accordance with department approved plans and specifications.
(2) The contractor has public liability insurance acceptable to the city in the amount of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars/five hundred
thousand dollars ($250,000.00/$500,000.00) for bodily injury and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for property damage.
(b) When all of the requirements of this section have been met, the director will issue a letter to the owner of the development giving permission to begin construction.
(c) All sewer and water line installations shall be designed in accordance with criteria and specifications established by the department.
(d) All engineering services shall be provided by the city for extensions to individual lots with costs thereof included in the total cost of construction.
(e) All engineering services required, including resident inspection, for construction of sewers or water lines within the boundaries of developments shall be furnished
by the development's engineer. Plans, specifications and contract documents shall be approved by the department prior to construction.
(f) Responsibility for resident inspection of construction shall be included in and be a part of the engineering services set forth above. During actual construction, the
engineer, or his representative, shall be on the site at all times. The engineer shall have the right to halt construction when there is an indication that the plans and
specifications are not being or have not been followed until such deviations are corrected to his satisfaction. The engineer shall, upon satisfactory completion of the
project, issue to the director a letter certifying the construction meets the requirements of all the plans and specifications and was completed to the satisfaction of the
engineer.
(g) In addition to the resident inspection specified above, and where resident inspection is not a responsibility of the department, department inspectors shall visit the
site periodically and, upon project completion, shall recommend to the director that final approval be given.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/376
(h) The owner of a development desiring sewer or water line extension to its boundary shall submit a written request to the director listing the lots and blocks of the
property abutting the extension. Two (2) approved plats of the area to be served shall be included with the request and become the property of the city. If the area for
which service is requested is part of a larger area owned or controlled by the owner of the development and which can reasonably be expected to require future extensions,
then two (2) preliminary plats of the larger area shall also be submitted showing a tentative design of overall layout for the entire area.
(1958 Code, sec. 40A-7; 1978 Code, sec. 28-87; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 33, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.02.149 Sanitary sewer lift stations
(a) If a boundary sanitary sewer lift station is required to provide sanitary sewer service to the development, the developer should be responsible for the design and
construction costs of such sanitary sewer lift station and all related appurtenances.
(b) The city may require the developer to increase the structure, motor, and pump sizes of the sanitary sewer lift station to accommodate future developments in the
area. If funds are available, the city will participate in the construction cost for acreage outside the limits of the proposed development. The city's participation value shall
be determined by the number of acres outside the limits of the proposed development multiplied by the sanitary sewer lift station construction cost per acre at the time of
installation. The city will not participate in any cost if the structure is sized for the proposed subdivision and additional wastewater flow to the sanitary sewer lift station
will only require pump and motor changes and/or modifications.
(c) The owners of future adjacent developments that have to discharge wastewater to an existing boundary sanitary sewer lift station, must reimburse the city or the
developer of the sanitary sewer lift station. The pro-rata reimbursement will be determined based on the total acreage the sanitary sewer lift station was required to
accommodate and the sanitary sewer lift station construction cost per acre. The reimbursement value shall be determined by number of acres added to the sanitary sewer
lift station multiplied by the construction cost per acre at the time of installation. The owners of the new developments will also be responsible for any and all required
changes and/or modifications to the existing pumps and motors.
(d) The construction cost of a sanitary sewer lift station shall be obtained through a bidding process abiding by state procurement laws to guarantee compatible pricing
to the city and the developers. The date when the sanitary sewer lift station was built will not affect the content of this section.
(Ordinance 09-065, sec. 4, adopted 11/17/09)
ARTICLE 22.03 INDUSTRIAL WASTES STANDARDS*
Sec. 22.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Act of God or unpreventable event. The affirmative defense that, if a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of this article or a permit issued
under this article was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, and was unpreventable, then the event is not a violation of this article or the
permit.
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended.
Administrative orders. Enforcement documents which direct an industrial user to undertake or cease specific activities. The orders may take the form of cease and desist
orders, consent orders, show cause orders, or compliance orders.
Administrator. The Region 6 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency or his duly authorized representative.
Approval authority. The executive director of the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). The TCEQ received the authorization to implement the NPDES
program in Texas.
Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
(1) An owner;
(2) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
(3) Any partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(4) A duly authorized representative of the individual above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
indirect discharge originates.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, as specified in 40 CFR section 136, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water, sewage, industrial waste, or other
liquid under standard laboratory procedures as specified in 40 CFR section 136, expressed as milligrams per liter.
Composite sample. A compound sample created by combining samples taken at different times.
Control authority. The City of Beaumont.
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
Director. The water utilities director of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Domestic wastewater. Waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water, and industrial waste. Normal domestic wastewater shall mean “normal” sewage for the city, in which the
following average concentrations are established:
(1) BOD = 250 milligrams per liter of wastewater.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/376
(2) COD = 550 milligrams per liter of wastewater.
(3) TSS = 300 milligrams per liter of wastewater.
(4) O and G = 200 milligrams per liter of wastewater.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed
fifteen (15) minutes as required in appendix E of 40 CFR section 403.
Hazardous waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes) which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may:
(1) Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of
causing substantial personal injury or illness;
(2) Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly
managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, chapter 361 Health and Safety Code, or the
Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976 and as may be amended in the future.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction. An area outside the corporate limits of a municipality as defined in Local Government Code, section 42.021.
Garbage. Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. Properly shredded garbage has been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch
in any dimension.
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user. Any person, business or governmental agency that discharges nondomestic waste to the city wastewater treatment system.
Industrial waste. All gases, solids or liquids resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, food processing, oil and/or gas well and/or gas field site operations or processes,
or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater.
Industrial wastewater discharge permit. A permit required of all significant industrial users to deposit or discharge industrial wastewater to the city's wastewater treatment
system. This permit does not grant a waiver to allow discharge of any waste prohibited by this article or allow discharge of any waste that exceeds the limits or is in
violation of the requirements of this article.
Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the wastewater treatment system which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's TPDES permit. This term
includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the wastewater treatment plant in accordance with section 405 of the Act, or any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the wastewater treatment plant.
Maximum discharge limit. The flow limitations as prescribed to collection system capacity and allowable head loading at the POTW.
May. “May” is a permissive or discretionary statement.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, wastewater product, or finished
product.
Nonhazardous waste hauler permit. A permit required of all persons engaged in draining, flushing, or cleaning out any tanks containing chemical liquid wastes, septic
tank wastes, oil and grease trap wastes, or any type of domestic or nondomestic waste within the city. This permit shall also be required of all persons transporting such
wastes into the city for final disposal.
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
Natural outlet. Any outlet to a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit. A permit issued by the EPA pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
New source. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source and such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that the source meets the requirements listed in 40 CFR section 403.3(k), including any amendments thereto.
Oil and grease (O and G). The total quantity of material recovered under standard laboratory procedures as specified in 40 CFR section 136, expressed as milligrams per
liter.
Pass-through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal
entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
Pollutant. Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system which is prohibited or limited by section 22.03.002 of this article. This term includes dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/376
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
POTW. Publicly owned treatment works as defined in 40 CFR section 403.3, including any amendments thereto; the municipal wastewater treatment system.
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful
state prior to or in lieu of discharging to the wastewater treatment system.
Pretreatment requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
Pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to
industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits.
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries wastewater to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user who:
(1) Has a discharge flow of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) of an average of
twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day;
(2) Has a flow greater than ten (10) percent of the average daily flow in the city's wastewater treatment system;
(3) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant;
(4) Is subject to requirements under the national categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR section 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
including any amendments thereto;
(5) Has a reasonable potential in the opinion of the director to adversely affect the POTW's operation, or for violation, [of] any pretreatment standard or
requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) including any amendments thereto).
Significant noncompliance. Instances of SNC are industrial user violations which meet one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Violations of wastewater discharge limits.
(A) Chronic violations. Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a sixmonth
period (any magnitude of exceedance).
(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three (33) percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the
same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period.
(C) The TRC applies to those measurements found to be 1.4 times the limit for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 times the limit for all other
pollutants except pH.
(D) Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through, or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or the public.
(E) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the city's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(2) Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the scheduled date.
(3) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from the due date.
(4) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(5) Any other violation or group of violations that the city considers to be significant.
Shall. “Shall” is a mandatory statement.
Slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards of this article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of
Management and Budget.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest EPA approved edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial waste.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, state commission on environmental quality, or TCEQ. The TCEQ, the administrator, or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or TPDES permit. A permit issued by the state commission on environmental quality under authority delegated pursuant to
33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general areawide
basis.
Total suspended solids (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering, as specified in Standard Methods, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable waste or other harmful substances from wastewater.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/376
Unpolluted water or waste. Any water or waste containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or other substances imparting
taste and odor in receiving water; toxic poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious and odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten
(10) milligrams per liter each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed fifty (50) parts per million as measured by the platinum-cobalt method as listed in
Standard Methods.
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the wastewater treatment
system.
Wastewater treatment system. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/90; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-100; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 35, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 22.03.002 Use of public sewers
(a) General discharge prohibitions. No user may introduce into the POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass-through or interference. No user shall contribute, directly
or indirectly, any of the following described materials, waters, or wastes. These prohibitions apply to all dischargers into the wastewater treatment system, whether or not
the user is subject to any national categorical pretreatment standard, any permit requirements as a significant user, or any other national, state or local standards or
requirements:
(1) Any discharges with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge to the system, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower
explosive limit of the meter. Prohibited materials include gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
cause fire or explosion.
(3) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or other solid or viscous substances which
cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment system.
(4) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade), or which will cause the
temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit (5.5 degrees centigrade) per hour, or a combined
total increase of plant influent temperature to one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees centigrade).
(5) Any wastewater having a pH less than six (6.00) or higher than eleven (11.00) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater treatment system.
(6) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(7) Any waste or water containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
material at the wastewater treatment plant or in the collection system.
(8) Any discharges that result in toxic gases, fumes, or vapors in a quantity capable of causing a potential health and safety hazard to either the public or
wastewater treatment personnel or any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(9) Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous pollutant in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, or cause the city to violate its TPDES permit for receiving water quality standards. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be
limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act.
(10) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process.
(11) Any wastewater exceeding the local limits set by the control authority and approved by the administrator. The following pollutant limits are established
to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following:
(A) Any heavy metals, in solution or suspension, in concentration exceeding the following local limit (in milligrams per liter):
Arsenic 4.0
Cadmium 0.3
Chromium (total) 21.0
Copper 1.0
Lead 1.8
Mercury 0.005
Nickel 4.0
Selenium 1.4
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/376
Silver 3.0
Zinc 8.0
(B) Any phenols greater than ten (10.0) milligrams per liter.
(C) Any cyanide greater than one and four-tenths (1.40) milligrams per liter as CN.
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal
unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. The
limits will apply to end of pipe of wastewater stream and/or process waste stream as determined by state and federal regulations. The city reserves
the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the
POTW.
(12) Any chloride concentrations great enough to raise the chloride content of the POTW effluent above 400 mg/l.
(13) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released as a slug flow which will cause interference to the wastewater treatment
plant.
(14) Any wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes of such concentration as may exceed applicable state or federal regulations.
(15) Any substance which may cause the wastewater treatment plant's effluent or any other product of the wastewater treatment system such as residues,
sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. Industrial user facilities utilizing or otherwise
handling chemical substances in such a manner that may generate either characteristic or listed hazardous waste shall be required by the director to perform
hazardous waste determinations on their process waste and/or wastewater.
(16) Any fat, oil, or grease in excess of two hundred (200) milligrams per liter.
(17) Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(18) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
(b) Dilution. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the local limits or the applicable pretreatment standards. The city may impose mass limitations on users that are using dilution to
meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this article, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the city.
(c) Discharge of manufacturing, industrial, etc., wastewater.
(1) When the director determines that a user is contributing to the wastewater treatment system any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as
to interfere with the operation of the system, the user shall be advised of the impact on the system and effluent limitations for such user will be developed to
correct the interference, or the waste will be prohibited from entering the system.
(2) Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the system, causing rapid structural deterioration and/or
interfering with proper treatment of wastewater, and/or presenting imminent danger to wastewater treatment personnel, the director is authorized to
immediately terminate service until such time as the user's discharge is in compliance with this article.
(d) Discharge of stormwater, etc., to sanitary sewer prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer without prior written approval of the director.
(e) Designation of sewers for stormwater, etc. In compliance with applicable state and federal statutes, the director may designate storm sewers and other watercourses
into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (d) of this section may be discharged.
(f) Compliance with existing authority.
(1) Unless exception is granted by the director, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
(A) Wastewater;
(B) Liquid industrial wastes; or
(C) Polluted liquids.
(2) Unless authorized by the state commission on environmental quality and/or EPA, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection
(1) of this subsection on public or private property in or adjacent to any:
(A) Natural outlet;
(B) Watercourse;
(C) Storm sewer; or
(D) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(3) The director shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of the laws,
regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state, and local government.
(g) General permits. All significant industrial users shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit. All existing significant users connected or contributing to the
wastewater treatment system shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/376
(h) Nonhazardous waste hauler permits. No person shall drain, flush or clean out any tanks or basins containing chemical liquid wastes, septic tank wastes, oil and
grease trap wastes, or any other type of domestic or nondomestic liquid wastes and dispose of such wastes into the city's sanitary sewer system unless such person is
issued a permit by the city. Any disposal site within the city, and method of disposal, must be approved by the director. Copies of trip tickets shall be maintained and made
available for inspection at any reasonable time.
(i) Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the
federal standard, if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
under this article. The director will attempt to notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR section 403.12; however, it will be
incumbent on all users to keep themselves apprised of current local, state, and federal laws.
(j) Excessive discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this article. Flow restrictions may apply where an industrial user's flow exceeds twenty (20) percent of
the POTW's average daily flow.
(k) Accidental discharges. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
The following requirements also apply:
(1) Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. When
required by the director, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted for review and shall be
approved before construction of the facility. All existing users shall submit the above information when required by the director, within ninety (90) days of
written notice.
(2) In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the wastewater treatment plant
superintendent of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume, and corrective actions.
(3) Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater treatment system, fish kills, or other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
(4) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a dangerous
discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
(5) Failure to notify the director of an accidental discharge may result in legal action or discontinuation of utility service.
(l) Pretreatment. Where necessary to comply with the provisions of this article, the user shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within acceptable limits, or to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or waste. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director and the chief
plumbing inspector, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. The following requirements also apply:
(1) Grease, oil, and sand traps shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for premises used exclusively as private living quarters or dwelling units.
(2) Grease and oil traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(3) Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the user at his expense.
(m) Inspection manhole. When required by the director, an industrial user shall install a suitable inspection manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director
and the chief plumbing inspector. The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the user at his expense.
(n) Inspection, sampling, and analysis. The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the requirements of this article are being met. All users
designated as significant industrial users shall be inspected and sampled a minimum of once per year. This shall not prohibit the city from more frequent sample collection
or inspections. Persons or occupants of the industrial user facility where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the director and/or his representatives (the state
(TCEQ) and EPA, along with other city personnel) ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling for routine or
independent samples, records examination, or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. All analyses shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, part 136 and amendments
thereto. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR, part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the administrator. All users who are required by this article to develop data for submittal to the city shall comply with this subsection.
(o) Existing pretreatment. Detailed plans showing any pretreatment facilities and operating procedures required to meet pretreatment standards or permit requirements
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facilities. The review of such plans and procedures will in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
(p) Noncompliance. The city shall annually publish in the Beaumont Enterprise newspaper a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance, as defined by
the EPA, of any pretreatment standards, permit requirements, or other provisions of this article. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement action taken
against the users during the same twelve (12) months.
(q) Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the user, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the TPDES permit, the state disposal system permit and/or pretreatment program and other judicial
reviews or enforcement proceedings by state or federal agencies. Any information requested to be held confidential shall be stamped “confidential business information”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/376
on each page containing such information. Confidential information will be treated in accordance with the city's written confidential statement procedure. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
(r) State requirements. Requirements and limitations on discharges, issued by the state, shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than requirements and
limitations in this article.
(s) City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater treatment
system if deemed necessary to meet or comply with new federal or state regulations.
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/90; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; Ordinance 03-044, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-101)
Sec. 22.03.003 Permits
(a) Industrial wastewater discharge permit application. Users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit (significant users) shall complete and file
with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city. Existing significant users shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days
after the effective date of this article, and proposed new significant users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the wastewater
treatment system. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, mailing address, and location (if different from the mailing address);
(2) SIC number according to the most recent edition of Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget;
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 22.03.002 of this article, as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(h) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended;
(4) Time and duration of contribution;
(5) Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and existing or proposed monitoring facilities
and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation;
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
(A) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (i.e., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major comments, commencing construction, etc.);
(B) No increment referred to in subsection (9) shall exceed nine (9) months;
(C) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director;
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(12) Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system;
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue
an industrial waste permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
(b) Permit modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the industrial wastewater discharge permit of
users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a
standard, has not previously submitted an application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection (a), the user shall submit an industrial waste
permit application to the city within three (3) months of the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standard.
(c) Extraterritorial jurisdiction industrial users. Any user located beyond the city limits required to obtain an indirect discharge permit shall submit a permit application
within ninety (90) days prior to discharging to the POTW as outlined in subsection (a) of this section, and be subject to all requirements of this article.
(1) If the industrial user is within a jurisdiction where the city does not have the legal authority to enforce this article as written, a multi-jurisdictional
agreement shall be filed with the municipality or county in which the industrial user is located.
(2) Any industrial user that is outside of the city limits shall request its municipality jurisdiction to enter into a multi-jurisdiction agreement with the city.
(d) Temporary indirect discharge permits. The city may issue indirect discharge permits to address temporary nondomestic discharges to the POTW. Each temporary
discharge must receive prior written approval from the city. Wastewater sources that are subject to temporary permitting include, but are not limited to, stormwater,
groundwater, cooling water, process water, cleanup water from spills, leaking underground storage tanks, and monitoring wells. Each temporary discharge permit must be
reviewed and reissued if the user wishes to discharge past the original expiration date. Users issued temporary indirect discharge permits shall pay all applicable charges
and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/376
(e) Permit conditions. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain the following provisions to insure compliance with permit conditions:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
(2) Limits on the maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities, and for offering the city access thereto;
(5) Specifications for self-monitoring requirements shall include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule;
(6) Compliance schedules;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording the city access thereto;
(9) Requirements for notification of the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents, any substantial change in volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system and any plans for the installation of new processes;
(10) Requirements for notification of potential problems, including slug loading and accidental discharges;
(11) Requirements for hazardous waste determinations on waste and wastewater generated at the permitted facility;
(12) Other parameters or conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article;
(13) The permittee may be required to conduct effluent monitoring at an increased frequency when effluent parameters are violated during the permit period.
(f) Denial. The city reserves the right to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not
meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its TPDES permit.
(g) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed three (3) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit may change as limitations or requirements as identified in section 22.03.002 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(h) Permit transfer. Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to
new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city.
(i) Reporting requirements for permittee. The following shall apply to reporting requirements under this section:
(1) Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater to the wastewater treatment system, any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards. The average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by
such pretreatment standards shall be included in the report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional O and M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user, and certified by a professional engineer.
(2) Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the director a report for continued compliance no less than twice a year as
determined by the pretreatment year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the director or the approval authority, indicating the
nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants in the effluent which are limited.
(3) All significant industrial users, whether or not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, shall submit once every six months on dates specified by the
director and/or [sic] periodic discharge monitoring reports as required in the user's permit, indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by pretreatment standards or permit requirements.
(4) Where an industrial user's or the city's sampling data indicates a violation of effluent parameters, other than surchargeable parameters, the industrial user
must repeat sampling and analysis for the parameter(s) violated and submit the analytical results to the director within thirty (30) days.
(5) The city will, on occasion, do monitoring in lieu of the user; however, the user shall compensate the city for cost of the monitoring, including sampling,
analysis, labor, and reporting.
(6) These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques
specified in 40 CFR section 136 and amendments thereto.
(7) The director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or permit requirements or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases the user's discharge monitoring reports shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the city, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard, or as deemed necessary by the city.
(8) Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of
the user and contain the following certification statement: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based
on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment
for knowing violations.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/376
(9) Monitoring reports to demonstrate continued compliance. Periodic reports required shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge,
including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by
the applicable pretreatment standards.
(10) The frequency of monitoring will be established according to requirements for assessing and ensuring compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The monitoring will be conducted during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring
during the reporting periods.
(11) Records shall include for all samples:
(A) Chain of custody with the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples;
(B) Dates analyses were performed;
(C) Who performed the analyses;
(D) The analytical techniques/methods used;
(E) The results of such analyses; and
(F) The quality control and assurance performed to validate the analyses.
(12) Noncompliance reporting. An industrial user shall give twenty-four (24) hours' notice of becoming aware of a noncompliance with pretreatment
standards and/or requirements. A written report shall be submitted with explanation of the reason for the noncompliance within five (5) days after becoming
aware of the noncompliance. The industrial user shall conduct repeat analysis, within thirty (30) days of the first noncompliance, to show continued
compliance.
(13) Report-keeping requirements. Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this article shall be required to retain for a
minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article) and shall
make such records available for inspection and copying by the director and the administrator. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the director or the administrator.
(j) Monitoring facilities. All significant industrial users shall provide a suitable inspection manhole to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement, as required by
section 22.03.002(m).
(k) Nonhazardous waste transporter permits. The following provisions shall apply to all persons required to obtain a nonhazardous waste hauler permit for the purpose
of transporting nonhazardous waste as required by section 22.03.002(h) of this article:
(1) Persons requesting a nonhazardous waste hauler permit shall make application on a form provided by the city and provide such information as the city
may reasonably request and shall have obtained a state commission on environmental quality sludge transporter registration number.
(2) All applicants shall submit for inspection by the city each vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste. Each vehicle shall be
constructed, equipped and identified in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) Business name in three-inch-high or larger letters shall be permanently displayed on both sides of the vehicle;
(B) Vehicle shall be equipped for safe operation;
(C) Vacuum tanks and associated piping shall be liquid tight and permanently attached to the vehicle;
(D) Piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean;
(E) Inlet and outlet of tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling or transfer, or during transport.
(3) A permit shall be issued by the city upon proof by the applicant that he has adequate and proper equipment to perform the services contemplated, and has
sufficient knowledge of chemical hazards and septic tank or other sewage disposal system construction to perform the services contemplated in a safe and
competent manner.
(4) The legal company name and number of the permit granted hereunder shall be plainly painted on each side of each motor vehicle used in the conduct of
the business permitted hereunder.
(5) Upon payment of the fee, the city shall issue a permit to haul nonhazardous wastes. A nonhazardous waste permit shall be issued for a one-year period
and shall be nontransferable.
(6) The following conditions shall apply to all nonhazardous waste hauler permits:
(A) A permit to transport nonhazardous waste issued by the city prohibits the hauling of hazardous waste and the co-mingling of hazardous waste with
nonhazardous waste.
(B) The city shall be notified of management changes during the permit period, and provided with the new manager's name.
(C) The flushing of solids from a grease or sand trap into the sanitary sewer system is strictly prohibited.
(7) The director may reject the disposal of any waste exhibiting chemical characteristics or concentrations that exceed the limitations set forth in sections
22.03.001 and 22.03.002.
(8) The director may suspend or revoke the permit of a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this section, and he may authorize the holding of the
vehicle until the violation is corrected.
(9) Copies of trip tickets, as required by federal, state, or local regulation, shall be maintained for a minimum period of five (5) years and shall be made
available for inspection by the director at any reasonable time. All wastes disposed within the city shall be noted on trip tickets prescribed by the city and shall
contain the following:
(A) Name and permit number of hauler;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/376
(B) Name of driver;
(C) Date(s) of waste pickup;
(D) Name, address, and phone number of generator(s);
(E) Description of wastes (chemical name, commercial name, etc.), and total gallons of wastes to be discharged;
(F) Hauler's state commission on environmental quality registration number.
(10) The director may revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee:
(A) Has violated a provision of this article;
(B) Has failed to pay a required fee;
(C) Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements;
(D) Has violated applicable federal or state regulations pertaining to the collection, transportation or disposal of wastes;
(E) Has falsified information on the hauler's permit application.
(11) A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/80; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-102)
Sec. 22.03.004 Enforcement
(a) Harmful contributions. The director may suspend the water service, wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the director, in order to:
(1) Stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or to
the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its TPDES permit;
(2) Prevent the discharge of prohibited substances to the POTW (or the environment);
(3) Prevent the continual violation of a wastewater discharge permit.
Any person notified of a suspension of the water service, wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection. The director may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service, or water service, upon
proof (i) of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or provision of adequate pretreatment facilities to comply with the discharge permit, (ii) payment of costs
incurred by the city, and (iii) submission of information as deemed necessary by the director for permit modification. A detailed written statement by the user describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of
occurrence.
(b) Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit
revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section:
(1) Failure of the user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(c) Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated this article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained therein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within five (5) days of the date of the notice, the
user shall submit to the city satisfactory evidence of correction of the violation.
(d) Administrative order. If the industrial user fails to correct a violation within fifteen (15) days of receiving a notification of violation, the city shall issue an
administrative order for the correction of this violation. The user is not relieved of responsibility for unauthorized discharges which occur within the 15-day interval.
(e) Show cause hearing. The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the waste treatment system to show cause before the city
council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the date, time and place of a hearing to be held by the
city council regarding why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10)
days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(1) The city council may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate a representative or committee to:
(A) Issue, in the name of the city council, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(B) Take the evidence.
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to the city council.
(2) At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony must be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made
available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(3) After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, the sewer service be discontinued unless the unauthorized discharge is properly treated, or otherwise prevented from entering the wastewater treatment
system, or proof of an act of God event is shown. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/376
(f) Legal action. If any user discharges sewage, industrial waste or other waste into the city's wastewater treatment system contrary to the provisions of this article,
federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any other orders of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the city
municipal court, or the appropriate state court.
(1) Injunctive relief. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or federal or state requirement, the city through the city attorney may commence an action for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, in municipal court or the appropriate state court, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other
action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(2) Fraud and false statements. Any reports or other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this article or user permits shall be subject to:
(A) The provisions of 18 U.S.C. section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;
(B) The provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or certification; and
(C) The provisions of section 309(c)(6) regarding responsible corporate officers
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/88; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-103; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 36, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.03.005 Fees and surcharges
(a) Industrial wastewater discharge permits. For each industrial wastewater discharge permit or nonhazardous waste hauler permit issued pursuant to this article, each
user shall pay a fee as established by the city manager for the duration of the permit. Permits may remain in full force for a period of three (3) years from the date of
issuance, unless sooner revoked, and shall be nontransferable.
(b) Monitoring fees. Each significant user for which the city has reporting requirements under EPA national categorical pretreatment standards or its TPDES permit
shall compensate the city for the cost of sampling and laboratory service required for monitoring discharges. The director shall determine the number of samples and the
frequency of sampling necessary to comply with the reporting requirements.
(c) Monitoring fees associated with compliance schedules. Any industrial user placed on a compliance schedule will pay for associated sampling and analytical services
to monitor return to compliance.
(d) User surcharge.
(1) Users discharging industrial wastewater which exhibit none of the characteristics of waste prohibited herein other than excessive oxygen demand and
suspended solids, but having a concentration in excess of normal sewage as defined in section 22.03.001 as normal domestic wastewater, may be accepted for
treatment if the user agrees to a surcharge over and above the regular sewer rates as established by the city. The method for computing the surcharge shall be
based on the following formula:
Oxygen demand surcharge (BOD or COD)
Co = [Bc (AB)] Vu or Co = [Cc (AC)] Vu
Total suspended solids surcharge (TSS)
Cs = [Sc (AS)] Vu
Total surcharge
Ct = Co + Cs
Where:
Co = Surcharge for excessive BOD or COD, whichever is higher.
Cs = Surcharge for excessive total suspended solids.
Ct = Total surcharge.
Bc = BOD cost per milligram per liter per million gallons.
Cc = COD cost per milligram per liter per million gallons.
Sc = Total suspended solids cost per milligram per liter per million gallons.
AB = User BOD - Normal BOD = (BOD - 250).
AC = User COD - Normal COD = (COD - 550).
AS= User TSS - Normal TSS = (TSS - 300).
Vu = Volume from user per month in million gallons (MG).
(2) Surcharges for BOD, COD, and TSS shall be as established under section 22.02.002(a), water and sewer regulations generally.
(3) The combined totals of the oxygen demand and suspended solids surcharges shall equal the total surcharge to be billed. The basis for determining the
surcharges shall be reviewed as deemed necessary by the director and shall be adjusted to reflect any change in wastewater treatment cost.
(4) Determination of the average concentration of strength of the user's waste shall be made by the city based on tests conducted on representative samples
collected by the city at least once each year. However, the user may request in writing that parallel sampling and tests at all times be made by the user and the
city, in which case the surcharge may be made, assuming city approval of the user's test methods, using the average of comparable values obtained by the user
and the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/376
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/90; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-104)
Sec. 22.03.006 Power and authority of enforcing agents
The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties whenever
necessary to conduct an inspection or to enforce any of the provisions of this article. The director or his authorized representative may enter all properties at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the city by this article. If such entry is refused, or if no owner or other person having charge or control of
the property can be located, the director or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ordinance 9-57, sec. 1,
adopted 9/25/90; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-105)
Sec. 22.03.007 Penalties; costs
(a) Civil penalties. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the city council or failed to comply with provisions of this article, and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) as prescribed by state law. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1) In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of
litigation, and any other expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have
violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
(2) The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
(3) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(b) Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to
be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) as prescribed by state law.
(c) Administrative fines. When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an indirect discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each day during the period of violation. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(d) Criminal prosecution. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both.
(Ordinance 90-57, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/90; Ordinance 03-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/03; 1978 Code, sec. 28-106)
ARTICLE 22.04 SERVICE RATES OF REGULATED COMPANIES*
Sec. 22.04.001 Increasing; hearing on application therefor
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of furnishing public utility service to the public within the city, or for any person exercising or enjoying
any public franchise or privilege under or in the city, to charge or collect for the local service rendered by them to the public in the city any higher rate than the rates fixed
by the city council without first filing an application for such increase and securing the approval thereof by the city council after an open hearing, as hereinafter provided.
(b) In the event any such person mentioned in this section shall desire to increase the charges at this time existing for such service, he shall, prior to attempting such
increase, file with the city council his application setting out in detail the rates by him proposed to be charged and the reasons for such increase and request a hearing.
(c) Upon the filing of such application, the city council shall, at the next succeeding regular meeting, set a date for such hearing to begin, which date shall not be later
than thirty (30) days thereafter, and notice of such date shall be given to the petitioner. Upon such hearing, which shall be held by the city council in open meeting, such
petitioner shall have the right and it shall be his duty to produce such documents, books, records, accounts and other evidence as may be necessary to enable the city
council to pass intelligently and fairly upon the reasonableness of the proposed rates. The city council shall have the right and authority to call for or introduce any books,
records, documents, accounts or other evidence which might assist in arriving at the proper determination of the issues involved.
(d) Such hearing shall be expeditiously conducted, and at the termination thereof the city council shall, within sixty (60) days thereafter, either grant or refuse such
increase, or partially grant same, or lower the existing rates as the merits of the case may require. It shall be unlawful for any person to charge or attempt to charge any
rates for local service within the city higher than that so fixed by the city council; and any such increased rate so made without permission shall be void, and uncollectible.
No person shall discontinue or refuse to furnish service to the public because of the failure or refusal of the public to pay a higher rate than the one so fixed by the city
council. Each separate charge of collection of any increase without permission of the city council shall constitute a separate offense.
(1958 Code, sec. 39-15; 1978 Code, sec. 28-110)
Sec. 22.04.002 Forfeiture of franchise for rate violation
Any person enjoying any public franchise within the limits of the city or holding any public privilege or right to render public service for profit within the city or
rendering any public utility service within the city, who shall violate the provisions of section 22.04.001, or who shall increase the rates charged the public in violation
thereof, shall subject himself to a forfeiture of such franchise rights, if any he may have, and the same may be forfeited by the city council, after ten (10) days' notice to
the holder of such franchise right. Any such person, with or without franchise, who shall in the city fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article shall not be
allowed or permitted to continue the operation of the business in which he is engaged within the city, and shall be, upon order of the city council, by the police
department, restrained and prevented from so doing. (1958 Code, sec. 39-16; 1978 Code, sec. 28-111)
Sec. 22.04.003 Centerpoint Energy
(a) Definitions.
Commercial consumer. The term “commercial consumer” as used in the schedules cited in subsection (c) of this section shall mean a customer or user of gas engaging in
any business, professional or institutional activity, for all unrestricted uses of gas, including cooking, heating, refrigeration, water heating, air conditioning and power.
Residential consumer. The term “residential consumer” as used in the schedules cited in subsection (c) of this section shall mean a customer or user of gas to whom
service is supplied in a dwelling or a residential apartment for uses usual in a home. The terms “residential consumer” and “domestic consumer” are considered to be
synonymous.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/376
(b) Natural gas supplied for individual use; resale or sharing prohibited. Natural gas supplied by Centerpoint Energy, its successors and assigns is for the individual use
of the customer at one point of delivery and shall not be resold or shared with others.
(c) Schedules of rates for natural gas, natural gas service. Centerpoint Energy, its successors and assigns (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “company”) is hereby
authorized to place in effect the schedules of rates within the city for the supply of natural gas and natural gas service, which schedules are on file in the office of the city
clerk.
(d) Right of city council to regulate rates preserved. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as in any manner, now or hereafter, limiting or modifying the
right and power of the city council under the law to regulate the rates charged by Centerpoint Energy, its successors and assigns, within the city.
(1958 Code, secs. 39-17–39-18.1; 1978 Code, secs. 28-112–28-115; Ordinance 08-040, secs. 37–40, adopted 5/13/08)
ARTICLE 22.05 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22.05.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Automated containers. Any containers for refuse provided by the city having a capacity of sixty (60) to ninety-six (96) gallons and equipped with wheels for mobility.
Building materials. Any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings,
construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures.
Bulk container. A metal container of not less than two (2) cubic yards nor larger than ten (10) cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on two (2)
sides and top, and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. Containers shall be covered.
Business trash. Any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which is usually
attendant to the operation of stores, restaurants, offices, churches, apartments and similar businesses.
Commercial establishment. Any retail, restaurant, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage
or trash may be generated, and having connection to the city's water system.
Curbline. The area directly behind the curb. In the absence of a curb, the area directly behind the edge of pavement.
Garbage. Every accumulation of animal, vegetable, and other waste matter that attends the preparation, handling, consumption, storage or decay of plant and animal
matter, including meats, fish and seafood, birds, fruits, vegetable or dairy products and the waste wrappers or containers thereof.
Hazardous refuse. Materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, and explosives or as defined by the state commission on
environmental quality.
Household trash. Every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to
housekeeping.
Industrial waste. All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises or as defined by
the state commission on environmental quality.
Inspectors. Persons appointed by the department director authorized to enforce health and sanitation, building, and sanitation codes or ordinances.
Landfill operations. A section of the solid waste division designated to perform sanitary landfill disposal services for the public.
Litter. Any man-made or man-used object, organic or inorganic material, or solid waste, and specifically includes trash which is not placed in a container, an authorized
sanitary waste disposal site, or another approved area or depository, or a vehicle designated for transport or disposal of litter, trash, garbage or waste.
Loading and unloading area. Any stream, river or lakeside or land dock, space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting
goods, wares, commodities or persons.
Multiple residential unit. Any duplex, apartments, group of apartments or condominium used as a dwelling place for more than one family.
Person. Any individual, firm, company, corporation, or association.
Post-consumer waste. A material or product that has served its intended use and has been discarded after passing through the hands of a final user. For the purpose of this
article, the term does not include industrial or hazardous waste.
Portable packing unit. A metal container, not exceeding four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds gross weight, with four (4) to six (6) cubic yard capacity, that contains
a packing mechanism and an internal or external power unit.
Private collector. Any person or firm engaging in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting, in the city, any garbage, waste or refuse.
Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, and ashes.
Refuse container. A metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with a tightfitting lid, and handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling for
collection at curbside. Except for those areas served by automated collection equipment, such containers shall have a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons and
a total weight, when full, of not more than fifty (50) pounds or an empty weight of not more than ten (10) pounds, and shall be kept in serviceable condition at all times.
Any areas serviced by automated collection equipment shall only use the automated containers as approved by the director. Any container which does not meet standards
set by the director or his designee shall be removed. Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the director or his designee.
Residentially zoned property. Property zoned for only single-family residential uses under the zoning ordinances of the city.
Roll-off/roll-on container. A unit, varying in capacity between five (5) cubic yards and forty (40) cubic yards, which is used for collecting, storing, and transporting
building materials, business trash, industrial waste, hazardous refuse, refuse or yard trash. The unit may or may not use an auxiliary stationary packing mechanism for
composition of materials into the container and may be of the open or enclosed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a
specially equipped truck and becomes an integral part of the truck for transporting the waste material to the disposal site.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/376
Single residential unit. Any dwelling place occupied by one family.
Small dead animals. Dead cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size.
Solid Waste Disposal Act. The Solid Waste Disposal Act, chapter 361 of the Health and Safety Code, V.T.C.S., as amended, and under the authority of the state
commission on environmental quality.
Solid waste division. The division under the control of the director designated to perform garbage and trash collection services, landfill waste disposal and recycling for
the city.
Tree and shrubbery trimmings. Waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery and cuttings or clippings created as refuse in the case of
trees or bushes.
Vacant property. Property that does not contain any structure whatsoever.
White goods. Major appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers, hot water heaters, stoves, dishwashers, etc.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush, including clean woody vegetative material not greater than six (6) inches in diameter, that results
from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. The term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 94-35, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/94; Ordinance 00-63, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/00; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.1; Ordinance 08-
040, sec. 1, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 1, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.002 Administration and enforcement
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, including provisions for refuse collection throughout the city, by both private contractors and the city,
shall be primarily the duty of the solid waste division with assistance from other city departments. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.2;
Ordinance 08-040, sec. 2, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.003 Notice of violation
(a) Authority to issue. Inspectors appointed by the department head shall have the authority to enforce sections 22.05.006, 22.05.009, 22.05.010, 22.05.011, 22.05.051,
22.05.053, 22.05.056, 22.05.058, 22.05.012, 22.05.013, 22.05.060, 22.05.061, 22.05.062, 22.05.063, 22.05.103, 22.05.104, 22.05.134, 22.05.137, and 22.05.058 of this
article by issuing a notice, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, informing the proper person of the date and nature of violation. Other violations of this article
shall be enforced by the issuance of a summons or warrant as provided by law.
(b) Method of issuance. When an inspector issues a notice for a violation of this article, notice shall be sufficient if served on the offending person by:
(1) Attaching a correction notice upon the container [of the person] to whom it is directed.
(2) Certified mail, with delivery reported, a copy of the notice to the last known address of the person as shown on the current tax roll or water bill.
(c) Response. The party who receives a notice of violation by certified mail will pay the fee assessment set forth hereinbelow in full satisfaction of such violation. The
fee assessment will be included on the water bill for payment in accordance with section 22.05.213. Continued violation of the sections in subsection (a) of this section
may result in termination of garbage service and institution of legal action.
For violation of section: Fee Assessment
22.05.006 $15.00
22.05.009 $15.00
22.05.010 $15.00
22.05.011 $15.00
22.05.051 $10.00
22.05.053 $10.00
22.05.056 $10.00
22.05.058 $15.00
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, secs. 28-20.3–28-20.5; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 3, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.004 Violation of article
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class C misdemeanor and, unless the penalty for such violation is paid
in accordance with section 22.05.003 of this article, upon conviction thereof, the court may impose a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/376
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.6; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 4, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.005 Bulk containers utilized by commercial establishments
Any commercial establishment which desires to utilize a bulk container for its refuse shall employ the services of a private contractor to service that container. Such
container shall at all times be clean, neat, and in good state of repair. Cleaning up materials spilled from the container when emptying shall be the responsibility of the
private contractor or the property owner or occupant. No refuse shall be placed adjacent to any bulk container. The property owner of any establishment for which a bulk
container screening requirement applies must maintain such screening in a clean and neat condition and in good state of repair. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92;
1978 Code, sec. 28-20.7)
Sec. 22.05.006 Hazardous refuse
No infectious or pathological refuse or any other refuse that may cause a public health hazard shall be placed in any container used for collection by the city or collection
by any private agency. The following are several types of special refuse items which shall be given special care and preparation before disposing of the same in any refuse
container:
(1) Hypodermic instruments and other sharp articles. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or
device for making hypodermic injections without prior placement in a puncture-resistant container for disposal so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury
to the collection personnel.
(2) Ashes. Ashes that are to be collected by the city or private collectors must have been wetted and cooled to the touch prior to collection. Ashes shall be
placed in suitable containers of such size and weight as stipulated in section 22.05.051 and shall not be placed with the normal refuse unless separately
wrapped, so that they will not cause injury to the collection personnel.
(3) Pressurized cans. All pressurized cans containing pesticides or any other dangerous materials shall be released of all pressure before being deposited in a
container for collection by the city or any private collection agency.
(4) Glass. All broken glass or any type of glass that may cause injury to refuse collection personnel shall be separately wrapped to prevent injury and placed
with the normal refuse.
(5) Pesticides. All pesticides and other poisonous containers shall be emptied and triple rinsed before being placed for collection.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.8)
Sec. 22.05.007 Disposal of refuse and debris from construction, demolition, etc., operations
(a) The city shall not be responsible for the collection or hauling of building materials originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the
construction of new buildings or alterations or additions to existing buildings of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed
by the owner of the property or by the contractor. A stop work order may be issued by the inspector until such material has been removed by the owner or contractor. In
addition, all contractors must provide refuse receptacles for construction debris and litter to be deposited in on a regular basis.
(b) Loose dirt, mud, clay, rocks, construction materials and other debris deposited upon any public highway, street and sidewalk or private property as a result of
construction or demolition operations shall be immediately removed by the contractor. Construction and demolition sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.
(c) The prime contractor or developer of a construction or demolition site shall be responsible for maintaining the site as required by this section.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1-28-92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.9)
Sec. 22.05.008 Collection, removal and disposal of industrial waste
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of in an approved manner by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing same. (Ordinance
92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.10)
Sec. 22.05.009 Unlawful deposits generally; littering
(a) No person shall place any accumulation of refuse or trash in any street, street right-of-way, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private
property, except as stated in other sections of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Scatter refuse about or litter any public or private street, area or place.
(2) Cast, throw, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or trash in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied or unoccupied premises within the city.
(3) Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any stream, body of water, or drainage system.
(c) The driver of any vehicle shall be responsible for assuring that no litter is thrown from the vehicle or occurs through the lack of proper covering.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.11)
State law reference–Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Sec. 22.05.010 Placing refuse or refuse containers on, in or over drainage system
No person shall place any refuse or refuse container on, in or over any drainage system. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.12)
Sec. 22.05.011 Property to be kept free of litter
All owners or occupants shall maintain the real property owned or occupied by them in a clean and litter-free condition. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting
the storage of refuse or litter in authorized containers for collection pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-
20.13)
Sec. 22.05.012 Interference with or damaging containers
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/376
No person, other than employees of the city charged with such duty, shall interfere with the contents of any refuse container set out for removal by the city or any private
collection agency, unless authorized by the director or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any refuse container placed at the curbline for
collection. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.14; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 5, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 1, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.013 Scavenging of recyclable materials from residential areas prohibited
(a) No person or persons, other than the current resident of the property on which the items are placed or an authorized carrier, shall remove, pick up, or transfer
recyclable materials, containers or bins left at curbside in either specifically marked recovery containers or any other type of container which is to be picked up by a
designated carrier for the purpose of removal of recyclable materials. Materials referred to, and to be left at curbside in specifically marked containers, will include
recyclable materials included in the city's recycling program.
(b) Each removal of an item or items from a residential subdivision residence location or a single-family residence location shall constitute a separate violation of this
section. Unauthorized persons removing materials or bins other than those persons designated by the city to remove such materials shall be fined as follows:
(1) Upon first conviction of violation of this section, the person shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such violation.
(2) Upon second conviction of violation of this section, the person shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation.
(3) Upon third and subsequent convictions of violation of this section, the person shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-20.15)
Sec. 22.05.014 Hauling of garbage, trash, waste or refuse on city streets
It shall be unlawful for any citizen, commercial establishment or private hauler to haul garbage, trash, waste or refuse on city streets without proper equipment for this
purpose. No vehicle will be used for transporting this type of material unless it is:
(1) Equipped with adequate sideboards and tailgate to fully contain waste and prevent accidental blowing or discharge at any time.
(2) Completely covered with a tarp if loose materials extend above the sideboards.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-45)
Secs. 22.05.015–22.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Collection by City
Sec. 22.05.051 Containers generally
All refuse to be collected by the city shall be stored in proper containers between times of collection. Any container provided by the city shall not be filled to exceed two
hundred (200) pounds total weight and all refuse therein must fit inside the container. The cover of any container shall be kept on at all times except when the container is
being filled, emptied or cleaned. Animal waste and ashes shall be wrapped separately from her refuse in a manner to prevent spillage prior to placing the same in a
container. All areas serviced by the city shall use ninety-gallon round or ninety-six-gallon containers as approved by the director. All refuse shall be placed within the
automated containers. No other type of container is permitted for use in the automated collection areas. Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the director or
his designee. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.1; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 6, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.052 Solid waste collection service
(a) Standard residential solid waste collection service shall include:
(1) Once a week collection of garbage containers and bagged or containerized yard waste.
(2) Twice monthly collection of oversized tree and shrubbery trimmings, household trash, and bulky items such as major appliances or furniture.
(b) To receive service, the dweller of the property shall be current on the garbage collection service fee in accordance with section 22.05.211.
(c) Residential and commercial accounts are limited to five (5) containers. Requests for additional containers must be submitted in writing to the department. The
person whose name appears on the account must sign the request.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 93-5, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/93; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.2; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 7, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046,
sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11; Ordinance 13-073, sec. 1, adopted 12/17/13)
Sec. 22.05.053 Points of collection
(a) Refuse containers and yard waste which are collected by the city shall be placed on the curbline of a city right-of-way abutting the property by 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled day of collection.
(b) Garbage and trash collection service on private property may be provided when alleys or streets of sufficient width are available and all of the adjoining property
owners or the owners' association by written document indemnifies the city for damages to curbs, alleys, pavements, and the private property of residents served.
(c) Some residents serviced by automated collection equipment may be required to place the automated containers on the opposite side of the street from their
residence. Solid waste vehicles may travel against the flow of traffic on a one-way street when so equipped with appropriate warning devices.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.3; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 8, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.054 Holiday collection schedule
(a) Refuse collection service shall not be provided by the city on the following holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Independence Day.
(3) Thanksgiving Day.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/376
(4) Christmas Day.
(b) During weeks containing observed holidays, collections shall be moved back one day after the holiday necessitating Friday collection.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 00-07, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/00; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.4)
Sec. 22.05.055 Refuse from multiple-unit dwellings not to be collected
The city shall not provide refuse collection to apartments, office and residential condominiums, duplexes, or other multiple-unit buildings unless each unit or duplex is
individually located on a separate lot abutting the right-of-way of a publicly maintained street; provided, however, that such refuse collection shall be done in accordance
with the other provisions of this article. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.5)
Sec. 22.05.056 Storage of yard waste; removal of yard waste generated by contractors; removal of bulky or heavy material
(a) Yard waste may be stored for collection in suitable containers or bags not to exceed thirty-two (32) gallons capacity and fifty (50) pounds in weight. Any yard waste
that cannot be put in a normal refuse container shall be handled as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) All limbs, branches, shrubbery and hedge trimmings to be collected by the city shall be stacked neatly in separate piles by the curbline for collection. Materials shall
not be stacked under low overhead cabling, signs or posts. This material will be collected in accordance with section 22.05.052.
(c) Every nurseryman, tree surgeon, and every person who cuts or trims trees, shrubs or grass as an independent contractor shall remove or cause to be removed all trash
from the premises serviced by him or follow the placement requirements set out in section 22.05.058. Failure to properly dispose of such cuttings or trimmings shall
constitute littering and is punishable in accordance with section 22.05.004 of this code.
(d) Collection of items such as building debris (lumber), shingles, siding, insulation, brick, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, large automobile parts, scrap metal, wire, dead
animals and other bulky or heavy material shall not be included in the regular garbage and trash collection service furnished by the solid waste division. The owner shall
have such debris removed at his own expense.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.6; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 9, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.057 Forking of debris flooded or washed upon private property
On seasonal occasions, when various types of debris from public waterways, highways or drainage systems is either flooded or washed upon private property (commercial
or residential), and when carted to the curbline for collection by the city, the director, or his designee, may authorize the forking of such accumulations of debris not in
containers or stacked as normally required by this article. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.7; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 10, adopted 5/13/08;
Ordinance 11-046, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.058 Deposit of yard waste in automated containers prohibited; placement of yard waste for collection
(a) No person shall place any yard waste or tree and shrubbery trimmings in city-furnished automated containers.
(b) Yard waste to be collected by the city shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on collection day. Yard waste may be placed in:
(1) Plastic or polyethylene bags which are at least 1.5 mils in thickness and having a capacity of not more than forty-five (45) gallons or a total weight of not
more than forty (40) pounds.
(2) Corrugated cardboard boxes or other suitable paper containers weighing not more than forty (40) pounds and of sufficient strength to prohibit bursting
when lifted. Corrugated cardboard boxes will be left at curbside by collection personnel.
(3) Metallic or plastic refuse containers having a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons or a total weight of not more than fifty (50) pounds.
(c) Tree and shrubbery trimmings to be collected by the city shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on collection day. Tree and shrubbery trimmings must be:
(1) Totally separated from all other waste; other waste includes metals, lumber, paper, plastics, furniture, appliances, concrete and any other solid materials.
Any waste, regardless of quantity or size, mixed with tree and shrubbery trimmings constitutes a violation of this section.
(2) Cut into sections not to exceed eight (8) feet in length.
(3) Cut so that tree stumps and root balls do not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.8; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.059 Disposal of white goods
White goods must have doors taped shut or removed before placing on city streets. White goods must be totally separated from all other waste to allow for separate
collection. White goods are prohibited from being buried on the landfill. White goods allowed at the landfill must be deposited in the white goods recycling area as
directed by the landfill personnel. It shall be unlawful to deposit any materials other than white goods in the white goods recycling areas. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted
1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.9; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 11, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.060 Disposal of tires
Tires will be collected from residential households only. Tires must be totally separated from all other waste. A maximum of four (4) tires will be collected on collection
day. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.10)
Sec. 22.05.061 Disposal of yard waste at landfill
Yard waste is prohibited from being buried on the landfill. Yard waste accepted at the landfill must be deposited in the compost area as directed by landfill personnel. It
shall be unlawful to deposit any materials other than yard waste in the compost area. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.11)
Sec. 22.05.062 Collection from vacant property
(a) Trash collection service will be provided to vacant property subject to the following provisions:
(1) The property must be located in a residential zone.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/376
(2) The property is not larger than one-half acre.
(3) The trash placed for collection is from normal vegetation maintenance such as tree cuttings above the ground, grass clippings, or brush cutting.
(4) The property is not being cleared for construction purposes.
(5) Tree trimmings did not result from the selling of usable timber.
(6) The property owner must reside in a single-family residence within the city limits that is currently paying a solid waste fee on that residence.
(7) The property is not being held for sale as part of a residential development.
(8) Only vegetative waste will be collected.
(9) Vegetation must not be obtained with machinery (i.e., a bulldozer) whereby trees and stumps with root balls are included in the trash to be collected.
(10) The acceptable vegetative waste is placed at the curb in accordance with section 22.05.058(c)(2) of the Code of Ordinances.
(b) Yard waste collection on vacant property shall be provided once per calendar quarter.
(Ordinance 00-63, sec. 2, adopted 8/15/00; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.12)
Sec. 22.05.063 Collection from single residential units located on more than one acre of land
Trash collection at single residential units built on multiple acres of land will be provided in accordance with the following:
(1) The trash placed on the curb is household trash, white goods, yard waste and other trash normally generated at a residence.
(2) The trash was generated on a maximum of one (1) acre of land upon which the house is situated. Hauling and disposal of trash or yard waste generated
on other parts of the property such as vegetative waste or waste generated by land clearing, or demolition of barns, sheds or other structures, is the
responsibility of the property owner.
(Ordinance 00-63, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/00; 1978 Code, sec. 28-21.13)
Secs. 22.05.064–22.05.100 Reserved
Division 3. Private Collectors
Sec. 22.05.101 Franchise required for collecting, hauling or transporting waste
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting, in the city, any garbage, waste or refuse, without first having obtained a franchise from the
city. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-22.1)
Sec. 22.05.102 Franchise required for providing commercial container collection services
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation to provide commercial container garbage collection services in the city without first obtaining a
franchise from the city. “Commercial container garbage collection services” is defined as a public utility for the collection of the garbage from mechanically emptied
“dumpster or roll-on” type containers from locations in the city which are not single-family locations, and disposal of such material in accordance with law. (Ordinance
83-128, sec. 1, adopted 10/4/83; Ordinance 87-93, sec. 1, adopted 12/8/87; 1978 Code, sec. 7-66; Ordinance 17-048 adopted 7/25/17)
Sec. 22.05.103 Maintenance of vehicles and other equipment
All vehicles, containers and other equipment used by private refuse collectors shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and free from odors at all times and shall
be equipped with watertight bodies. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-22.2)
Sec. 22.05.104 Inspection of containers and vehicles
All containers and vehicles owned or operated by private refuse collectors shall be subject to inspection by officials of the department to insure safety compliance and to
insure that proper lids or covers are provided to prevent litter problems. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-22.3; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 12,
adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 3, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.105 Collections to be made from customer's premises
Containers owned by private refuse collectors shall not be placed on any street or right-of-way within the city. All collections shall be made directly from the premises of
the customer and any emptied containers returned directly to such premises. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-22.4)
Secs. 22.05.106–22.05.130 Reserved
Division 4. City Landfill
Part I. In General
Sec. 22.05.131 Unloading material
All persons or businesses hauling into the city landfill shall deposit such material only in the place designated by a landfill attendant. Such dumping shall only be from
Monday through Saturday during the hours of operation as determined by the director. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-42; Ordinance 08-
040, sec. 21, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.132 Unauthorized removal of material
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove trash, waste or refuse, or any material from the city landfill without the written permission of the director or his designee.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-43; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 22, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/376
Sec. 22.05.133 Materials not accepted
Entrance to and dumping of the following at the city landfill shall not be allowed without prior approval of the director or his designee:
(1) Junk automobiles;
(2) Human excrement;
(3) Inflammable liquids;
(4) Dangerous chemicals;
(5) Insecticides;
(6) Industrial chemicals or industrial solid waste;
(7) Waste oil or grease;
(8) Liquid waste;
(9) Other waste prohibited from landfill disposal by the Solid Waste Act.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 94-35, sec. 4, adopted 7/12/94; 1978 Code, sec. 28-44; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 23, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-
046, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.134 Use by private collectors
Persons engaged in the business of collecting solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage may deposit solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage at the city landfill subject to the
following provisions:
(1) The proper city refuse disposal permit has been purchased and is current.
(2) The vehicles transporting the solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage have a current city refuse disposal permit license decal displayed thereon.
(3) Section 22.05.171 has been and is fully complied with.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 94-35, sec. 2, adopted 7/12/94; Ordinance 00-06, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/00; 1978 Code, sec. 28-23.1)
Sec. 22.05.135 Hours of operation
The director, with the approval of the city manager, is hereby authorized to establish reasonable hours of operation for the city landfill. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted
1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-23.3; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 14, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.136 Determination of acceptability of deposits
The director, or his designee, shall have the authority to determine what solid waste, refuse or garbage shall be acceptable for deposit at the city landfill. (Ordinance 92-7,
sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-23.4; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 15, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.137 Delivery vehicles to conform to Solid Waste Disposal Act
(a) Every vehicle used to deliver material to a city refuse disposal area shall conform to the requirements of the Solid Waste Disposal Act so that the contents of such
vehicle do not escape therefrom.
(b) A person operating a vehicle which does not conform to such section [act] shall be allowed access to such area only after he is issued a notice of, or summons for, a
violation of this section.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-23.5)
Sec. 22.05.138 Liability for violation of article
Any officer or agent of a corporation, or member of a partnership or association, who shall personally participate in or be an accessory to any violation of this article by
such corporation, partnership or association shall be subject to the penalties provided for such violation. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-
23.6)
Secs. 22.05.139–22.05.170 Reserved
Part II. Disposal Permit
Sec. 22.05.171 Required
(a) No person engaged in the business of collecting solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage shall deposit such material at any city refuse disposal area unless he has a
current refuse disposal permit issued by the director or his designated agent.
(b) The fee for a permit required by this section shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle per year or any part thereof. Each such permit shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
(c) When a permit is issued under this section, a decal shall be issued for each vehicle listed on the permit. Such decal shall be affixed to the left side of the vehicle
windshield at all times when it is being used at any city refuse disposal area.
(d) The director, or his designee, is hereby authorized to revoke or suspend any permit issued under this section, to prevent the holder thereof from utilizing the city
refuse disposal areas, for good cause.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-23.2; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 13, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 5, adopted 7/19/11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/376
Sec. 22.05.172 Conditions for issuance
Upon filing of an application, the landfill superintendent shall grant such permit if the following conditions have been met:
(1) Provision is available to lawfully dispose of the garbage, trash, waste or refuse within the city landfill;
(2) The provisions of this article have been met;
(3) The proposed removal and disposition of such garbage, trash, waste or refuse will not create a public nuisance;
(4) The vehicle for conveyance has been inspected and measured by the landfill division; and
(5) The applicant has been current in payment for previous disposal services.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-40; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 19, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.173 Revocation; appeals
The permit herein authorized to be issued may be revoked by the landfill superintendent at any time for the violation of or noncompliance with any of the provisions of
this article or the conditions under which it was issued and, immediately upon such revocation, the permit issued thereunder shall be surrendered to the landfill
superintendent or any of his duly authorized representatives; however, any person feeling aggrieved by such revocation shall have the right to appeal to the director for
redress, and such appeal shall be made either by personal appearance on the part of the aggrieved party or by written communication addressed to the director setting forth
the cause of complaint. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-41; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 20, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 5, adopted
7/19/11)
Secs. 22.05.174–22.05.210 Reserved
Division 5. Service Fees
Sec. 22.05.211 Residential and recycling service
(a) The solid waste division shall systematically collect and remove garbage, trash, recyclable materials, and yard waste from premises used for residential purposes.
All residences in the city are subject to, and the owners or occupants are required to pay, a collection services fee except:
(1) Residences from which the owners or occupants are serviced by a private collector as defined in this article.
(2) Residences on which the owners or occupants use an on-property disposal method that is approved by the city, county, and state.
(3) Residences that are vacant and water service for which is discontinued.
(4) Owners of vacant residences who do not require water service will not be required to pay a garbage and trash collection fee.
(b) Garbage and trash rates. No rate adjustment will be made for temporary nonuse of service. Nonpayment of the collection services fee shall be sufficient grounds for
discontinuance of city water service. The rate for collection outside the city limits shall be one hundred fifty (150) percent of the rate established for service inside the city
limits. No type of service will be offered residences exempted under section 22.05.007(c) or for vacant lots except as provided in section 22.05.062. If a business is
located in a part of a residence, a collection services fee shall be charged for each connection to the city's water system. The following monthly rates apply for collection
services:
(1) The monthly rates for standard collection services shall consist of the following elements:
(A) Garbage and trash collection: $18.25.
A 10% discount to the garbage and trash collection fee shall apply to customers residing in single-family residences who are sixty-five (65) years of
age or older. To obtain the senior citizen garbage and trash collection rate, eligible persons must file a sworn application on a form provided therefor
with the central collections division. The rate shall remain in effect so long as the customer residing in the single-family residence is sixty-five (65)
years of age or older.
(B) Additional containers: A one-time $20.00 prep and delivery fee for each additional container obtained. The monthly fee for each additional
container is three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75) per month.
(2) A reconnect container fee will be assessed for those households whose garbage container(s) have been collected by the city due to the removal of a water
meter as a result of nonpayment of city water and/or garbage services, and then subsequently reissued upon payment and reinstallation of the meter.
(A) Reconnect container fee: $20.00 per container.
(c) Recycling service. Citizens participating in curbside recycling shall pay the fees listed below.
(1) The rates to be charged for curbside recycling shall consist of the following:
(A) A recycling container service fee of fifty-eight dollars ($58.00) per container. The container is to remain the property of the city.
(B) A recycling fee of eleven dollars and fifty cents ($11.50) per month.
(2) Recyclable materials will only be collected if they are placed inside the recycling container.
(3) Recycling containers must be placed on the curbside for them to be collected by the city.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; Ordinance 93-5, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/93; Ordinance 94-61, sec. 1, adopted 12/13/94; Ordinance 00-63, sec. 4, adopted 8/15/00;
Ordinance 02-092, secs. 1–3, adopted 11/5/02; Ordinance 05-087, secs. 1, 2, 10/18/05; 1978 Code, sec. 28-24.1; Ordinance 07-094, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance
08-040, sec. 16, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-084, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/11; Ordinance 12-028, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/12; Ordinance 13-040, sec. 1, adopted 6/25/13;
Ordinance 13-073, sec. 2, adopted 12/17/13; Ordinance 15-038, sec. 1, adopted 9/29/15; Ordinance 16-042, sec. 1, adopted 8/23/16; Ordinance 18-005, secs. 1–2, adopted
2/20/18)
Sec. 22.05.212 Public, business and commercial establishments
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/376
(a) Applicability. All commercial establishments in the city are required to pay a collection services fee except:
(1) Institutions that haul their own garbage.
(2) Institutions that have a private collector.
(3) Institutions that use an on-property disposal method that is approved by the city, county, and state.
(4) Institutions that are vacant and the water service is discontinued.
(b) Nonpayment of the collection services fee shall be sufficient grounds for discontinuance of city water and sewer serving the location.
(c) No rate adjustments will be made for temporary non-use of service unless the water service is disconnected. Service shall not be provided outside the city limits.
(d) Commercial establishments may be provided, at their option, the same refuse container service provided to residents. No separate trash service will be provided to
commercial establishments for trees, shrubs, white goods, or yard waste.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a hauler holding a valid permit under section 22.05.171 of this article to transport commercial garbage from one
location to another or to a residence.
(f) The rate set out in section 22.05.211 hereof shall be the rates charged to commercial establishments.
(Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-24.2; Ordinance 08-040, sec. 17, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.05.213 Collection of charges
The charges fixed herein for the removal and disposal of all garbage and trash shall be entered by the city against the owner or occupant using or occupying any building
or structure receiving such service. To avoid duplication in billing and as a convenience to the public, the city shall include such charges on the monthly city invoice. Any
person who shall fail or refuse to pay the charge herein specified within fifteen (15) days from the date of the bill shall have his garbage service suspended and the director
shall be noted immediately for appropriate action in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 92-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 28-24.3;
Ordinance 08-040, sec. 18, adopted 5/13/08; Ordinance 11-046, sec. 6, adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 22.05.214 Landfill fees
(a) All persons of the city may dispose of residential waste from their residence upon presenting proof of residency.
(1) All persons of the city and other municipality under a disposal contract may dispose of residential waste from their residence upon presenting proof of
residency.
(2) Nonprofit charitable organizations who operate as a necessary part of their day-to-day business vehicles owned or leased by them for the transport of
waste or refuse resulting from the renovation or repair of donated used material shall be exempt from the fee requirement of this section.
(b) Disposal fees shall be based on collection of refuse from inside the city limits. The fee shall be assessed to the nearest cubic yard of refuse disposed.
(1) Compacted refuse: $6.00/cy.
(2) Noncompacted refuse: $5.25/cy.
(Ordinance 93-51, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; Ordinance 94-35, sec. 3, adopted 7/12/94; 1978 Code, sec. 28-24.4)
ARTICLE 22.06 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 22.06.001 Declaration of policy, purpose and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire
protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency
conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water
shortage or other emergency water supply condition is deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 22.06.010 of
this plan.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(a))
Sec. 22.06.002 Public involvement
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city by means of providing a public meeting to provide opportunity to
allow public input. The meeting was publicly announced through the Beaumont Enterprise. The notice for the meeting was posted at City Hall, 801 Main St., and the
meeting was held July 31, 2001. (Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(b))
Sec. 22.06.003 Public education
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be
initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of television announcements,
press releases and utility bill flyers. (Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(c))
Sec. 22.06.004 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the Region I regional water planning area and the city has provided a copy of this plan to Region I. (Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1,
adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(d))
Sec. 22.06.005 Authorization
The city manager, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation
is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/376
supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. (Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec.
28-59(e))
Sec. 22.06.006 Application
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan
include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. (Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted
10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(f))
Sec. 22.06.007 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail
establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of
water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, and sanitation, or for cleaning a
residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, and locations without addresses.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial
lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians.
Non-essential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as otherwise provided under this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting.
Odd-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(g))
Sec. 22.06.008 Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or
termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when the specified “triggers” are reached. The triggering criteria described below are based on known system capacity limits.
Future improvements to the city's water system will increase capacity and this plan will be modified to reflect the system's upgraded capacity.
(1) Stage 1 triggers–Mild water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water
uses defined in section 22.06.007 of this article (definitions) when total daily water demand equals or exceeds thirty-seven million (37,000,000) gallons
for three (3) consecutive days or thirty-eight million (38,000,000) gallons on a single day (e.g., based on the “safe” operating capacity of water supply
facilities).
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a
period of three (3) consecutive days.
(2) Stage 2 triggers–Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses
provided in section 22.06.009 of this plan when the total daily water demand equals or exceeds thirty-eight million (38,000,000) gallons for three (3)
consecutive days or thirty-nine million (39,000,000) gallons on a single day.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a
period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(3) Stage 3 triggers–Severe water shortage conditions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/376
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for
stage 3 of this plan when the total daily water demand equals or exceeds thirty-nine million (39,000,000) gallons for three (3) consecutive days or forty
million (40,000,000) gallons on a single day.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a
period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative.
(4) Stage 4 triggers–Critical water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for
stage 4 of this plan when the total daily water demand equals or exceeds forty million (40,000,000) gallons for three (3) consecutive days or forty-two
million (42,000,000) gallons on a single day.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a
period of two (2) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative.
(5) Stage 5 triggers–Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 5 of this plan when the city
manager, or his/her designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on:
(i) Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or
(ii) Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source(s).
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a
period of three (3) consecutive days.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(h))
Sec. 22.06.009 Drought response stages
(a) Generally. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering
criteria set forth in section 22.06.008 of this plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe, critical, emergency or water shortage condition exists and shall implement
the following notification procedures:
(1) Notification of the public (all trigger stages): The city manager or his/her designee shall notify the public by means of:
(A) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation (the Beaumont Enterprise);
(B) Public service announcements (local television and radio stations).
(2) Additional notification: The city manager or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities:
(A) The mayor and members of the city council and the city fire department (all trigger stages);
(B) City and/or county emergency management coordinator (trigger stage 3 or above);
(C) TCEQ (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed) (triggers 4 and 5);
(D) Major water users (trigger stage 3 and above);
(E) Critical water users, i.e., hospitals, prisons, etc. (trigger stage 3 and above);
(F) Parks/street superintendents and public facilities managers (any trigger stage).
(b) Stage 1 response–Mild water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a voluntary eight (8) percent reduction in total water demand.
(2) Supply management measures.
(A) Reduced flushing of water mains;
(B) Discontinue fire hydrant flushing;
(3) Voluntary water use restrictions.
(A) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address
ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7
or 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days.
(B) All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for stage 2 of the plan.
(C) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential purposes.
(c) Stage 2 response–Moderate water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a ten (10) percent reduction in total water demand.
(2) Supply management measures.
(A) Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains;
(B) Discontinue fire hydrant testing;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/376
(C) Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas;
(D) Implement measures to return all system components to full production capacity.
(3) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers
with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd
number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a
faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or a drip irrigation system.
(B) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld
bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate
premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and
welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables.
(C) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated
watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where
such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
(E) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and
welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city.
(F) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city,
the facility shall not be subject to these regulations.
(G) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the patron.
(H) The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited:
(i) Wash-down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas;
(ii) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;
(iii) Use of water for dust control;
(iv) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and
(v) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s).
(d) Stage 3 response–Severe water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a twelve and one-half (12.5) percent reduction in total water demand.
(2) Supply management measures.
(A) All measures described for stage 2;
(B) Aggressively locate and repair major water main leaks and breaks.
(3) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00
p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed automatic sprinkler
system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times.
(B) The watering of golf course tees is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city.
(e) Stage 4 response–Critical water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a fifteen (15) percent reduction in total water demand.
(2) Supply management measures. All measures described in stages 2 and 3.
(3) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m.
and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently
installed automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited at all times.
(B) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial carwash
and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at
commercial carwashes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(C) The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where
such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/376
(E) No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or
water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought
response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall be in effect.
(F) The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued.
(f) Stage 5 response–Emergency water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a thirty (30) percent reduction in total water demand.
(2) Supply management measures. All measures described in stages 2, 3, and 4.
(3) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5 except:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited.
(B) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited.
(C) All water usage except that required to protect the public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(i)–(n); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 30, adopted 5/13/08)
Sec. 22.06.010 Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other
purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to
action taken by the city manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
and not more than two thousand dollars ($2000.00). Each day that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is
convicted of three (3) or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the
premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby established
at seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager that the
same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed
to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property
committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for
violations of their minor children, and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water
as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any employee of the city, police officer, or other city employee designated by the city manager may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in
violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, and the offense charged, and
shall direct him/her to appear in the city municipal court on the date shown on the citation, for which the date shall not be less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10)
days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation
to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over fourteen (14) years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a
resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in the city municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the
alleged violator fails to appear in the city municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant.
These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(o))
Sec. 22.06.011 Variances
(a) The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that
failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such
variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in
effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the city within five (5) days after the plan or a particular
drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or
others if the petitioner complies with this article.
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/376
(c) Variances granted by the city manager shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(p))
Sec. 22.06.012 Application of plan to wholesale customers of city water system
(a) Pro rata water allocation. In the event that the triggering criteria specified in section 22.06.008(3) of the plan for stage 3 severe water shortage conditions have been
met, the city manager is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis in accordance with Texas Water Code section 11.039 and according to
the following water allocation policies and procedures:
(1) A wholesale customer's monthly allocation shall be a percentage of the customer's water usage baseline. The percentage will be set by resolution of the
city based on the city manager's assessment of the severity of the water shortage condition and the need to curtail water diversions and/or deliveries and may
be adjusted periodically by resolution of the city as conditions warrant. Once pro rata allocation is in effect, water diversions or by deliveries to each wholesale
customer shall be limited to the allocation established for each month.
(2) A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the city manager or his/her designee, for each wholesale customer. The wholesale customer's
water usage baseline will be computed on the average water usage by month for the 1995–2000 calendar year period. If the wholesale water customer's billing
history is less than five (5) years, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no billing
history exists.
(3) The city manager shall provide notice, by certified mail, to each wholesale customer informing them of their monthly water usage allocations and shall
notify the news media and the executive director of the TCEQ upon initiation of pro rata water allocation.
(4) Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city manager the allocation may be reduced or increased if:
(A) The designated period does not accurately reflect the wholesale customer's normal water usage;
(B) The customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another wholesale customer; or
(C) Other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions.
A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the city council.
(b) Enforcement. During any period when pro rata allocation of available water supplies is in effect, wholesale customers shall pay the following surcharges on excess
water diversions and/or deliveries:
(1) One hundred ten (110) percent of the normal water charge for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation up through five (5)
percent above the monthly allocation.
(2) One hundred twenty (120) percent of the normal water charge for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation from five (5)
percent through ten (10) percent above the monthly allocation.
(3) One hundred fifty (150) percent of the normal water charge for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation from ten (10)
percent through fifteen (15) percent above the monthly allocation.
(4) Two (2) times the normal water charge for water diversions and/or more than fifteen (15) percent above the monthly allocation.
(5) The above surcharges shall be cumulative.
(c) Variances.
(1) The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant a temporary variance to the pro rata water allocation policies provided by this plan if it is
determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the public health, welfare, or safety and if one or more
of the following conditions are met:
(A) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the
plan is in effect.
(B) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use.
(2) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the city manager within five (5) days after pro rata
allocation has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city council, and shall include the following:
(A) Name and address of the petitioner(s);
(B) Detailed statement with supporting data and information as to how the pro rata allocation of water under the policies and procedures established in
the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article;
(C) Description of the relief requested;
(D) Period of time for which the variance is sought;
(E) Alternative measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date;
(F) Other pertinent information.
(3) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city or its designee:
(A) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/376
(B) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements.
(Ordinance 01-058, sec. 1, adopted 7/31/01; Ordinance 01-078, sec. 1, adopted 10/9/01; 1978 Code, sec. 28-59(q); Ordinance 08-040, sec. 30, adopted 5/13/08)
CHAPTER 23
ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
[This chapter reserved for future use.]
CHAPTER 24
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 24.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 24.01.001 Contractor's bond requirements
(a) No person or corporation acting as a contractor may perform construction work without first having obtained a bond from the city. Nothing in this code shall be
construed to require a person to obtain a bond or license to do any work himself on his own residence which is owned and occupied as his homestead. This individual
shall be present for all inspections by the city.
(b) The contractors bond requirements shall be as follows:
(1) The bond shall cover all erecting, construction, enlarging, repairing, moving, improving, converting or demolishing of building and structures for the
period of one (1) year from the date of approval and filing thereof and shall cover all work performed under said bond for a period of not less than two (2)
years from the date of final building inspection.
(2) Building contractor's bond: $25,000.00.
(3) Roofing contractor's bond: $15,000.00.
(4) Driveway and sidewalk contractor's bond: $5,000.00.
(Ordinance 97-5, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/97; Ordinance 97-66, sec. 2, adopted 12/16/97; 1978 Code, sec. 6-4; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/07; Ordinance 10-057,
sec. 1, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.01.002 Fee schedule
Fee Description Fee
Administrative Fees
Usage fee $2.00
Minimum permit fee $35.00
Certificate of occupancy $75.00
Temporary certificate of occupancy $45.00
Reinspection fee $25.00
Overtime inspections (minimum 4 hrs at $35.00 per hour) $140.00
New address or address changes
Single address $35.00
Two or more per address $10.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/376
Building permit fee - commercial
Building permit fee
First $1,000.00 $35.00
Each additional $1,000.00 up to $50,000.00 $6.25
Building permit fee
First $50,000.00 $293.00
Each additional $1,000.00 up to $100,000.00 $5.20
Building permit fee
First $100,000.00 $500.00
Each additional $1,000.00 up to $500,000.00 $4.15
Building permit fee
First $500,000.00 $2,000.00
Each additional $1,000.00 $3.10
Building permit fee - Residential new construction $0.35/sq. ft.
Building permit fee - Residential additions and remodeling
construction
$0.18/sq. ft.
Building permit fee - Residential - doors and windows $1.50 each
Building permit fee - Sheetrock $1.00/sheet (32 sq.
ft.)
Building permit fee - Residential - siding $0.50/lineal foot
Building permit fee - Residential - roofing $0.05/sq. ft.
Swimming pools - Residential $200.00
Moving permit fee $200.00
Demolition permit fee - Residential demolition $75.00
Demolition permit Fee - Commercial demolition $150.00
Plan Review Fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/376
Commercial plan review fees for permits $25,000.00 and over 65% of permit fee
Revision - Commercial plans $50.00
Parking Lots/Paving
First 1,000 sq. ft. $40.00
Each additional sq. ft. $2.00
Driveways
Residential $35.00
Commercial $75.00
Electrical Permits
Pre-final service $35.00
Reconnection $35.00
Additional meters $35.00
Move meter $35.00
Service for meter $35.00
Temporary pole $35.00
Increase service $35.00
Permanent pole $35.00
Motors
Up to 5HP $5.20
Over 5HP $6.75
A/C outlet $2.50
Ceiling fans $1.60
Bells, buzzers and chimes $2.10
Dishwasher $2.10
Disposal $2.10
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/376
Dryer $2.50
Elevators $35.00
Fixtures $0.50
Floodlight poles $15.00
Furnaces/heater $7.50
Gasoline pumps $35.00
Power panels not at service $8.50
Outlets/switches/receptacles $0.50
Range $2.50
Rectifiers/transformer $5.70
Reground $15.00
Water heater $2.50
Welding machine $2.50
Yard lamps $2.50
Signs/electrical $35.00
Swimming pool
Aboveground $16.50
In-ground $75.00
Plumbing Fees
Air conditioning drain $3.00
Dental chair $7.50
Dishwasher $3.75
Drinking fountain $3.75
Floor drain $3.00
Garbage disposal $3.75
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/376
Grease trap/wash rack $50.00
Laundry tray $3.00
Lavatories $3.00
Service sink $3.00
Sewer line
First line $35.00
Each additional line $10.00
Showers $3.00
Single sink/restaurant $5.75
Three compartment sink $8.40
Toilet $3.00
Tub $3.00
Two compartment sink $5.40
Urinal $8.00
Washing machine $3.00
Water heater $25.00
Water line
First line $35.00
Each additional line $10.00
Gas Permits
Gas permits $35.00
Each additional opening over four (4) $2.10
Yearly gas inspection - Commercial $50.00
Mechanical Permit - Commercial
First $1,000 $35.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/376
Each additional $1,000.00 $3.20
Mechanical Permit - Residential
First ton $35.00
Each additional ton $5.00
(Ordinance 10-057, sec. 31, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/17; Ordinance 19-036 adopted 6/18/19)
ARTICLE 24.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.02.001 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-008, sec. 2, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.002–24.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 24.02.051 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, that certain building code known as the International Building Code, being particularly the 2015 edition
thereof, including appendices A, B, C, D, F, and K. One (1) copy of such International Building Code has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment and maintenance of all buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the city,
save and except the portions of the International Building Code which are hereby deleted, substituted, modified or amended, as set forth in this article. (Ordinance 75-16,
sec. 1, adopted 3/4/75; Ordinance 78-46, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/78; Ordinance 82-103, sec. 1, adopted 8/31/82; Ordinance 87-52, sec. 1, adopted 7/7/87; Ordinance 89-62,
sec. 1, adopted 8/22/89; Ordinance 96-57, sec. 2, adopted 10/15/96; Ordinance 98-67, sec. 1, adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 99-87, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 03-
080, sec. 2, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-20; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 2, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 3, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.052 Amendments
Section 105.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 105.1 Required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent, or contractor who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the
occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, or construct a sign of any description, or to install or alter fire-extinguishing apparatus, elevators, engines, or
to install a steam boiler, furnace, heater, incinerator, or other heat producing apparatus, or other appurtenances, or to install burglar bars, the installation of
which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the
work. The building official is authorized to withhold inspections from and the issuance of permits to any contractor who fails to maintain the required bonds,
insurance or approved master as required, or is thirty (30) days past due on permit invoice accounts with the city.
Section 105.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building.
1. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
2. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding class I, II or IIIA liquids.
3. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2:1.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
5. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
6. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925
L) and are installed entirely above ground.
7. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
8. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support of groups R-3 and U occupancies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/376
9. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
Electrical.
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved permanently installed receptacles.
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions,
but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical
equipment or apparatus.
Gas.
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical.
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing.
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent
pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.
Section 107.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 107.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in two
or more sets with each application for a permit. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state
regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following.
Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
(I) All group A, E and I occupancies.
(II) Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high.
(III) Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in area. For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the
applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered
design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that the review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance
with this code.
Section 109.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. See City of Beaumont Code of Ordinances section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule.
Section 109.4 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started or completed prior to obtaining said permit,
the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this
code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
Section 110.7 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 110.7 Address numbers. Temporary addresses should be posted at the beginning of construction and placed on a 2 ft. x 2 ft. wooden placard placed at
the edge of the street and shall remain in place until structure is finished and permanent address has been installed. Buildings shall have approved permanent
address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a
minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building address
cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
Section 112.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/376
Section 112.2 Temporary service. Temporary electrical service may be supplied to a building that is under construction after the owner of the building and the
general contractor make such request on a form provided by the building official. The temporary service shall be provided for a period not to exceed three (3)
months. Ten (10) days written notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant that the electrical service will be disconnected unless permanent approval or
an additional temporary permit has been issued. The building official shall then issue written instructions to the electricity provider to disconnect the temporary
electrical service. A letter addressed to “occupant,” at the address of the temporary service, shall be deemed as sufficient to notify the owner if the name and
address of the owner is not known.
Section 113.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official or the fire marshal relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable
governing authority and shall office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. The board shall consist of seven (7)
members. Such board shall be composed of one architect, one engineer, one member at-large from the building industry, one building contractor, one member
at-large from the public and two members from the fire service and fire safety professions.
Section 114.4 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 114.4 Violation and penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of the International Building Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or who shall cause to be erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
moved, or demolished a building or structure, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such
fine is for an offense for which the state law imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense
under the state law. Each day any violation of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 114.5 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 114.5 Bond may be revoked.
(a) A building contractor's bond may be revoked, after notice and hearing before the city manager or his designee, for either any of the following
reasons:
(1) Reoccurring incidents of work performed not in accordance with the International Building Code and the holder refuses to correct the
violation after being given sufficient notice of said violations; or
(2) The bond or permits were obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or
(3) That one or more of the terms or conditions imposed by the bond has not been met or has been violated; or
(4) Failure of the bond holder to comply with the requirements of the International Building Code.
(b) Prior to revocation of the bond, the city manager or his designee shall notify the bond holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the bond is
subject to revocation and advising that the bond shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following the service of such notice, unless a
request for a hearing is filed with the city manager or his designee by the bond holder, within such five (5) day period. A bond may be suspended for
cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. If no request for hearing is filed within the five (5) day period, the revocation of the bond
becomes final. The bond holder may not perform any work in the city during the period of suspension pending the outcome of the hearing.
(c) Service of notices. Notice provided for in this ordinance [code] shall be deemed to have been properly served when the notice has been delivered
personally to the bond holder, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the bond
holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the city manager or his designee.
(d) Hearings. The hearings provided for in this ordinance [code] shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee at a time and place designated
by him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the city manager or his designee shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any
official notice or order considered in the hearing.
(e) Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a bond has become final, the bond holder of the revoked bond may make written
application for a new bond after a period of six (6) months.
Section 310.1, Residential group R, of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding sections 310.1.1 and 310.1.2 to read as follows:
Section 310.1.1. Licensed child-care home. Shall be licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services. Licensed child-care homes shall be
allowed in a single-family residence with a specific use permit and a certificate of occupancy. All licensed child-care homes shall have yearly inspections from
the fire marshal's office. Licensed child-care homes shall also comply with section R314.4 of the 2015 International Residential Code, Power source: Smoke
alarms shall receive their primary power from the building's wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial source and, when primary power is
interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over current
protection. Smoke alarms shall be interconnected.
Section 310.1.2. Registered child-care home. Shall be licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services. Registered child-care homes shall
be allowed in a single-family residence with a specific use permit and a certificate of occupancy. All registered child-care homes shall have yearly inspections
from the fire marshal's office. Registered child-care homes shall also comply with section R314.4 of the 2015 International Residential Code, Power source:
Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial source and, when power is
interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for over current
protection. Smoke alarms shall be interconnected.
Section 310.2 is hereby amended by adding definitions to read as follows:
Licensed child-care home. The primary caregiver provides care in the caregiver's own residence for children from birth through thirteen (13) years on a twentyfour
(24) hour basis. The total number of children in care varies with the ages of the children, but the total number of children in care at any given time,
including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). These licensed child-care homes shall be classified as R-3 residential occupancies.
Registered child-care home. The primary caregiver provides regular care in the caregiver's own residence for not more than six (6) children from birth through
thirteen (13) years for less than twenty-four (24) hours and may provide care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional elementary school children.
The total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed twelve (12). These registered child-care
homes shall be classed as R-3 residential occupancies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/376
Section 310.5.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 310.5.1 Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted
to comply with the International Residential Code.
Section [F] 903.2.8 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group
R fire area.
Exception: Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code and shall not be required to have an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section [F] 903.2.8.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in group R-3 occupancies.
Exception: Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code and shall not be required to have an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section [F] 903.2.8.4 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.2.8.4 Care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family
dwelling.
Section 903.4.1.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 903.4.1.1 Monitoring system. Fire sprinkler system shall be supervised by a fire alarm panel separate from any other fire alarm panel unless otherwise
approved by the fire official.
Sections 907.1.4, 907.1.5 and 907.1.6 are hereby added to read as follows:
907.1.4 System required. A total coverage, NFPA 72 compliant fire alarm system shall be installed in all nonsprinkled structures which are 2,000 square feet or
greater in size.
907.1.5 Tenant spaces. Individual spaces shall have an independent fire alarm system.
907.1.6 Code requirements. All systems shall meet all federal, state and local codes.
Section 1004.3 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1004.3 Posting of occupant load. All assembly occupancies shall post an occupant load. Every room or space shall have the occupant load of the room
or space posted in a conspicuous place, near the main entrance access doorway to the room or space. Posted sign shall be of an approved legible permanent
design and shall be maintained by the owner or authorized agent. Any occupancy that derives 51 percent or more of its income from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, any assembly occupancy that sells or provides setups for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic
beverages and, any assembly occupancy that rents or leases rooms or spaces for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages as determined by chapter
3, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, shall keep an accurate count of the number of occupants, in the rooms or spaces with the posted occupant load, during
business hours. The building official, fire marshal, or any other official authorized to enforce section 1004.3 may require the owner or authorized agent to
conduct an immediate recount of the occupants, when the accurateness of the count is in question, in order to determine the actual number. Should the actual
count of occupants exceed the posted occupant load, the occupancy owner or authorized agent will be ordered to immediately reduce occupant load to within
the posted limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state law imposes a fine,
the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation of any provision of
this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1609.1.1.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1609.1.1.1 Applicability. All construction, new commercial and additions shall comply to the provisions of the (ICC-600-2014). A (ICC-600-2014)
form shall be signed and sealed by a structural engineer. All other commercial wood frame construction shall comply to the provisions of the (ICC-600-2014)
and the Texas Windstorm Inspection Program. Inspections shall be performed by a qualified engineer.
1. The hill, ridge or escarpment is 60 feet (18288 mm) or higher if located in Exposure B or 30 feet (9144 mm) or higher if located in Exposure C;
2. All commercial buildings and new residences to be moved shall comply with the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council; and
3. All commercial buildings to be moved shall be placed on a permanent foundation and shall be a poured in place concrete or masonry curtain wall.
Curtain wall must cover three (3) sides of structure. Permanent foundations must meet Texas Windstorm Tie-Down methods.
Section 1804.6.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 1804.6.1 Open pit excavations.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Person. As defined in section 1.01.004 of the Code of Ordinances.
(b) Borrow pit. The pit, hole, or depression created by any excavation of dirt, sand, stone, or other earth material.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) hereof, no person shall dig, excavate, remove, or cause to be dug, excavated, or removed, any dirt, clay, rock,
or other material below the surface of the ground without having first obtained an excavation permit in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
Any excavations in violation of this subsection are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
(3) This subsection shall not be applicable to excavation for foundation purposes, where a building permit has been properly applied for and granted in
accordance with the International Building Code; provided, however, if the construction for which a building permit had been granted should be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/376
abandoned or delayed for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days, any pit excavated shall be required to conform to the provisions of
subsections (5), (6) and (10) of this subsection. This subsection shall not be applicable to excavations of drainage ditches, canals, or similar facilities.
(4) Each application for an excavation permit shall be in writing, on a form provided for that purpose by the city engineer, stating the purpose of the
proposed excavation of the land upon which the excavation is to be done, and the names of all owners of the land upon which the proposed excavation is
to be done, and of all owners of land lying within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed excavation, and shall be accompanied by an accurate drawing
showing the location of the proposed excavation, and the dimensions of the borrow pit to be created thereby. Each application shall be accompanied by a
permit fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), which shall be refunded to the applicant if the permit is not granted. The permit fee shall not be required of any
governmental agency, entity, or instrumentality, but all other requirements of this subsection shall remain applicable to such bodies.
(5) No excavation shall be made within ten (10) feet of any property line, without the express written consent of the owner of the adjacent property.
Borrow pits shall be sloped no steeper than two (2) feet horizontal for each one (1) foot vertical measurement. An excavation which is conducted adjacent
to roadways, easements, drainage systems, utility lines, or other structures, shall be conducted at an adequate distance from such facilities, as determined
by the building official, so as not to interfere with or cause damage to such facilities.
(6) No excavation may be made upon any dedicated street or highway right-of-way or any planned or proposed street described in the master street
plan of the city.
(7) Trucks hauling excavated material shall, insofar as possible, use existing truck routes. Excavated materials shall not be dropped or placed upon any
public street or highway.
(8) Upon proper application as provided in subsection (3) hereof, the building official shall issue an excavation permit if he is satisfied, from
competent evidence presented to him as he may require, that the proposed excavation is consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare, that the
requirements of this subsection will be met, and that the excavation operations will be conducted in a manner and at a location which will supplement
existing or proposed drainage facilities of the city.
(9) If an application for an excavation permit is denied by the building official, the applicant may within ten (10) days appeal such denial to the
building board of adjustment.
(10) Upon completion of the excavation for which a permit has been granted hereunder, but not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after
excavation has begun, a substantial fence, at least six (6) feet in height and otherwise being in accordance with specifications promulgated by the building
official, shall be erected completely surrounding the borrow pit. Such fence shall be kept in good repair as long as the borrow pit exists, and all gates kept
closed except as necessary for excavation and removal purposes. If any part of a borrow pit is situated within fifty (50) feet of a residence, the fence
surrounding such pit shall be so constructed as to prevent small children from gaining access to the borrow pit.
Section 1810.3.9.5.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 1810.3.9.5.1.
(a) General.
(1) Foundation repair work on all residential structures shall be accomplished only by a contractor licensed and bonded by the city to operate as a
building contractor, or foundation repair contractor, within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) A permit for each foundation repair project must be obtained from the building official prior to beginning any actual repair work. The fee
shall be as that established by the city in accordance with current fee schedules.
(3) A permit will be issued to the foundation repair contractor, upon approval by the building official of documents (in three (3) copies) submitted
by the contractor containing the following information, and payment of the scheduled fee:
a. A drawing of the complete building foundation plan, indicating the location of the foundation failure and the proposed corrective work.
b. A detailed description of the proposed corrective work.
c. A copy of the proposal to the property owner with the owner's signature indicating acceptance.
d. A copy of the submittal documents, bearing the approval of the building official, shall be maintained at the jobsite for review by the city
building inspector.
e. Prior to the placement of any concrete, the contractor shall arrange for a jobsite inspection by the building inspector.
(b) Minimum standards–Reinforced concrete foundation.
(1) Holes in earth for foundation piers and footings must be free of standing water, loose dirt, or other deleterious matter, prior to placement of
concrete.
(2) Each drilled shaft (footing) must have as a minimum an eighteen (18) inch diameter shaft, or a twelve (12) inch diameter shaft with an
eighteen inch (18") diameter footing. In lieu of these minimum size footings, an engineered design for this particular project may be substituted.
Engineered design repair work shall be documented by drawings and specifications bearing the seal and signature of a current Texas-registered
professional engineer.
(3) Minimum sized shafts (footings) shall have a maximum spacing of eight (8) feet for single story and six (6) feet for two-story structures. A
minimum of two (2) footing diameters clearance shall be maintained between footings.
(4) Shafts/footings shall be founded at a minimum depth of eight (8) inches and bearing on a firm soil of constant moisture content.
(5) Each footing/shaft will have a maximum angle of fifteen (15) degrees from vertical.
(6) Each shaft will contain a minimum of three (3) #5-A36 reinforcing bars for the full depth of the shaft.
(7) Each shaft (footing) must have a minimum of five (5) days concrete (min. 2,500 psi at 28 days) curing time before imposing jacking loads.
(8) A solid concrete block or poured in place concrete (min. 2,500 psi at 28 days) must be used to transfer the building load to the footing after
jacking.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/376
(9) Minimum size (3" x 6" x 1/4") steel shims set in two (2) rows, a maximum of three (3) inches high, may be used to transfer the load to the
solid concrete blocks.
(10) Backfill of the excavation may consist of excavated material or low p.i. (10-20) clay compacted to existing adjacent conditions. Sand
backfill will not be permitted except for the top six (6) inches which may be used to level the grade.
(c) Minimum standards–Houses on piers.
(1) Minimum size concrete footing pads shall be 16" x 16" x 4" solid concrete with solid concrete block piers.
(2) Maximum height of shims shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) inches, and shim width must equal the width of sill. Exception: Shims on existing
masonry piers may have a maximum height of three (3) inches.
(3) All new wood sills must be treated wood 4" x 6" half-lap spliced and properly nailed with two (2) treated wood splice plates. All joints must
be supported by a pier with pad footing.
Section 3410.1 of the International Building Code is hereby repealed.
Appendix D101.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Fire districts: There are hereby created and established within the city two (2) fire districts which shall be known and designated as the first fire district and the
second fire district, and shall have the following boundaries:
(a) First fire district. The first fire district shall include all the area lying within the following described boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the
centerline of Magazine Street with the westerly bank of Brakes Bayou; thence west along the centerline of Magazine Street and said centerline of Willow
Street; thence south along the centerline of Willow Street to its intersection with the centerline of Calder Avenue; thence west along the centerline of
Calder Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Forrest Street; thence south along the centerline of Forrest Street and said centerline extended to
its intersection with the present main line of the Texas and New Orleans Railroad track; thence easterly along the present main line of the Texas and New
Orleans Railroad track to its intersection with the centerline of Trinity Street extended northward; thence in a southerly direction along the said centerline
of Trinity Street to its intersection with the centerline of Crockett Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Cricket Street to its intersection with the
centerline of Holmes Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Forsythe Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Forsythe Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Trinity Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Trinity Street to its intersection with the centerline of College
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of College Street to its intersection with the centerline of Neches Street; thence southerly along the centerline
of Neches Street to its intersection with the centerline of Franklin Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Franklin Street to its intersection with the
centerline of Park Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Park Street to its intersection with the centerline of Blanchette (formerly Austin) Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Blanchette (formerly Austin) Street to its intersection with the centerline of Main Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of Main Street to its intersection with the centerline of Gilbert (formerly Washington) Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Gilbert
(formerly Washington) Street to its intersection with the easterly line of the original town site of Beaumont; thence northerly along the easterly line of the
original town site of Beaumont to its intersection with the centerline of College Street; thence westerly along the centerline of College Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Market Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Market Street to its intersection with the centerline of Forsythe
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Forsythe Street and said centerline extended to its intersection with the westerly bank of the Neches River;
thence in a northerly direction along the westerly bank of the Neches River and Brakes Bayou to the place of beginning.
(b) Second fire district. The second fire district shall include all of the area of the city except that which is excluded in the first fire district.
(1958 Code, secs. 8-1.1–8-1.7, 8-3, 8-4, 16-28; Ordinance 76-124, sec. 1, adopted 10/19/76; Ordinance 81-55, sec. 1, adopted 7/14/81; Ordinance 83-14, secs. 1, 2,
adopted 2/15/83; Ordinance 83-52, sec. 1, adopted 5/10/83; Ordinance 86-69, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/86; Ordinance 87-52, sec. 2, adopted 7/7/87; Ordinance 89-62, sec. 2,
adopted 8/22/89; Ordinance 91-20, secs. 1, 2, adopted 2/26/91; Ordinance 91-59, sec. 1, adopted 7/30/91; Ordinance 96-57, sec. 3, adopted 10/15/96; Ordinance 97-66,
sec. 1, adopted 12/16/97; Ordinance 98-67, sec. 2, adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 99-5, sec. 1, adopted 1/19/99; Ordinance 99-23, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/99; Ordinance 02-074,
sec. 1, adopted 9/17/02; Ordinance 02-099, sec. 1, adopted 11/26/02; Ordinance 03-080, sec. 3, adopted 10/14/03; Ordinance 04-069, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/04; 1978 Code,
sec. 6-21; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 3, adopted 2/20/07; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 3, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 10-075, sec. 1, adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 4,
adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.053–24.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 24.02.101 Adoption
The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC), including appendix J, is hereby adopted and declared operative as the
residential building code of the city, save and except those portions that are deleted, modified, or amended by this code. A copy of such code is on file in the office of the
city clerk. (Ordinance 01-100, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/01; 1978 Code, sec. 6-173; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 25, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 5, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.102 Amendments
Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Building.
1. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
2. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge.
3. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
4. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.
5. Swings and other playground equipment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/376
6. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
Electrical.
1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.
4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of
energy.
5. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles.
Gas.
1. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
2. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical.
1. Portable heating appliances.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
4. Steam, hot or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative coolers.
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or
less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing.
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent
pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes and fixtures.
Section R108.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. See section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont.
Section R112.2.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section R113.4.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section R113.4.1 It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state law imposes a fine,
the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation of any provision of
this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Section R301.2.1.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R301.2.1.1. Wind limitations and wind design required. In regions where the basic wind speeds from figure R301.2(4)B equal or exceed 100 miles per hour
(45 m/s) in hurricane-prone regions, or 110 miles per hour (49 m/s) elsewhere, the design of buildings shall be in accordance with one of the following
methods. The elements of design not addressed by those documents in items 1 through 5 shall be in accordance with this code.
1. American Forest and Paper Association (AF&PA) Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (WFCM); or
2. All new residential and additions, construction and reroofs, shall comply to the International Code Council Standard for Residential Construction in
High Wind Regions (ICC-600-2014) and the Texas Windstorm Inspection Program. Inspections shall be performed by a qualified engineer.
3. ASCE Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures (ASCE 7).
4. American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI), Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing-Prescriptive Method for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (AISI
S230).
5. International Building Code.
Where ASCE 7 or the International Building Code is used for the design of the building, the wind speed map and exposure category requirements as
specified in ASCE 7 and the International Building Code shall be used.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/376
Section R313.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section R314.3 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section R319.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R319.1 Address numbers. Temporary addresses shall be posted at the beginning of construction, and placed on a 2 ft x2 ft wooden placard placed at
the edge of the street, and remain in place until structure is finished and permanent address has been installed. Buildings shall have approved permanent
address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a
minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building address
cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
Section R322 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section R403.1.3.3 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R403.1.3.2. Slabs-on-ground with turned down footings. Slabs-on-ground with turned down footings shall have a minimum of five (5) No. 5 bars in
the footing, minimum footing width for a one (1) story is 15 inches. Minimum footing width for a two (2) story is 18 inches. Minimum footing depth is 20
inches, footing shall be placed at least 6 inches below the undisturbed ground surface. All slabs on grade shall have a clear vapor barrier. Minimum elevation
shall be 12 inches above the crown of the street.
Section M1305.1.3 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and a clear and unobstructed passageway large enough
to allow removal of the largest appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) long
measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring in accordance with
chapter 5 not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space at least 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present along
all sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm)
and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway
shall be not more than 50 feet (15 250 mm) long.
3. In all type R construction a pull down stairway shall be installed for appliance access.
Section M1502.4.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section M1502.4.1 Material and size. Exhaust ducts shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in diameter. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth interior finish and be
constructed of metal having a minimum thickness of 0.0157 inches (0.3950 mm) (No.28 gage), or schedule 40 PVC when used in concrete slabs.
Section P2803.6.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section P2902.5.3 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section P2902.6.4 of the International Residential Code is hereby added to read as follows:
Section P2902.6.4 Identification of pressure sewer piping. The distribution pipe shall be class 200 in the color of green with labeling tape stating “sewer” with
a green background. The tape shall be installed on the top of the pipe and backfilled properly.
Section P2903.8.5 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section P2906.5.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby added to read as follows:
Section P2906.5.1 Under concrete slabs. Underground inaccessible water distribution piping under building slabs shall be copper tubing minimum type “L” or
“K.”
Section P3002.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section P3002.1. Piping within buildings. Drain, waste and vent piping in buildings shall be schedule 40 PVC pipe and fitting, cast iron, or copper tubing and
fitting.
Section P3002.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section P3002.2. Building sewer. Building sewer piping shall be a minimum of four (4) inches and conform to P3002.1. Six (6) inch and larger sewer shall be
SDR 26 or better.
Section P3108.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section P3114 of the International Residential Code is hereby repealed.
Section E3601.1.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby added to read as follows:
E3601.1.2 Required power source. Electrical system shall be provided with service from the public utility company or a power source approved by the building
official. Portable generators may only be used when service is not available from a public utility company or an approved power source or when approved by
the building official for temporary power.
(Ordinance 01-100, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/01; 1978 Code, sec. 6-174; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 26, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 6, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.103 Driveway required for all new residential construction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/376
It is the duty of all persons owning property abutting on paved streets in the city to construct or cause to be constructed, at their own cost and expense, driveways leading
from the curbline to the property line on such lots as may be necessary to enter with any vehicle from the street. (Ordinance 10-057, sec. 27, adopted 8/3/10)
Secs. 24.02.104–24.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 24.02.151 Adoption
The 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code, except for appendices, is hereby adopted and declared operative as the plumbing code of the city, save and except
those portions that are deleted, modified or amended by this code. A copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance 03-080, sec. 8, adopted
10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-140; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 17, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 7, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.152 Definitions
As used in this code the following definitions shall apply:
Approved or approval. Approved by the plumbing inspector. National, state, and city standards shall be the basis of such approval.
Journeyman plumber. Any person who is employed by a person (who is by training, experience, and education competent to lay out, design and install a plumbing system
to conform to the IPC National Plumbing Code) to do plumbing work for wages and who does not furnish any materials or supplies in the performance of his work and
holds a journeyman plumbing license.
Maintenance and repair. The act of keeping in a state of safe operating condition any conductor or piece of equipment used inside or outside attached or connected to any
building plumbing system, by replacement of units or elements thereof, but shall not include extensions of or additions to an existing system.
Maintenance plumber. A person is not required to be licensed under chapter 1, section 1301.053, of the state plumbing license law.
Master plumber. Any person who is, by training, experience, and education, competent to lay out, design, and install a system of plumbing and holds a master plumbing
license.
Plumbing construction. All work and material used in installing, maintaining, or extending of a plumbing system and all appurtenances, apparatus, and equipment used in
connection therewith, inside of or attached to any building or structure, lot, or premises.
Plumbing contractor. Any person or firm engaged in the business of providing and selling plumbing services shall have a permanently established place of business with a
published telephone number. He shall hold a master plumbing contractors certificate or shall employ an individual who does and carry him on his active payroll. A master
plumber may not qualify more than one plumbing contractor. He shall be available to the inspection authority to answer any questions relating to plumbing work coming
under the jurisdiction of this plumbing inspection authority.
(Ordinance 10-057, sec. 18, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.02.153 Amendments
Section 106.6.2 of the International Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule. See section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont.
Section 109.1 of the International Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the building board of appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code official
within 20 days after the notice was served.
Sections 109.2 through 109.2.6 of the International Plumbing Code are hereby repealed.
Section 504.6 of the International Plumbing Code is hereby repealed.
Section 605.4.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 605.4.1 Underground inaccessible water distribution piping under a slab shall be copper water tube minimum type “L” or K.”
Section 608.16.5 of the International Plumbing Code is amended and sections 608.16.5.1 through 608.16.5.13 are added to read as follows:
Section 608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems.
Section 608.16.5.1 Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance [code], have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure
receiving vessel.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes
the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against backsiphonage. At the
same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker backsiphonage
prevention assembly.
Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable
water source.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the
existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/376
Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests
performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or
pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process.
Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as
collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices,
locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a
site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating
pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated
shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve
backflow prevention assembly.
Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation
system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue
Code, 26 United States Code Service, section 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in
performing employment related tasks.
Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head.
Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into
the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects.
Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an
irrigation system.
Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems
and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor.
Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is
licensed according to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an
employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses
and registrations).
Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the
changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or
connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate
any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by
an agricultural operation as defined by Texas Agricultural Code, section 251.002.
Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise
installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any
water supply, and who is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and
registrations).
Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees),
microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or
for hydrological control.
Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an
irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who
is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining
permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering,
repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system.
Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf.
License. An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under title 30, Texas Administrative Code,
chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves.
Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding
the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the
automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and
operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/376
from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration
data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material
where the system is installed.
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to
the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe,
replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline.
Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate.
New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of
the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly.
Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation.
Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents
that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check
valve.
Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or
employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning
January 1, 2009 15 [2015], an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or
service an irrigation system.
Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes
the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce
dust, and control erosion.
Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually
opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all
nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
Section 608.16.5.2 Valid license required. Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city must hold a valid license, as
defined by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 and required by chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code, or as defined by chapter 365,
title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code.
Exemptions:
A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, title 12, section 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is
performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner
who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344 regarding spacing,
water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and
isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system.
See Texas Occupations Code section 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement.
Section 608.16.5.3 Permit required. Any person installing an irrigation system within the jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a permit from the
city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Exemptions:
(1) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by section 251.002, Texas Agriculture Code.
Section 608.16.5.4 Backflow prevention methods and devices.
(a) Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by a laboratory that has equivalent
capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in
accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current
published recommendations.
(b) If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow:
(1) An air gap may be used if:
(A) There is an unobstructed physical separation; and
(B) The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet
discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/376
(2) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
(A) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be
submerged; and
(B) Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve.
(3) Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No back-pressure condition will occur; and
(B) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up
sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler.
(4) Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No back-pressure will be present.
(B) There are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker.
(C) The device is installed at a minimum of six (6) inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up
sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler.
(D) There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period.
(E) A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all
the emission devices that the valve controls. Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested
upon installation and annually thereafter.
(F) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the
system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any
major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed and shall comply with article 22.02, division 2, cross-connection control and
prevention, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules and regulations.
(G) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced
pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on
the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly.
(H) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester prior to being
placed in service and the test results provided to the City of Beaumont water utilities director within ten (10) business days of testing of the
backflow prevention device.
(I) Backflow prevention assemblies are required to be tested on a annual basis with test results provided to the water utilities director
within ten (10) business days of testing of the backflow prevention device.
Specific Conditions and Cross-Connection Control.
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected
through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the
irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable
water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 285, then:
(1) All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facilities system as required for a private
water line in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 285.91(10);
(2) Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the
water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section
344.50; and
(3) Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be
controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess
water that would prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively.
Section 608.16.5.5 Water conservation. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a
manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of this ordinance [code].
Section 608.16.5.6 Irrigation plan design: Minimum standards.
(a) An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the
irrigation plan must be on the jobsite at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the
system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances
from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirements of this ordinance [code]; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/376
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to
be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A north arrow;
(4) A legend;
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) Location and type of each:
(A) Controller; and
(B) Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze);
(7) Location, type, and size of each:
(A) Water source, such as, but not limited to, water meter and point(s) of connection;
(B) Backflow prevention device;
(C) Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or microsprays;
(D) Valve, including, but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
(E) Pressure regulation component; and
(F) Main line and lateral piping.
(8) The scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
Section 608.16.5.7 Design and installation: Minimum requirements.
(a) No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the
manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component.
(b) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The
radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific
operating pressure.
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize aboveground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the
impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more
perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any
adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four (4) inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation,
fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public
areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area.
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as
published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not
limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads.
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five (5)
feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
(e) Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil
conditions, and hydrological requirements.
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same
precipitation rate.
(g) Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious
material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
(h) Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new
installations.
(i) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior
to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (section 605).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/376
(j) Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other
technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off
technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that
require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation
system during periods of moisture or rainfall.
(k) Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device.
(l) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth
coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum
depth coverage of six (6) inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation
system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six (6) inches or
less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system
owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues.
(2) If a utility, manmade structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six (6) inch depth coverage requirement
impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two (2) inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural
grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried
with a minimum of six (6) inches of select backfill.
(m) Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not
limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has
hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be
installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib
must be labeled “NonPotable, Not Safe for Drinking.” An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an
irrigation system.
(n) A licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed.
When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the
installation of the irrigation system.
Section 608.16.5.8 Completion of irrigation system installation. Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who
provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four (4) items:
(1) A final “walk through” with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system.
(2) The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the
maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature
line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance
checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include, but are not limited to:
(A) The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic;
(B) A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical
reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
(C) A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended
frequency for the service; and
(D) The statement, “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the irrigation plan and is properly
adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time.”
(3) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty
period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker
shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink.
(4) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative.
Section 608.16.5.9 Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems.
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an
irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator
who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original
grade with compacted select backfill.
(c) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation
system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (section 605).
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention
device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present.
Advertisement Requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/376
(a) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's
license number in the form of “LI” in a contrasting color of block letters at least two (2) inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of “LI.”
Any form of advertisement, including business cards and estimates, which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the
licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise
irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number.
(c) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in
plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation
records are kept.
Section 608.16.5.10 Contracts.
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name, license number,
business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the
statement, “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas
78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www. tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date.
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include the irrigator's
name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas
Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.30 (relating
to license required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and
registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.1(36) (relating to
definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed
irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through contract must
identify by name and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for
irrigation system warranty work.
(d) The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
Section 608.16.5.11 Warranties for systems.
(a) On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative with a written
warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to
terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide
the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty
must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
(b) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business telephone
number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include
the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin,
Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is
provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information.
Section 608.16.5.12 Items not covered by this ordinance [code]. Any item not covered by their ordinance [sic] and required by law shall be governed by
the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality rule.
Section 608.16.5.13 Enforcement.
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm,
corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to
suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state law
imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any
violation of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to
seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance [code] or to require specific conduct that is necessary for
compliance with the ordinance [code]; and
(2) Other available relief.
Section 702.2 of the International Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 702.1, 702.2, 702.3 Building sanitary drainage and vent pipe. All sanitary drainage and vent piping for building drain or building-sewer to be schedule
40 PVC or better, cast iron, or copper tube. Building sanitary drainage and vent pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in table 702.2.
Sections 912.1 and 912.2.1 of the International Plumbing Code are hereby repealed.
Section 918 of the International Plumbing Code is hereby repealed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/376
(Ordinance 03-080, sec. 8, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-142; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 19, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 8, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.154 Supervision of work
In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing of any plumbing system or equipment for which a permit is required by this code, there shall be present
and in direct supervision a qualified plumber of the proper classification. It shall be required that a master or journeyman, as the case may be, be liable and responsible for
the layout and technical supervision of any work which has required the securing of permits and a journeyman plumber shall not supervise at the job site more than three
(3) unclassified workers. Should it come to the notice of the chief plumbing inspector or his assistants that such supervision and control are not being maintained, the
inspector may order the work to be discontinued and the person to whom the permit has been issued shall discontinue further work until proper supervision has been
employed or supplied. (Ordinance 10-057, sec. 20, adopted 8/3/10)
Secs. 24.02.155–24.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 24.02.201 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for air conditioning, heating and ventilating equipment, refrigeration, ducts and
duct systems, piping, incinerators and electrical requirements for same, that certain code known as the International Mechanical Code, being particularly the 2015 edition,
except for appendices, of which one (1) copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein, and from the date on which this division shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of air conditioning, heating, and
ventilating equipment, refrigeration equipment, ducts and duct systems, piping, incinerators and the electrical requirements for same, save and except the portions of the
International Mechanical Code which are hereby deleted, substituted, modified or amended as set forth in this division. (Ordinance 78-52, sec. 1, adopted 5/9/78;
Ordinance 89-61, sec. 1, adopted 8/22/89; Ordinance 96-60, sec. 1, adopted 10/15/96; Ordinance 03-080, sec. 9, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-170; Ordinance 10-
057, sec. 21, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 9, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.202 Amendments
Section 106.5.2 of the International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. See section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont.
Section 301.7 of the International Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows:
Section 301.10 [301.7] Electrical. All electric connections between fuel-fired appliances, mechanical equipment, etc., and the building wiring shall conform to
N.F.P.A. 70 and the currently adopted National Electrical Code.
Sections 301.10.1 and 301.10.2 are added to read as follows:
Section 301.10.1 For new construction, a disconnecting means and one hundred fifteen volt outlet shall be installed within sight and easy reach in the
ungrounded leads of each power circuit to electrically operated components. The disconnecting means shall in no case be installed farther than six (6) feet from
the service side of the equipment.
Section 301.10.2 For existing construction, disconnecting means (shall be installed) within sight, not more than a fifty (50) foot distance from the equipment,
and within easy reach to the ungrounded leads of each power circuit to electrically operated components.
Section 306.3 of the International Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows:
Section 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow
removal of the largest appliance. The passageway shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet
(6096 mm) in length measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring
not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front
or service side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to
allow removal of the largest appliance.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required
opening.
2. Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway
shall be not greater than 50 feet (15250 mm) in length.
3. In all type R construction a pull down stairway shall be installed for appliance access.
(Ordinance 78-52, sec. 1, adopted 5/9/78; Ordinance 83-40, sec. 4, adopted 4/19/83; Ordinance 90-16, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/13/90; Ordinance 92-80, sec. 1, adopted
11/24/92; Ordinance 96-60, sec. 2, adopted 10/15/96; Ordinance 99-46, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/99; Ordinance 03-080, sec. 9, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-171;
Ordinance 10-057, sec. 22, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 10, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.203–24.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 24.02.251 Adoption
The 2015 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted and declared operative as the gas code of the city, save and except those portions that are deleted,
modified or amended by this code. A copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance 87-5, secs. 1, 2, adopted 2/10/87; Ordinance 96-59, sec. 1,
adopted 10/15/96; Ordinance 98-67, sec. 3, adopted 11/3/98; Ordinance 03-080, sec. 5, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-130; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 15, adopted
8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 11, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.252 Amendments
Section 106.6.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/376
Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule. See section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Beaumont.
Section 109.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the building board of appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code official
within twenty (20) days after the notice was served.
Sections 109.2 through 109.2.6 of the International Fuel Gas Code are repealed.
(Ordinance 03-080, sec. 6, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-131; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 16, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 12, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.253–24.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. Existing Building Code
Sec. 24.02.301 Adoption
The 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted and declared operative as the existing building code of the city. A copy of such code is on
file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance 89-63, sec. 1, adopted 8/22/89; Ordinance 03-080, sec. 10, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-172; Ordinance 10-057, sec.
23, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 13, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.302 Amendments
Section 113.4 of the International Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 113.4. Violation penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed
guilty of a violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00): provided. where such fine is for an offense for which the state
law imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation
of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 409.1 of the International Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 409.1 Conformance. Structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this code for new structures.
A. It shall be unlawful to move a building or part of a building through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the city if the building or
part of a building was designed for residential purposes and is to be placed on a lot in the city for residential purposes without obtaining a structure
moving permit from the building official. A building or part of a building to be used for any purposes may not be moved through or across any sidewalk,
street or alley within the city without first obtaining a moving permit from the building official. The application for a structure moving permit shall be
accompanied by applications for all necessary permits required to bring these houses, buildings or structures into compliance with the applicable building
codes. Included with the building permit application shall be a complete set of plans showing the changes, if any, of the structure after all contemplated
improvements.
B. A structure moving permit may be obtained from the building official if the structure, prior to being moved, meets the following criteria:
1. A residential structure must be located in the city; commercial structures may only be moved from outside the city with prior approval from the
building official. These commercial structures shall comply with the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council.
2. The appraised value of the structure, as set by the Jefferson County appraisal district, must be a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the average
appraised value of all residential and or commercial structures on lots or tracts within four hundred (400) feet of the property line of the lot or tracts
upon which the structure to be moved will be placed.
3. The application for a structure moving permit must be accompanied by an application for all necessary permits required to bring the structure
into compliance with all applicable codes. Included with the building permit application shall be a complete set of plans showing the changes, if
any, of the structure after all contemplated improvements.
C. The building official, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a residential moving permit, shall require a bond or cashier's check in the amount
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond or cashier's check shall be made payable to the City of Beaumont and shall be conditioned upon strict
compliance with the terms of this ordinance [code].
1. The structure will be brought into compliance with all applicable codes and connected to water, sewer, electricity and gas if applicable
(“utilities”) within ninety (90) calendar days after relocation to the new site. Failure to connect the structure to utilities may result in forfeiture of
the required security and demolition of the structure. If the security is forfeited for any reason, the city is hereby authorized to demolish the
structure and clear the lot. By signing an application for a structure moving permit, the owner or agent for the owner agrees that the structure may
be demolished by the city if it becomes necessary to forfeit the security required by this ordinance [code].
2. Failure or refusal to timely perform any one or more of the requirements of this ordinance [code] may result in the forfeiture of the required
security.
3. Appeals from the denial of a structure moving permit or a decision to forfeit the required security by the building official shall be made in
writing to the zoning board of adjustment within ten (10) days after the denial of such permit. The zoning board of adjustment may reverse the
decision of the building official if the board of adjustment finds by the concurrence of four (4) members of the board that the structure meets the
requirements set out herein for issuance of a building permit.
4. Extensions of time as deemed reasonable may be granted by the building official upon a showing of delay caused by matters beyond the
control of the owner or mover. One thirty (30) day extension may be granted by the building official.
5. All new commercial buildings and new residences to be moved shall comply with the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council.
(Ordinance 10-057, sec. 24, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 14, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.303–24.02.350 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/376
Division 8. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 24.02.351 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations attendant to the use and occupancy of residential buildings and accessory
structures that certain code known as the 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance and appendix A. One (1) copy of such International Property
Maintenance Code has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from
the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling concerning the matters set out in said code. (Ordinance 03-080, sec. 11, adopted
10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-175; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 28, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 15, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.02.352 Amendments to code
Section 106.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 106.4 Violation penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed
guilty of a violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state
law imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation
of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
Sections 110 and 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby repealed.
Section 304.1.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
304.1.1 Unsafe substandard conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe substandard and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with
the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load
effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
4. Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained,
weather resistant or water tight;
5. Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;
6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
7. Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting
materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
8. Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is
not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
9. Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not
properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
10. Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
11. Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
12. Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound,
not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or
13. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
Exceptions
1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.
Section 305.1.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
305.1.1 Unsafe substandard conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe substandard and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with
the International Building Code, the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings and the 2015 International Residential Code:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load
effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
4. Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/376
5. Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
Exceptions
1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.
Section 604.1.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
604.1.1 Required power source. Electrical system shall be provided with service from the public utility company or a power source approved by the building
official. Portable generators may only be used when service is not available from a public utility company or an approved power source or when approved by
the building official for temporary power.
(Ordinance 10-057, sec. 29, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 16, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.02.353–24.02.400 Reserved
Division 9. International Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 24.02.401 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations attendant to the use and occupancy of commercial buildings, residential buildings
and accessory structures that certain code known as the 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. One (1) copy of such International Energy
Conservation Code has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from
the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling concerning the matters set out in said code, save and except those portions that
are deleted, modified, or amended by this code. (Ordinance 10-057, sec. 30, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 17, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 24.03 ELECTRICITY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.03.001 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-008, sec. 19, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.03.002–24.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Code
Part I. In General
Sec. 24.03.031 Short title; adoption
(a) The title of this division shall be “The Beaumont Electrical Code,” and may be cited as such, and may be referred to in this division as “this code.”
(b) There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, and
maintenance of electrical systems, within the corporate limits of the city that certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code being particularly the 2014
edition thereof, one (1) copy of such National Electrical Code has been and now is filed in the office of the city and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling the construction, alteration, repair,
removal, demolition, equipment and maintenance of all electrical systems within the corporate limits of the city, save and except the portions of the National Electrical
Code which are hereby deleted, substituted, modified or amended, as set forth in this division.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-1; 1978 Code, sec. 6-50; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 4, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 20, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.03.032 Definitions
As used in this code, the following definitions shall apply:
Approved or approval. Approved by the electrical inspector. National, state, and city standards shall be the basis of such approval.
Conductor. A wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying electrical current or potential.
Electrical construction. All work and material used in installing, maintaining, or extending a system of electrical wiring, and all appurtenances, apparatus, and equipment
used in connection therewith, inside of or attached to any building or structure, lot, or premises.
Electrical contractor. Any person or firm engaged in the business of providing and selling electrical services. He shall have a permanently established place of business
with a published telephone number. He shall hold an electrical contractor's certificate or shall employ an individual who does and carry him on his active payroll. A
master electrician may not qualify more than one contractor. He shall be available to the inspection authority to answer any questions relating to electrical work coming
under the jurisdiction of this electrical inspection authority.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/376
Equipment. Conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, signs, apparatus, motors, and the like, used as a part of or in connection with any electrical
installation.
Journeyman electrician. Any person who is employed by a person (who is by training, experience, and education competent to lay out, design and install a system of
wiring for light, heat or power to conform to the National Electrical Code) to do electrical work for wages and who does not furnish any materials or supplies in the
performance of his work and holds a journeyman electrician license.
Journeyman sign erector. Any person who is employed by a master sign electrician to install signs for wages and who does not furnish any materials and supplies in the
performance of his work and holds a journeyman sign electrician license.
Maintenance and repair. The act of keeping in a state of safe operating condition any conductor or piece of equipment used inside or outside, attached or connected to any
building electrical system, by replacement of units or elements thereof, but shall not include extensions of or additions to an existing system or branch thereof.
Maintenance electrician. An electrician regularly employed on a permanent basis by any person and who performs work only in the confines of the building or in or on
the premises where he is regularly employed on a permanent basis, and who does maintenance work as defined in the definition of “maintenance and repair” and holds a
maintenance electrician license.
Master electrician. Any person who is, by training, experience, and education, competent to lay out, design, and install a system of wiring for light, heat, or power, and
holds a master electrician license.
Master sign electrician. Any person who is engaged in the business of manufacturing and/or installing electric signs and holds a master sign electrician license.
Outside electrical work. The installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, or erecting of any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment located
outside of and separate from buildings and on poles, towers, or other structures designed or constructed to be used exclusively for the support of such electrical wiring,
apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms of this code, except that overhead conductors may be attached to
buildings.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-2; Ordinance 83-34, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/83; Ordinance 87-41, sec. 1, adopted 5/26/87; Ordinance 88-75, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/88; Ordinance 93-35,
sec. 1, adopted 7/6/93; Ordinance 95-23, sec. 1, adopted 4/4/95; 1978 Code, sec. 6-51; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 5, adopted 2/20/07)
Sec. 24.03.033 Purpose
The purpose of this code is the practical safeguarding of persons, and buildings and their contents, from electrical hazards arising from the improper use of electricity for
light, heat, power, radio, signaling, or for any other purpose. (1958 Code, sec. 11-3; 1978 Code, sec. 6-52)
Sec. 24.03.034 Scope
(a) The provisions of this code shall apply to all installations of and work done on electrical conductors, fittings, devices, motors, controls, appliances, fixtures,
electronic devices, signs and gaseous tubing, herein referred to as electrical equipment, within or on public and private buildings and premises, with exceptions as
provided herein.
(b) On all installations of electrical conductors or equipment hereafter made, and all existing installations which are altered, or for which the use has changed, all work
shall be done in a manner that will conform with the requirements for a sufficient and safe electrical structure and system under this code.
(c) Repair and maintenance work shall be such that, if any electrical conductor or equipment is removed and later replaced, same shall be replaced in accordance with
the provisions of this code.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-4; 1978 Code, sec. 6-53)
Sec. 24.03.035 Applicability
(a) Public utilities. The provisions of this code shall not apply to installations made or used by agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity, or
for the operation of railways, signals or transmission of intelligence when located within or on buildings, enclosures, or premises used exclusively by such agency or on
public thoroughfares; provided, however, such agencies excepted are operating under a valid franchise agreement with the city.
(b) Radio and television stations. The provisions of this code shall apply to electrical equipment used for supplying electrical power for radio transmission in amateur
radio transmitting stations and shall apply to all electrical equipment used for power supply to radio transmitting equipment, but shall not apply to other electrical
equipment used for radio or television transmission.
(c) Signs and gaseous tubing. This code shall apply to all forms of electrical signs, gaseous tubing, and outline lighting conductors and equipment. All sign structures,
attachments to buildings and foundations shall be approved by the building official as set forth in sections covering the construction and erection of signs in the building
code prior to inspection under this code.
(1958 Code, secs. 11-5–11-7; 1978 Code, secs. 5-54–6-56)
Sec. 24.03.036 Sale of electrical equipment
(a) Prohibited sales. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell, expose for sale, offer to sell, dispose of as a premium, offer for rent, or repair any
appliance which has not been endorsed by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or other nationally recognized standards association, or without first obtaining approval
from the chief electrical inspector in absence of such evidence of safety approval.
(b) Approval of articles generally. The chief electrical inspector shall approve for sale at retail such electrical equipment, material, conductors, apparatus, or appliances
as are reasonably safe to persons and property. Conformity of such equipment and material with the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie
evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property.
(c) Passing upon articles not on approved list.
(1) Should any material or equipment be submitted for approval which is not listed as approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the chief electrical
inspector shall, within ten (10) days of the receipt of written request for special approval, approve, provisionally approve, or disapprove such electrical material
or equipment.
(2) Approval shall be based on reasonable safety to persons or property, and material and equipment shall be considered as adequate for approval if the
standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories Inc., or provisions of this code are met. When material or equipment is approved by the chief electrical inspector,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/376
such approval shall continue until the material or workmanship on the article approved is changed. When the material or workmanship is changed, the article
shall be reexamined for approval.
(3) When no applicable standard can be used to determine whether an article is reasonably safe, the chief electrical inspector may grant provisional approval
and allow its sale until such time as it can be tested or determined whether the article is safe to persons or property.
(4) When an article is disapproved by the chief electrical inspector, the decision may be appealed for review by the electrical board of review.
(5) The chief electrical inspector shall keep in his office a complete list of electrical equipment, material, appliances, and devices approved by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., provisionally approved, or disapproved for sale within the city. This list shall be available to the public during regular working hours.
(1958 Code, secs. 11-70–11-72; 1978 Code, secs. 6-57–6-59)
Secs. 24.03.037–24.03.070 Reserved
Part II. Electricians*
Sec. 24.03.071 State license required
A person or business may not perform or offer to perform electrical work unless the person or business holds an appropriate license issued by the state department of
licensing and regulation. (1958 Code, sec. 11-41; 1978 Code, sec. 6-80; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 7, adopted 2/20/07)
Sec. 24.03.072 Master electrician's office
Every master electrician, if he qualifies as an electrical contractor, must have and maintain an established place of business and shall have a person in attendance to
receive messages from the electrical inspector's office of the city or other persons concerned during regular business hours. (1958 Code, sec. 11-22; Ordinance 87-41, sec.
4, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-91)
Sec. 24.03.073 Supervision of work
(a) In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing of any electrical conductors or equipment for which a permit is required by this code, there shall
be present and in direct supervision a qualified electrician of the proper classification. It shall be required that a master or sign electrician, as the case may be, be liable
and responsible for the layout and technical supervision of any work which has required the securing of permits and a journeyman electrician shall not supervise at the job
site more than three (3) unclassified workers. Should it come to the notice of the chief electrical inspector or his assistants that such supervision and control are not being
maintained, the inspector may order the work to be discontinued and the person to whom the permit has been issued shall discontinue further work until proper
supervision has been employed or supplied.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such person deemed guilty of a violation shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for which the state law imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal
court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each day any violation of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been
served shall constitute a separate offense.
(1958 Code, secs. 11-45, 11-62; Ordinance 83-34, sec. 7, adopted 4/5/83; 1978 Code, sec. 6-92; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 5, adopted 8/3/10)
Secs. 24.03.074–24.03.100 Reserved
Part III. Permits
Sec. 24.03.101 Required; to whom issued; exemption
(a) Permits shall be issued to electrical contractors qualified to secure permits, as set forth in this code, or to their duly authorized agent. Electrical contractors shall
certify their duly authorized agent to the chief electrical inspector in the form of an affidavit stating that such electrical contractor assumes all and full responsibility for
any permit taken out or applied for by such agent. This certification shall be kept on file in the office of the building official.
(b) Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent a person from doing electrical work himself on his own residence which is owned and occupied by him as such,
so long as he complies with all of the other provisions of this code. This exception shall be construed to mean an individual owner (not firm, copartnership, or
corporation) who actually does the labor himself. This individual owner shall be present at the time of any electrical inspection.
(1958 Code, secs. 11-31, 11-32; Ordinance 79-62, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/79; Ordinance 88-75, sec. 4, adopted 8/16/88; 1978 Code, sec. 6-100; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 9,
adopted 2/20/07)
Sec. 24.03.102 Application; scope of permit requirements
(a) Every person who shall install, cause to be installed, or permit to be installed any electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment or shall make any alteration, addition,
change or repair within the scope of this code shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the commencement of such work, make application for a permit therefor with the
city electrical inspector.
(b) There shall be one permit for each building for which rough work for electrical conductors or electrical equipment is installed. Accessory buildings, tourist cottages,
or group houses shall not be considered separate buildings when the work is to be installed as one complete project and at one time, except where separate switches or
meter loops are installed thereon.
(c) Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the electrical inspector's office for that purpose. With such application there shall be filed a
diagram or plan showing clearly the character and kind of wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work to be done. The plan or diagram shall show the manner in
which the electrical installation is to be made, or the character of any repairs to any existing electric installation. Such application shall include the following information:
(1) Street and house number;
(2) Name of the owner;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/376
(3) Kind of buildings; and
(4) A list of electrical fixtures and appliances to be installed.
(d) The diagram or plans, and application, shall be referred to the chief electrical inspector, who shall have the authority to issue or refuse to issue a permit.
(e) Plans for buildings of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet, based on exterior dimensions, or more than two (2) stories in height, shall bear the seal and
signature of a professional electrical engineer licensed in the state.
(1958 Code, secs. 11-28, 11-30; Ordinance 88-75, sec. 5, adopted 8/16/88; 1978 Code, sec. 6-101)
Sec. 24.03.103 Fees
See section 24.01.002, adoption of fee schedule, of this code. (1958 Code, sec. 11-29; Ordinance 75-28, sec. 1, adopted 4/15/75; Ordinance 83-40, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/83;
Ordinance 03-080, sec. 4, adopted 10/14/03; 1978 Code, sec. 6-102; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 6, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 21, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.03.104 Expiration
If electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work authorized under a permit is not started within sixty (60) days after issuance of such permit, or if the work
is started and then discontinued and the work remains discontinued without justifiable cause for a period of sixty (60) days, the permit shall become void, and no work
shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all necessary fees paid. No refunds shall be made for permits that have become void. (1958 Code, sec. 11-
33; 1978 Code, sec. 6-103)
Sec. 24.03.105 Cancellation
The building official shall have the right to declare a permit null and void if there has been misrepresentation of facts or any violation of the provisions of this code. (1958
Code, sec. 11-34; 1978 Code, sec. 6-104; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 7, adopted 8/3/10)
Secs. 24.03.106–24.03.130 Reserved
Part IV. Standards and Specifications
Sec. 24.03.131 Responsibility for safe work; liability of city for damages
The electrical regulations of this code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating or installing electrical
conductors, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors or equipment, for damages to persons or buildings caused by any defect therein by reason of the inspection
herein authorized or the certificate of approved inspection issued by the electrical inspector's office as herein provided, nor shall the city be held liable for any damages by
reason of the enforcement of this code. (1958 Code, sec. 11-8; 1978 Code, sec. 6-110)
Sec. 24.03.132 Installation standards generally
(a) All installations of electrical wiring and equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this code, the
applicable statutes of the state, and any rules or regulations issued by authority thereof.
(b) Due to the unusual climatic conditions prevailing in and about the city, certain exceptions to the wiring methods and materials, as set forth in the National Electrical
Code herein adopted, shall be made as set forth in this division.
(c) Required power source. Electrical system shall be provided with service from the public utility company or a power source approved by the building official.
Portable generators may only be used when service is not available from a public utility company or an approved power source or when approved by the building official
for temporary power.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-35; Ordinance 75-28, sec. 2, adopted 4/15/75; Ordinance 78-13, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/78; Ordinance 81-18, sec. 2, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 84-73,
sec. 1, adopted 6/12/84; Ordinance 90-6, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/90; 1978 Code, sec. 6-111; Ordinance 08-006, sec. 1, adopted 1/8/08; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 8, adopted
8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.133 Equipment standards generally
(a) All electrical equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to persons and property in conformity with the provisions of this code, the applicable statutes of
the state and any rules or regulations issued by authority thereof.
(b) Conformity of electrical equipment with the applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is
reasonably safe to persons and property.
(c) Only standard parts and materials approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or by the chief electrical inspector, as set forth in section 24.03.036, shall be
permitted in electrical repair or maintenance work.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-36; 1978 Code, sec. 6-112; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 22, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.03.134 Sign standards generally
(a) All electrically illuminated or electrically powered outdoor and indoor signs and displays shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the
provisions of this code.
(b) Conformity of all types of electrical signs with applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie
evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property; provided that the provisions of this division shall prevail in case of conflicting provisions.
(c) Conformity of construction, erection, foundation and means of support of all such signs with the city building code shall be approved by the city building official
before permits for electrical inspection shall be issued under the authority of this code.
(d) A permit for an electrical sign must be obtained from the housing code enforcement division before any sign is installed.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-37; Ordinance 87-41, sec. 6, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-113)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/376
Sec. 24.03.135 Utility company rules and regulations
Rules and regulations of the company supplying electricity to the city regarding service and meter installations for the kind and character of service to be rendered, as
passed and approved by the governing body of the city from time to time, in accordance with franchise provisions, are hereby referred to, incorporated herein, and made a
part hereof. (1958 Code, sec. 11-38; 1978 Code, sec. 6-114)
Sec. 24.03.136 Approved wiring methods, use thereof
Wiring methods approved by the National Electrical Code shall be used with the exceptions listed below:
(1) Any approved method may be used for temporary work.
(2) In all buildings and on all properties, all commercial buildings, and all buildings used for commercial purposes, the following wiring methods are
excluded from the approved methods, as listed in the National Electrical Code:
Article 398–Open wiring on insulators
Article 394–Concealed knob and tube work
Article 394–Electrical non-metallic tubing
Article 334–Non-metallic sheathed cable
Article 338–Service entrance cable
Article 340–Underground feeder and branch circuit cable
(3) The following equipment shall be installed on individual circuits:
(a) Attic fan and heating unit.
(b) Dishwasher.
(c) Disposal.
(d) Washing machine.
(e) Dryer.
(f) Water heaters and space heaters.
(g) Ranges, built-in ranges, tops and ovens.
(h) Air conditioning equipment.
(i) Other types of equipment that requires special circuits.
(j) Built-in microwave ovens.
(4) Low voltage wiring. All low voltage wiring and devices shall be installed according to the requirements of the National Electrical Code.
(5) The installation of A.C. or armored cable shall not be permitted in any place or places designed or intended for assembly occupancy purposes.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-65; Ordinance 79-62, sec. 2, adopted 8/21/79; Ordinance 83-34, sec. 8, adopted 4/5/83; Ordinance 87-41, sec. 7, adopted 5/26/87; Ordinance 87-53,
sec. 1, adopted 7/7/87; Ordinance 91-11, sec. 1, adopted 2/12/91; 1978 Code, sec. 6-115; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 9, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.137 Residential wiring
Service-entrance cable may be used on all one- and two-family residences where three (3) number six (6) copper conductors or larger are used. (1958 Code, sec. 11-66;
1978 Code, sec. 6-116; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 10, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.138 Branch circuit protection
It shall be unlawful for any person to bridge, tamper with or change from its original installation, except upon the approval of the chief electrical inspector, and then only
after proper permit for alteration has been issued, any fuse of the plug, cartridge type or link type, installed in panel boards, main switches or switchboards, or to alter or
change circuit breakers so that the original calibration will be affected, or to tie down or secure any circuit breaker so that it will not function properly. Only eight (8)
devices shall be installed on #14 wire and ten (10) devices on #12 wire. (1958 Code, sec. 11-67(a); 1978 Code, sec. 6-117; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 11, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.139 Service clearances
Service clearances shall comply with the current requirements of “standard service practices” of the local utility company. Where these clearances are not covered by this
standard, the National Electrical Code shall apply. (1958 Code, sec. 11-68; Ordinance 87-41, sec. 8, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-118)
Sec. 24.03.140 Service disconnect
There shall be a service disconnect on the exterior of all commercial buildings. (Ordinance 10-057, sec. 12, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.141 Tenant spaces
Each individual tenant space within a structure shall have an independent service. Two (2) services on an individual tenant space within a structure shall only be permitted
with prior approval from the building official. (Ordinance 10-057, sec. 13, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.142 Extension cord
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/376
Extension cords shall not be used in commercial buildings for powering of accessory appliances as defined by the building official. (1958 Code, sec. 11-69; 1978 Code,
sec. 6-119; Ordinance 10-057, sec. 14, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.03.143 Temporary construction poles
Temporary poles shall comply with the requirements of the local utility company's standard service practices. (Ordinance 76-90, sec. 1, adopted 8/17/76; Ordinance 87-41,
sec. 9, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-119.1)
Secs. 24.03.144–24.03.180 Reserved
Part V. Inspections
Sec. 24.03.181 Certificate of approval required before connecting
It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment on an installation for which a
permit is required, as set forth in this code, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection and the use of such
wiring, devices or equipment. (1958 Code, sec. 11-55; 1978 Code, sec. 6-120)
Sec. 24.03.182 Unauthorized connection after disconnection
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment which has been disconnected
by order of the electrical inspector, or the use of which has been prohibited for reasons herein set forth, until a certificate of approval has been issued by him authorizing
the reconnection and use of such wiring, devices or equipment.
(b) Whenever the service wires are once disconnected in any commercial building in the city limits or any building in the inner fire limits, the service shall not again be
connected until the same has been wired so as to conform to this code.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-63; 1978 Code, sec. 6-121)
Sec. 24.03.183 Rough work inspection; correcting faulty work; reinspection
(a) Notice; time; signing inspection card. When the rough wiring or installation work is completed on any premises, the person responsible therefor shall notify the
electrical inspector that the job is ready for inspection, giving proper identification of the work, address and permit number. The electrical inspector shall then make an
inspection of the electric installation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of notification (exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays). If the wiring or installation
work has been installed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code, the city electrical inspector shall sign the inspection card, noting thereon the date of
approval of the work. More than one rough inspection may be made without charge when the progress of construction requires such inspection.
(b) Faulty work. If the electric wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty, incorrectly or defectively installed, the electrical inspector shall
notify the responsible person who installed such work of the changes necessary to be made in order that the work may conform to this code.
(c) Rectification of faulty work. The electrical contractor shall, within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of notification, make or start to make the changes ordered
and shall proceed with the work until the same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the reinspection fee, he shall notify the electrical inspector to the
effect that faulty work has been corrected. The latter shall then cause the reinspection to be made and, if such work is found to comply with this code, he shall sign the
inspection card noting thereon the date of approval of the work. If the electrical inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, he shall notify the responsible
electrical contractor of the necessary changes and shall collect an additional reinspection fee. If the responsible master electrician does not make the required changes
within a reasonable time, the electrical inspector shall refuse to issue to any such person any further permits until such work in question is corrected and approved.
(1958 Code, sec. 11-56; Ordinance 87-41, sec. 10, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-122)
Sec. 24.03.184 Final inspection
Upon the completion of all electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment in any building or on any premises, the electrical contractor shall notify the chief
electrical inspector that the work is ready for final inspection, giving the electrical permit number and street address, and the chief electrical inspector shall then cause
inspection to be made within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of receipt of notification (exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays) and, if any faulty or defective
wiring or equipment is found, the electrical contractor shall be notified of the changes to be made in order that such work shall conform to this code. If such work is found
to be correctly installed, replaced or repaired, the electrical certificate shall state that the wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the provisions of
this code. For each final inspection requested after the first has been made, the final inspection fee shall be paid as provided. (1958 Code, sec. 11-57; Ordinance 87-41,
sec. 11, adopted 5/26/87; 1978 Code, sec. 6-123)
Sec. 24.03.185 Leaving work open
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover, or cause to be covered, any part of a wiring installation with flooring, lath, wallboard or other material, until the electrical
inspector shall have approved the wiring installation, in part or as a whole, except as herein set forth. (1958 Code, sec. 11-58; 1978 Code, sec. 6-124)
Sec. 24.03.186 Removal of dead wires, etc.
It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to cause all abandoned dead wire, unused poles or electrical apparatus on the outside of the buildings or in streets or alleys to
be removed at the expense of the owners thereof, by giving the owners written notice. (1958 Code, sec. 11-59; 1978 Code, sec. 6-125)
Sec. 24.03.187 Altering conductors or equipment; when interference with other work
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If, in the course of the
erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or equipment have previously been installed in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the
structure, notice shall be immediately given the authorized person using the electrical conductors or equipment, and he shall be required to accomplish this needed change
in accordance with this code. (1958 Code, sec. 11-60; 1978 Code, sec. 6-126)
Sec. 24.03.188 Periodic inspection; remedying defects
The chief electrical inspector shall inaugurate thorough periodic reinspection of installation of all electric wiring, electric devices and electric equipment now installed, or
that may hereafter be installed, within the city, and within the scope of this code, and when the inspection of any such wiring, devices or equipment is found to be
defective, dangerous or in an unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating the same shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring,
devices or equipment in a safe condition within five (5) days or any longer period specified by the chief electrical inspector in such notice. The chief electrical inspector
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/376
shall immediately order the disconnection or discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, devices or equipment until same has been made safe, as directed. (1958
Code, sec. 11-61; 1978 Code, sec. 6-127)
ARTICLE 24.04 UNSAFE SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.04.001 Defined
All vacant structures, dwellings, dwelling units, and accessory structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed unsafe substandard structures.
Determination of unsafe substandard structures shall be governed by the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code. (Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85;
Ordinance 91-53, sec. 1, adopted 6/11/91; Ordinance 98-34, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/98; Ordinance 05-019, sec. 1, adopted 2/8/05; 1978 Code, sec. 14-50; Ordinance 10-059,
sec. 2, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 23, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.002 Declared nuisances
All unsafe substandard structures within the terms of section 24.04.001 are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, removed or demolished as
hereinafter provided. (Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85; 1978 Code, sec. 14-51; Ordinance 10-059, sec. 3, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 24, adopted
2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.003 Standards for repair or demolition
The following standards shall be followed by the building official or designated enforcing officer and the city council in ordering repair or demolition of an unsafe
substandard structure within the terms of section 24.04.001:
(1) If, after inspection by the building official or designated enforcing officer and support inspections from other concerned departments or divisions, if
necessary, a determination is made that the structure is an unsafe substandard structure, the building official or designated enforcing officer shall tag the
structure and the owner shall be ordered by a certified letter to contact the building official or designated enforcing officer within fifteen (15) days from the
date of said letter. The owner shall be ordered, by letter, to enroll in an official work program to repair the structure or demolish said structure within thirty (30)
days.
(2) If a permit to repair or demolish said structure is not obtained from building codes and repairs or demolition are not completed within forty-five (45)
days of the date of the letter provided for in subsection (1) above, the building official or designated enforcing officer shall give notice, by letter, to the owner
of said structure to appear before the city council to show cause why said structure should not be demolished and at the cost of the owner. Building permits
issued to repair a structure under an official work program shall have the same expiration date as the work program.
(3) If a structure is to be repaired such that it is no longer an unsafe substandard structure under the terms of this article, said structure shall be brought into
compliance with the provisions of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the city. Except as outlined in subsection (9), repairs to such
structures shall be completed and a certificate of occupancy issued within a period not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days from the date of initiating a
work program. Upon failure to obtain substantial completion, as defined in the work program, within ninety (90) days from the date of initiating said program
or failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy within the one hundred fifty (150) day period, the structure may be brought before the city council for a
condemnation order without further notice to the owner. Owner who initiates a work program hereunder shall agree that unless the structure is brought into
compliance with the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code it may be immediately brought before city council for condemnation order without further
notice.
(4) Any vacant structure found to be an unsafe substandard structure, as defined herein or substandard under this article, shall be posted as provided in this
chapter to prevent occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, or allow others to occupy, a structure that has been tagged as an unsafe
substandard structure in accordance with this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this code. Each such
person deemed guilty of a violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, where such fine is for an offense for
which the state law imposes a fine, the fine imposed by the municipal court shall be the same as the fine for each such like offense under the state law. Each
day any violation of any provision of this code continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
(5) All notices, as provided herein, shall be served by delivering same to the owner or agent in person, or by mailing the same certified to the residence or
business address, if known, of such owner or agent, or by posting the same in a prominent place upon such structure.
(6) If, upon hearing, the city council finds that the structure is in violation of section 24.04.001 hereof, the city council shall order the structure to be razed or
repaired at such time and under such conditions as the city council may, in its discretion, stipulate at said hearing. Such owner or his/her agent shall forthwith
comply with said order of the city council. Any owner or his/her agent who fails to comply with such order within the time therein stipulated shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in this code. If the owner obtains a permit and voluntarily demolishes his/her structure under this program,
such owner shall be exempt from payment of the landfill disposal fee for the debris resulting from such demolition.
(7) If any such structure condemned by the order of the city council, as provided herein, is not razed or repaired within the time and under the condition
specified in such order, the council may, at its discretion, proceed to have the same razed and charge the actual expense to the owner of the real estate or lot as
shown on the tax roll. A statement of expenses incurred by the city in the demolition and removal of such structure under this section shall be mailed to the
property owner shown on the tax roll at the time of service. The statement of expenses shall, in addition to giving the amount of such expense, provide the date
upon which such work was done, and description of the lot or premises upon which such work was done. Payment is due and is considered delinquent if not
received by the city within thirty (30) days. If payment is not made within ninety (90) days, the city's authorized agent is hereby authorized to charge such
costs and expenses as a lien against the property upon which such structure was situated, and upon all other property situated in the city belonging to the owner
of such structure.
(A) The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures made and interest shall accrue at the rate of ten (10) percent annually on the unpaid
balance due from the date of payment by the city.
(B) The city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due.
(C) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making
the improvements and of proper notices as required by this article.
(D) The governing body of a city may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a proceeding relating to the property brought under subchapter
E, chapter 33, Texas Tax Code.
(8) Judicial review of council's order shall be governed by section 214 of the Texas Local Government Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/376
(9) Structures that have been tagged as an unsafe and/or substandard structure, which may be of historical significance, shall be provided reasonable time for
repairs and/or restoration. In order to qualify under the historical structure requirement, the structure must meet one (1) of the following criteria:
(A) Existing or proposed recognition as a national historic landmark, or state historic landmark, or entry, or proposed entry into the national register of
historic places.
(B) Identification as the work of a designer, architect or builder whose work has influenced the growth or development of the city.
(C) Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represents a significant architectural innovation or an
outstanding example of a particular historical, architectural or other cultural style or period.
(D) The determination if a structure meets criteria of subsection (B) or (C) shall be determined by the historic landmark commission.
(E) The process for obtaining a historical designation will include the submittal of an application to the planning division. An application for an
amendment to the zoning ordinance shall also be submitted with the historical designation application. A letter to be included with the application shall
provide the necessary documentation that supports at least one (1) of the above criteria. Additional information may be submitted or requested by the city
that may be appropriate to support or verify the historical designation.
(F) The property owner of a tagged structure that meets one (1) or more of these criteria will be provided one (1) year from the date the structure is
tagged to substantially complete repairs, as currently defined by the city, and one (1) additional year to obtain a certificate of occupancy (CO), provided
the city's historic landmark commission approves a detailed work program outlining the work to be performed and a timeline for completion. If either one
of these time frames is not met, the structure may be razed.
(Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85; Ordinance 91-53, sec. 2, adopted 6/11/91; Ordinance 92-50, sec. 1, adopted 6/30/92; Ordinance 94-15, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/94;
Ordinance 98-34, sec. 2, adopted 5/12/98; Ordinance 05-019, sec. 2, adopted 2/8/05; Ordinance 05-032, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/05; 1978 Code, sec. 14-52; Ordinance 10-
059, sec. 4, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 25, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.004 Standard for repair–Residential structure
Standard for repair of a residential structure shall comply with appendix J, existing buildings and structures, of the 2015 International Residential Code. (Ordinance 10-
059, sec. 5, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 26, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.005 Commercial unsafe substandard structures
All commercial unsafe substandard structures shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the 2015 International Building Code and the 2015 International Existing
Building Code as required for existing buildings. (Ordinance 10-059, sec. 6, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 27, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.006 Abatement of structures constituting a clear and present danger to the public safety
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the city to summarily order the demolition of any vacant
structure where it is apparent that the immediate demolition of such structure is necessary for the preservation of life and property in the city. (Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1,
adopted 5/14/85; 1978 Code, sec. 14-53; Ordinance 10-059, sec. 7, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.04.007 Enforcing officer powers and duties
The building official or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as “enforcing officer,” is charged with the duty of enforcing this article.
(1) Neither the enforcing officer nor any employee of his division shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of unsafe substandard structure or in the making of plans and specifications for a profit unless such person is the owner
of such structure.
(2) Neither the enforcing officer nor any employee of his division shall engage in any work which is in conflict with his duties or the interest of the
department.
(3) The enforcing officer shall enforce this article in the following manner:
(A) The enforcing officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected, when necessary, all structures of any kind which are unoccupied or apparently
abandoned, for the purpose of determining whether any condition exists which renders such place an unsafe substandard structure within the terms of
section 24.04.001.
(B) The enforcing officer shall inspect any structure about which a complaint is filed by any person to the effect that a structure is or may be existing in
violation of this article.
(C) The enforcing officer shall notify in writing, by certified mail, the owner and/or all persons having an interest, as shown by the tax rolls of the city,
in any structure found by the enforcing officer to be an unsafe substandard structure within the standards set forth in section 24.04.001. Said notice shall
state:
(i) A description of the structure;
(ii) A statement of the particulars which make the structure an unsafe substandard structure;
(iii) That the owner must repair or demolish said structure;
(iv) That any person notified under this subsection to repair or demolish any structure shall be given reasonable time, as provided in this code, to
do or have done the work required by the notice; and
(v) That the owner of said structure shall appear before the city council to show cause why said structure should not be repaired, removed or
demolished.
(D) The enforcing officer shall also file a notice of declaration of unsafe substandard structure in the deed records of the county. Such notice will
provide lawful notice to any proposed purchaser of the property that the structure thereon has been declared an unsafe substandard structure, may not be
lawfully occupied, is subject to demolition and may not be eligible for building permits necessary to rehabilitate the structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/376
(Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85; Ordinance 98-34, sec. 3, adopted 5/12/98; Ordinance 05-019, sec. 2, adopted 2/8/05; 1978 Code, sec. 14-54; Ordinance 10-
059, sec. 8, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 28, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.04.008 Assistance by other departments
The enforcement officer is to seek the assistance of the fire department, the health department, and the police department in order to effectively enforce the terms of this
article, and said departments are to assist the enforcing officer in any way possible in said enforcement. (Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85; Ordinance 05-019, sec.
2, adopted 2/8/05; 1978 Code, sec. 14-55; Ordinance 10-059, sec. 9, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.04.009 No utilities to vacant dwellings
No water, gas, electricity, or sewer services shall be provided to any dwelling unit or rooming unit found to be an unsafe substandard structure which is or becomes vacant
until such dwelling unit or rooming unit has been brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 85-56, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/85; 1978 Code, sec.
14-56; Ordinance 10-059, sec. 10, adopted 8/3/10)
Sec. 24.04.010 Securing of unoccupied buildings
(a) An owner or person in control of an unoccupied structure shall insure that the building is in such condition that an unauthorized person cannot enter into it through
missing or unlocked doors or windows, or through other openings into the building. The city may secure unoccupied, unsecured structures after the owner(s) fail to do so
after reasonable notice. A lien may be filed on the structures to assure recovery of the cost of securing.
(b) An unsecured, unoccupied building is hereby defined to be any structure that currently has no legitimate occupant or tenant and which has missing or unlocked
doors or windows, or other unsecured openings into the building through which unauthorized persons can enter. Any unoccupied, unsecured building is hereby declared to
be a danger to the public health and safety.
(c) Whenever it is found that an unoccupied building is in such condition that an unauthorized person can enter it through missing or unlocked doors or windows or
other openings, the city shall cause a written notice or “Notice to Secure” to be given to the owner of the property as such owner appears on the tax rolls of the city or to
the person having the control over the property. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given by depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner
at the owner's post office address. If notice cannot be obtained by United States mail or the owner's post office address is unknown, notice may be given by publishing
such notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. If notice cannot be obtained by mail or the owner's post office
address is unknown, notice may be obtained by posting the notice on or near the front door of the structure. The notice must contain the following information:
(1) An identification which is not required to be a legal description of the structure and property on which it is located;
(2) The description of the violation of the municipal standards that are present at the building;
(3) A statement that the municipality may secure the building within thirty (30) days of the date of notice; and
(4) An explanation that the owner is entitled to request a hearing within such thirty-day period concerning any matter relating to the municipality's proposed
securing of the building.
(d) Compliance with the provisions concerning the securing of unoccupied structures does not relieve the owner or occupant of the structure from the requirement to
comply with other provisions of the “unsafe substandard structure” ordinance.
(e) If the owner requests a hearing about the structure, the municipality shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written
information about any matter relating to the proposed securing of the structure by the city. The hearing shall be conducted within twenty (20) days after the day the owner
files a written request for such hearing. The hearing shall be before a hearing officer designated by the city manager for such purpose.
(f) An owner who fails to timely comply with a notice to secure as set out herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day's failure to comply after the expiration of the notice period shall constitute a
separate offense.
(g) If the owner fails to comply with a notice to secure, the city may order the boarding up of all openings so as to prevent entry or the reasonable securing of the
structure by any other reasonable fashion and may assess the expenses of such securing as a lien on the property as allowed by section 214.0011(f) of the Texas Local
Government Code.
(h) Method of securing unoccupied structures shall be governed by the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code appendix A.
(Ordinance 94-15, sec. 2, adopted 3/22/94; 1978 Code, sec. 14-58; Ordinance 10-059, sec. 12, adopted 8/3/10; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 29, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.04.011–24.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Rehabilitation Agency
Sec. 24.04.041 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall, for the purpose of this division, have the following meanings:
Deferred loans. The monies provided for rehabilitation of owner-occupied dwelling units to be forgiven at a rate of 1/60th of the total loan per month for a period of five
(5) years.
Dwelling unit. A house, apartment, room or group of rooms occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
Rehabilitation, residential. The restoration of deteriorated structures to standard housing codes as established by law, including repair, renovation, conversion or
remodeling of any structure with energy conservation material and/or devices.
(Ordinance 79-4, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/79; Ordinance 79-97, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/79; Ordinance 83-132, sec. 1, adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 92-16, sec. 1, adopted
2/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 14-71)
Sec. 24.04.042 Rehabilitation deferred loans
Housing services shall make deferred loans to qualified persons for the rehabilitation of dwelling units. Deferred loans shall also be made for investor-owned residential
property. (Ordinance 79-4, sec. 2, adopted 1/16/79; Ordinance 92-16, sec. 1, adopted 2/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 14-73)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/376
Sec. 24.04.043 Creation of fund
There is hereby created a rehabilitation deferred loan fund, to be funded with Department of Housing and Urban Development funds, to make deferred loans to owners of
dwelling units in project areas who are unable to secure or qualify for funds from conventional sources for the purpose of refinancing or rehabilitating such property to
standard housing code requirements. (Ordinance 79-4, sec. 4, adopted 1/16/79; Ordinance 83-132, sec. 1, adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 92-16, sec. 1, adopted 2/11/92;
1978 Code, sec. 14-74)
Sec. 24.04.044 Promissory note, lien as evidence and security of loan
Rehabilitation deferred loans shall be evidenced by a promissory note in favor of the city and either a mechanic's and materialmen's lien or by a properly executed real
estate lien note and deed of trust for a period of time not to exceed a period of five (5) years. Deferred loans shall be forgiven at the rate of 1/60th of the total loan per
month for a period of five (5) years at which time the lien shall be released. If property is sold prior to the five (5) years the owner shall reimburse the program the
remaining payments based on the sixty (60) months' amortization. The obligation to reimburse the loan funds should the property to [be] sold prior to five (5) years after
the commencement of the loan shall remain an obligation of the heirs of a deceased deferred loan holder. (Ordinance 79-4, sec. 10, adopted 1/16/79; Ordinance 83-132,
sec. 1, adopted 10/11/83; Ordinance 92-16, sec. 1, adopted 2/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 14-80)
Sec. 24.04.045 Loan delinquency
The city shall have the authority to collect delinquent loans through any reasonable means permitted by law, including foreclosure and sale, upon the direction of the city
manager. (Ordinance 79-4, sec. 11, adopted 1/16/79; Ordinance 92-16, sec. 1, adopted 2/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 14-81)
Sec. 24.04.046 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-008, sec. 30, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 24.05 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.05.001 Statutory authorization
The state legislature has, in sections 16.3145, 16.315 of the Texas Water Code, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-25)
Sec. 24.05.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy
of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood
damage.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-26)
Sec. 24.05.003 Statement of purpose
(a) It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight
areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-27)
Sec. 24.05.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/376
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-28)
Sec. 24.05.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its
most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows;
active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding
can occur.
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provisions of this article or a request for a variance as defined in this section.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be
designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Board of adjustment. The city zoning board of adjustment.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
compromised.
Development. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. A non-basement building:
(1) Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in
zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(2) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls met the standards of
section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM, or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, and the water surface elevation of
the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain
ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/376
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically
to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance
with sound engineering standards.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the
flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial
improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty
(50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/376
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore,
permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see 44 CFR section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)
(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-29; Ordinance 07-017, sec. 4, adopted 2/20/07)
Sec. 24.05.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-30)
Sec. 24.05.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for
the City of Beaumont,” dated August 6, 2002, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM), and any revisions
thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7-9-02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-31)
Sec. 24.05.008 Establishment of development permit
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-32)
Sec. 24.05.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-33)
Sec. 24.05.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02;
1978 Code, sec. 6-34)
Sec. 24.05.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-35)
Sec. 24.05.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare
occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or
any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ordinance 02-
050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-36)
Secs. 24.05.013–24.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 24.05.041 Designation of the floodplain administrator
The planning manager, or his appointee, is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec.
6-37)
Sec. 24.05.042 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/376
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state water development board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 24.05.007, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot,
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-38; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 31, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a development permit, in the floodplain, shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is
required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of
section 24.05.072(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 24.05.042(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at
the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-39; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 32, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.044 Variance procedures
(a) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/376
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of
historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded
by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 24.05.043(b) of this article have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 24.05.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation
below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-40; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 33, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.05.045–24.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 24.05.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above the base flood elevation, so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Tanks shall be vented a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above the base
flood elevation;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from
the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-41)
Sec. 24.05.072 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 24.05.007, section 24.05.042(8), or section 24.05.073(c), the
following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 24.05.043(a)(1), is satisfied.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/376
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above and below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
“substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one (1) foot six (6) inches above the base flood elevation; and
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 24.05.043(a) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of
this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-42; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 34, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 24.05.002, 24.05.003 and
24.05.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit
requirements of section 24.05.008 and section 24.05.043 and the provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 24.05.007 or section 24.05.042(8) of
this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-43; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 35, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.074 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 24.05.007 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/376
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in
section 24.05.043(a), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-44; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 36, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.075 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 24.05.007 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of this division.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-45; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 37, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.05.076 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day any
violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-46)
Sec. 24.05.077 Conflict of laws
Within a flood hazard area, the provisions of this article shall take precedence over any conflicting municipal laws, ordinances, or codes. (Ordinance 02-050, secs. 1, 2,
adopted 7/9/02; 1978 Code, sec. 6-47)
Sec. 24.05.078 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-008, sec. 38, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 24.06 MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 24.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power
or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel camper and motor home. For the purposes of this article,
RVs shall be classified as either dependent, meaning an RV that does not contain toilet and/or bathing facilities, or independent, an RV that contains toilet and/or bathing
facilities.
Recreational vehicle lot. A parcel of land in a recreational vehicle park set aside for the placement of a single recreational vehicle and for the exclusive use of its
occupants.
Recreational vehicle pad. That area of a recreational vehicle lot intended for the placement of the recreational vehicle.
Site plan. A line drawing clearly describing the trailer park and its environs and shall include adequate labeling and dimensioning of all fundamental features of the
project, the legal description of the property, north point, and date, and shall be drawn to engineering scale.
Trailer coach. A transportable single-family dwelling unit which is or may be mounted on wheels, suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water
supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing, and shall include the terms “mobile home” and “modular home.”
Trailer park “A”. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of trailer coaches for transient use, supplementary
structures and accessory uses not prohibited by chapter 28 of this Code of Ordinances.
Trailer park “B”. A parcel of land which is:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/376
(1) Under multiple ownership or which may be developed under multiple ownership;
(2) Recorded in its entirety as a subdivision plat with the appropriate right-of-way dedications for streets, alleys and/or easements, lots and blocks; and
(3) For the placement of trailer coaches for nontransient use, supplementary structures and accessory uses not prohibited by chapter 28 of this Code of
Ordinances.
Trailer park “C”. A parcel of land which is occupied or intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles for transient dwelling purposes regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for such service. For the purposes of this article, recreational vehicle park and travel trailer park shall have the same meaning.
Transient. To occupy a space for only a brief stay.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-1; 1978 Code, sec. 27-1; Ordinance 06-070, sec. 1, adopted 10/24/06; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 39, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.06.002 Enforcing officer
It shall be the duty of the building official, or his designated representative, to make inspections to determine the existence of violations of this article. A complete report
of any violation discovered shall be made to the city manager for further handling. (1958 Code, sec. 38-9; 1978 Code, sec. 27-2)
Sec. 24.06.003 Action to prevent and abate violation
In case any building, structure or trailer coach is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, trailer coach or
land is used, in violation of section 24.06.007 or in violation of any applicable section of chapter 28 of this code, the city manager, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any proper action or proceeding in the name of the city to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance
or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violations, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, trailer coach or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises. (1958 Code, sec. 38-10; 1978 Code, sec. 27-3; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 40, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.06.004 Parking inside and outside a trailer park
(a) Parking on public streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer coach on any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city for a
longer period than three (3) hours.
(b) Parking in trailer parks. No trailer coach shall be parked for use or occupancy on any tract of ground within the city except in a duly authorized trailer park “A” or
“B”; provided, however, that:
(1) The building inspector may permit the parking, use and occupancy of a trailer coach outside of a duly authorized trailer park for a period of time not
exceeding ten (10) days, when such coach is occupied by persons employed in the operation of a temporary recreational, amusement or civic activity. Such
temporary parking, use and occupancy of a trailer coach shall be permitted only when the trailer coach is parked on the same premises on which the activity is
located and only when adequate sanitary facilities are available upon the premises for the use of the occupants of the trailer coach;
(2) A permit shall be required for all trailer coaches now parked outside trailer parks which were so parked prior to December 31, 1961; the annual permit
renewal fee shall be a minimum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each trailer coach and shall be paid to the building official, and such fee shall be for the calendar
year ending the thirty-first day of December of each year. Said authorization shall terminate and become void and of no effect upon failure of the trailer coach
occupant to pay the fee hereinabove provided for prior to its expiration or upon damage to such trailer coach by fire, explosion or any act of God to the extent
of twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of such trailer coach or upon the moving of such trailer coach off of the tract of ground upon which it was
located on or before December 31, 1961. The authorization herein provided for is not transferable, and, in the event the present occupant moves from the trailer
coach, the authorization shall terminate and no authorization shall be permitted in the trailer coach for a new occupant; once an authorization terminates and
becomes void, the building official shall not authorize the same trailer coach to be occupied unless it is in a duly authorized trailer park.
(c) Exception for temporary construction office. Mobile homes/trailer coaches may be used as on-site temporary construction offices.
(d) Exception for night watchman facilities. Mobile homes/trailer coaches may be used as night watchman facilities; provided, however, that mobile homes/trailer
coaches may not be used as a place of residence by any person, including the night watchman, and that all zoning regulations must be satisfied.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-2; Ordinance 82-64, sec. 1, adopted 6/22/82; 1978 Code, sec. 27-4)
Sec. 24.06.005 Minimum standards for type “A” trailer park
Any trailer park type “A” hereafter established, constructed, or erected, and in the case of existing trailer parks that portion extended, altered, expanded and/or improved,
shall conform to and comply with the following minimum standards:
(1) Park area. Each trailer park shall provide a minimum of three (3) acres in area but in no case shall there be less than fifteen (15) trailer coach lots.
(2) Density. Each trailer park shall not exceed a maximum density of fifteen (15) trailer coach lots per acre as determined by the total area bounded by the
trailer park property lines.
(3) Private streets. Private streets shall be provided and shall extend continuously from the public street right-of-way so as to provide suitable access to all
trailer coach lots and other facilities or uses permitted in the trailer park as well as provide adequate connection to future streets at the boundaries of the trailer
coach property line. Private streets shall meet the following standards:
(A) Minimum pavement widths shall be as follows:
(i) Class 1 private streets which provide direct access to five (5) or more trailer coach lots: Twenty (20) feet.
(ii) Class 2 private streets which provide direct access to less than five (5) trailer coach lots: Fourteen (14) feet.
(B) Private street intersections shall generally be at right angles; offsets at intersections of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet (centerline to
centerline) should be avoided; intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided.
(C) Dead-end private streets shall be limited to a maximum length of one thousand (1,000) feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space,
with a turning circle of eighty (80) feet in diameter.
(D) All private streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather
conditions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/376
(E) Private streets which may connect two (2) public street rights-of-way shall by the use or curves, offsets, location and/or the use of two (2) or more
streets be located so as to discourage through traffic.
(4) Trailer coach lots. Each and every trailer coach lot shall conform to the following standards:
(A) Be served with sanitary sewer, water, electrical power, telephone service and natural gas.
(B) Provide an average minimum width of thirty (30) feet and an average minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet.
(C) Abut and/or have access to a private street for a minimum distance of twelve (12) feet.
(D) Provide a minimum area of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet, said area to be determined by the lot lines.
(E) Provide a trailer coach stand which shall provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of one single-family trailer coach, thereby
securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. Said trailer coach stand shall be:
(i) Impervious to plant material such as weeds, grass and shrubs.
(ii) Provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete “dead men,” eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw
augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices which secure the stability of the trailer coach, and shall be placed at least at each corner of the trailer
coach stand.
(iii) Twelve (12) feet in width and sixty (60) feet in length.
(iv) Located not closer than three (3) feet from the trailer coach lot line; be located at least ten (10) feet from any class 1 private street and five
(5) feet from any class 2 private street, and be a minimum of five (5) feet from the rear trailer coach lot line (the end of the trailer coach stand
opposite the end adjacent to the private street).
(F) Setbacks for supplementary structures. No physical structure, dump-master container, carport, cabana, awning, fence or storage locker shall be
permitted within ten (10) feet of a class 1 private street and five (5) feet from any class 2 private street; provided further, the setbacks from the sides and
rear shall be three (3) feet, save and except a fence, from any trailer coach lot line not adjacent to the private street.
(G) Provide a minimum of one off-street parking space.
(H) Double frontage of trailer coach lots should be avoided.
(I) No vehicular access to a trailer coach lot is permitted from a public dedicated street.
(5) Usable open space. Usable open space shall be provided so as to conform to the following standards:
(A) Conveniently situated and containing a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet for the first fifteen (15) trailer coach lots or
three (3) acres in the trailer park; for each additional trailer coach lot over fifteen (15), twenty-five (25) additional square feet is required.
(B) Such open space may be in one or more areas but shall be of such size and shape as to afford reasonable use by the occupants.
(C) No portion of such required usable open space shall be used for off-street parking, vehicular drive loading areas or accessory uses, save and except
recreational uses such as swimming pools and tennis courts.
(6) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for each trailer coach lot. Off-street parking spaces not
located on the trailer coach lot shall be located on or within the trailer park and be easily accessible to the occupants and visitors; said spaces shall:
(A) Have a permanent all-weather surface;
(B) Have dimensions of not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches by eighteen (18) feet;
(C) Be accessible to an all-weather surfaced private street;
(D) Be appropriately defined and marked;
(E) Be so located and regulated that no parking, or maneuvering incidental to parking, shall be on any public street or walk;
(F) Provide adequate barriers to keep any parked vehicle from extending into or overhanging any public dedicated street or private street;
(G) Be so designed that any vehicle may be parked and unparked without requiring the moving of any other vehicle.
(7) Setbacks.
(A) All trailer coach stands and attached trailer coaches shall be located as follows:
(i) A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any trailer park property boundary line abutting upon a public dedicated street or residentially used
or zoned R-1A, R-1 and R-2 property, as set out in chapter 28 of this Code of Ordinances.
(ii) A minimum of five (5) feet from any trailer park property boundary line, not abutting upon a public dedicated street, when the abutting
property is used or zoned as industrial or commercial property, providing further that a six (6) foot solid permanent screening fence or wall shall be
constructed along said trailer coach property boundary line.
(B) All accessory uses shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any trailer coach lot line.
(8) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every trailer park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner so as not
to permit water to stand or become stagnant.
(9) Lighting. The private streets, parking lots, walks and service areas shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so the trailer park shall be
safe for occupants and visitors; provided further all entrances and exits shall be lighted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/376
(10) Refuse disposal. Facilities shall be provided for the storage, collection and disposal of refuse of the occupants of the trailer park. A refuse pickup
easement shall be granted by the owner of the trailer park to the city if these facilities are located so as to require the entrance of a municipal vehicle into the
trailer park.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-5; 1978 Code, sec. 27-8)
Sec. 24.06.006 Minimum standards for type “B” trailer park
A trailer park, type “B”, hereafter established, constructed, erected, extended, altered, expanded and/or improved shall conform with the following minimum standards:
(1) Park area. Each trailer park “B” shall provide a minimum of three (3) acres in area.
(2) Layout of streets and blocks. Within a trailer park “B” no block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length and streets
shall be laid out to provide a minimum distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet, center of street to center of street, between intersections.
(3) Trailer coach lot standards. Each and every trailer coach lot shall conform to the following standards:
(A) Be served with sanitary sewer, water, electrical power, telephone service and natural gas.
(B) Provide for the placement of one single-family trailer coach with all garages, carports, enclosed rooms and porches being subordinate to this
primary use.
(C) No average dimension (width or depth) shall be less than fifty (50) feet.
(D) Abut and/or have access to a public dedicated street for a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet.
(E) Provide a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet determined by the lot lines.
(F) Prior to occupancy of any trailer coach lot, it must be provided with a trailer coach stand which shall provide an adequate foundation for the
placement and tie-down of one single-family trailer coach, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. Said trailer
coach stand shall be:
(i) Impervious to plant material such as weeds, grass and shrubs.
(ii) Provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete “dead men,” eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw
augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices which secure the stability of the trailer coach, and shall be placed at least at each corner of the trailer
coach stand.
(iii) A minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and sixty (60) feet in length or the size of the trailer coach to be placed on the lot.
(G) Provide a minimum of one off-street parking space.
(H) Double frontage of trailer coach lots should be avoided.
(I) No vehicular or pedestrian access to a trailer coach lot is permitted from a public dedicated street not completely contained or located within the
tract of land authorized as a trailer park; provided further no access to a trailer coach lot is permitted except when the lot directly across the public street
is located in the trailer park and designated as and complying with the standards for a trailer coach lot as herein provided.
(J) Be officially recorded in a subdivision plat.
(4) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum rate of one space for each trailer coach lot.
(5) Setbacks. All trailer coach stands and attached trailer coaches and all other structures shall be located as follows:
(A) A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any trailer park property or boundary line adjacent to a public dedicated street not providing access to the
trailer coach lot; fences are excluded;
(B) A minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front lot line;
(C) A minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line;
(D) A minimum of five (5) feet from the side lot line.
(6) Screening. A six (6) foot permanent screening fence or wall shall be constructed along the boundary lines of the trailer park except where a public
dedicated street provides access to the trailer park.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-6; Ordinance 81-24, secs. 1, 2, adopted 4/14/81; 1978 Code, sec. 27-9)
Sec. 24.06.007 Uses permitted in type “A” or “B” trailer parks
Upon issuance of a trailer park permit, type “A” or “B”, by the city council, no use except the following shall be permitted in any trailer park, type “A” or “B”:
(1) Single-family trailer coaches.
(2) Accessory uses providing service to the occupants of the trailer park; such uses may include recreational facilities, central or community garages, storage
buildings and washaterias.
(3) Supplementary structures.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-7; 1978 Code, sec. 27-10)
Sec. 24.06.008 Minimum standards for type “C” recreational vehicle park
Any recreational vehicle park hereafter established, constructed, or erected, and in the case of existing recreational vehicle parks that portion extended, altered, expanded
and/or improved, shall conform to and comply with the following minimum standards:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/376
(1) Park area. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide a minimum of three (3) acres in area but in no case shall there be less than fifteen (15)
recreational vehicle lots. The perimeter of every recreational vehicle park shall be surrounded by an eight (8) foot tall solid permanent screening fence or wall.
(2) Private streets. Private streets shall be provided and shall extend continuously from the public street right-of-way so as to provide suitable access to all
recreational vehicle sites and other facilities or uses permitted in the recreational vehicle park. Private streets shall meet the following standards:
(A) Minimum pavement widths shall be as follows:
(i) One-way streets: Fourteen (14) feet.
(ii) Two-way streets: Twenty (20) feet.
(B) Private street intersections shall generally be at right angles; offsets at intersections of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet (centerline to
centerline) should be avoided; intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided.
(C) Dead-end private streets shall be limited to a maximum length of one thousand (1,000) feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space
with a turning circle of eighty (80) feet in diameter.
(D) All private streets shall be constructed of a minimum of asphalt and shall be well drained under normal use and weather conditions.
(E) Private streets which may connect two (2) public street rights-of-way shall by the use of curves, offsets, location and/or the use of two (2) or more
streets be located so as to discourage through traffic.
(3) Recreational vehicle lots. Each and every recreational vehicle lot shall conform to the following standards:
(A) Provide a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum depth of forty (40) feet.
(B) Provide a recreational vehicle pad site which will provide a hard surface for the placement of one recreational vehicle. Minimum pad size shall be
eleven (11) feet in width and thirty-five (35) feet in depth. Pads shall be impervious to plant material.
(C) Setbacks.
(i) Back-in lots: Pads shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from the recreational vehicle side lot line and a minimum of five (5) feet from
the recreational vehicle rear lot line
(ii) Pull-through lots: Pads shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from the recreational vehicle side lot line.
(iii) All recreational vehicle pad sites shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any recreational vehicle park property line.
(D) Provide sewer, water and a minimum of 30 amp electrical hookups. One-half (1/2) of the lots shall be provided 50 amp electrical hookups.
(E) Abut and/or have access to a private street for a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet.
(F) Frontage on two private streets shall be permitted to allow for pull-throughs.
(G) Provide a minimum of one off-street parking space for each recreational vehicle site. One (1) common guest space shall be provided for every
three (3) RV sites. All parking spaces shall have a permanent all-weather surface and shall conform to the city off-street parking and driveway standards.
(H) No vehicular access to a recreational vehicle lot is permitted from a public dedicated street.
(4) Common park facilities. Common park facilities shall be provided so as to conform to the following standards:
(A) Usable open space. Usable open space shall be provided so as to conform to the following standards:
(i) Conveniently situated and containing a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet for the first fifteen (15) recreational vehicle lots or three
(3) acres in the recreational vehicle park; for each additional recreational vehicle lot over fifteen (15), twenty (20) additional square feet is required.
(ii) Such open space may be in one or more areas but shall be of such size and shape as to afford reasonable use by the occupants.
(iii) No portion of such required usable open space shall be used for off-street parking, vehicular drive loading areas or accessory uses, save and
except recreational uses such as swimming pools and tennis courts.
(B) Office. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of office space shall be provided to provide for the check-in/check-out of park patrons.
(C) Restrooms and showers. A minimum of two (2) men's and two (2) women's or four (4) unisex restrooms and showers shall be provided.
(Ordinance 06-070, sec. 2, adopted 10/24/06; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 16-056 adopted 10/25/16)
Sec. 24.06.009 Reasonable accommodation
It is the policy and practice of the city to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for persons with disabilities,
which allows for the modification or exception to the city's codes and regulations, to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for
individuals with disabilities. A review process exists to consider requests for reasonable accommodation in order to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities. The policy as adopted by Resolution No. 16-146 of the city is incorporated herein by reference to be used in conjunction with the purposes of this code.
(Ordinance 17-008, sec. 44, adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 24.06.010–24.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 24.06.041 Building permit required
No person shall erect or construct, or proceed with the erection or construction, add to, enlarge, improve, alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish any trailer park, type
“A” or “B,” trailer coach stand, building, structure, fence or any part thereof, or install any plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment as a part of the site, building or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/376
structure, or make any other improvements to any trailer coach lot “A” or “B” or cause the same to be done within a trailer park type “A” or “B” as defined herein without
obtaining a building permit from the building official; provided further, said building permit shall be granted only after a permit for a type “A” or “B” trailer park, as set
out in section 24.06.042, has been granted by the city council and that such conforms to the permit approved and/or granted by the city council and on file in the division
of planning and zoning. (1958 Code, sec. 38-4; 1978 Code, sec. 27-7; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 41, adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 24.06.042 Park permit required; conditions; fee
Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the building official, the city council shall approve a trailer park permit, “A” or “B” type. Application for a permit shall be
made in writing to the director of planning, signed, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, location and address of the trailer park, and legal description
of the property to be used for the trailer park and accompanied by a site plan and by the deposit of a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00); provided, however, the director
of planning shall reserve the right to refuse to examine any incomplete, unintelligible or indefinite drawings or plans, and such proposed trailer park type “A” or “B” plans
shall conform to the minimum standards as set out in sections 24.06.005 and 24.06.006. (1958 Code, sec. 38-3; 1978 Code, sec. 27-5; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 42, adopted
2/7/17)
Sec. 24.06.043 Revocation of type “A” trailer park permit
A trailer park permit type “A,” as issued by the city council, may be revoked or suspended by the building inspector for any period of time, after written notice to the
permit holder and upon a determination by him that:
(1) The permit holder, an employer or any employee of the permit holder has violated any provision of this article or any provision of chapter 28 of this code
relating to trailer parks, within sixty (60) days immediately preceding the date of revocation.
(2) The permit holder or owner of the trailer park for which the permit is issued is failing to comply and maintain said trailer park in compliance with the
requirements set forth in section 24.06.005 providing for certain minimum standards.
(3) The permit holder, an employer or any employee of the permit holder has refused to allow the director of health or any of his inspectors, the building
official or any of his inspectors, the chief of police, the chief of the fire department, or any of their authorized employees, or any other duly authorized
employee of the city, to enter upon the trailer park at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting same for compliance with the provisions of this article
and any other applicable city ordinance.
(1958 Code, sec. 38-8; 1978 Code, sec. 27-6; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 43, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 24.07 BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 24.07.001 Prohibiting unmarked or incorrect number
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a residence, business, house or other building in this city, or for any person who resides in a residence in this city, to
fail to number such building with a plain and visible house number, or to fail to number such building correctly, so that the number of the same conforms to the plan
adopted by the city.
(b) Proof of a culpable mental state, as defined in chapter 6 of the Texas Penal Code, is not required to prove a violation of this section.
(1958 Code, sec. 33-39; Ordinance 92-42, sec. 1, adopted 5/5/92; 1978 Code, sec. 23-2)
Sec. 24.07.002 Violation; penalty
Every person who violates the provisions of section 24.07.001 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code;
provided, however, that the court in its discretion may dismiss said violation if the defendant presents the court photographic or other compelling evidence that the
building has subsequently been brought into compliance with section 24.07.001. For each dismissal under this section, the court may assess a fee not to exceed ten dollars
($10.00). (1958 Code, sec. 33-40; Ordinance 92-42, sec. 1, adopted 5/5/92; 1978 Code, sec. 23-3; Ordinance 17-008, sec. 45, adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 24.08 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION IN HIGH WIND REGIONS
Sec. 24.08.001 Adoption
The 2014 edition ICC 600 Standard for Residential Construction in High Wind Regions is hereby adopted and declared operative in the city. A copy of such code is on
file in the office of the city clerk. (Ordinance 17-008, sec. 46, adopted 2/7/17)
CHAPTER 25
RESERVED
CHAPTER 26
SUBDIVISION AND SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 26.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 26.01.001 Title
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of Beaumont, Texas.” (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978
Code, sec. 24-1)
Sec. 26.01.002 Adoption of statutes authorizing the regulation of subdivisions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/376
The statutes of the state authorizing and empowering cities to regulate the platting and recording of subdivisions or additions situated within the corporate limits or within
five (5) miles of the corporate limits of such city, the same being chapter 231, Acts of the Regular Session of the 40th Legislature of Texas, 1927, such statutes Texas
Local Government Code, section 212.001 et seq. are hereby adopted for and on behalf of the city, and the city acting through its duly authorized officials shall have all the
rights, powers, privileges and authority authorized and granted by and through such statutes. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-2)
Sec. 26.01.003 Purpose
(a) The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of parcels in the community for residential, commercial and industrial
uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public purposes will determine to a large degree the conditions of health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in
the urban area. The quality of these conditions is of public interest. These regulations and standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make
provision for adequate light, air, open space, drainage, transportation, public utilities and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive,
planned, orderly and efficient community pursuant to the official comprehensive plan for the city.
(b) The goals of these regulations are as follows:
(1) To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality;
(2) To guide the future growth and development of the municipality, in accordance with the comprehensive plan;
(3) To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population;
(4) To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the municipality and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development
and redevelopment of all parts of the municipality;
(5) To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the municipality and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
(6) To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation, and other public requirements and facilities;
(7) To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines;
(8) To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and
to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land;
(9) To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;
(10) To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise
use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of
the land;
(11) To preserve the natural beauty and take into account the topography of the municipality and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these
natural features;
(12) To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for minimum
width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as established in the zoning ordinance of the municipality;
(13) To provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract
and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be done by the whole community;
(14) To ensure that street, utilities, and drainage improvements needed by the subdivision are actually installed.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-3)
Sec. 26.01.004 Jurisdiction
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, every owner of land situated within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, who causes the division of such
land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, parcels, units or fractional parts thereof, shall first prepare a plat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
description of such lots, building sites, units or interests by metes and bounds or by other reference in an instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction from the
provisions of this chapter. However, the addition of two (2) tracts or lots of land into one lot or parcel does not constitute a subdivision under these regulations.
(b) No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued nor shall connection or service with any city utilities, such as water and sewers, be permitted for any
lot, tract, parcel or premises which was created by subdivision after January 22, 1980, unless the subdivision was approved by the planning commission.
(c) No improvements shall be started until a preliminary plat has been approved by the planning commission, after which approval, improvements may be started in
accordance with the preliminary plat and with the approval of the city engineer of the final construction plans.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-4)
Sec. 26.01.005 Scope of provisions
These regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions, standards, and specifications contained in the building and housing codes, zoning
ordinance, comprehensive plan, official street and highway plan and other official plans of the city. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of any other city ordinance, rule or regulation or any other provisions of law, the more restrictive shall control and be reflected in the
plat. No plat showing a violation of a city ordinance, rule or regulation shall be approved. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-5)
Sec. 26.01.006 Definitions
(a) Usage. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular
number; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the word “lot” includes the word “parcel,” “plot,” or “tract”; the word “shall” is mandatory and not
discretionary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/376
(b) Definitions. In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and terms are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter:
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or corporate limits.
Comprehensive plan. Policies in graphic and textual form adopted by the city council to govern the future physical development of the city. Such plan may cover the
entire city and all of its functions and services, or may consist of a combination of plans governing specific geographic areas which together cover the entire city and all of
its functions and services.
Construction plans. The maps or construction drawings accompanying a subdivision plat that show the specific location and design of all required or proposed
improvements to be installed in the subdivision.
Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the area being subdivided.
Final plat. The map or drawing of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in these regulations, which, if approved by the planning commission, may
be submitted to the county clerk for filing.
Lot. An undivided tract, plot or parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer or ownership or for building development.
Lot orientation. The compass reading for a line drawn from a point midway between the side lot lines at the required front yard setback to a point midway between the
side lot lines at the required rear yard setback.
Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
Planning area. The planning area shall constitute an area beginning two (2) miles from corporate limits of the city and extending out an additional three (3) miles to the
boundary of the five (5) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Resubdivision. A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line.
Subdivider. Any person who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision.
Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or interests for the purpose of
offer, sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-6; Ordinance 16-006, sec. 1, adopted 2/2/16)
ARTICLE 26.02 PROCEDURE AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 26.02.001 Pre-application conference
The applicant should confer with the planning staff prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat and discuss the procedure for obtaining approval of a subdivision plat and
the requirements as to the general layout and arrangement of lots, blocks and streets, and minimum design and construction requirements for streets, storm drainage,
sewerage and water improvements. The planning staff shall also advise the applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must
eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction. At the request of the secretary of the planning commission, the subdivider shall
submit a master or tentative plan for all the contiguous property owned or intended for development by the subdivider as required by the secretary of the planning
commission. The plan shall show a proposed future street system and lot pattern sufficient for the secretary of the planning commission to review the proposed
development for general compliance with respect to surrounding land use, street connections, utilities, drainage facilities and park and open space needs. (Ordinance 83-
95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 1, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-7)
Sec. 26.02.002 Preliminary plat
(a) After the pre-application conference, the applicant shall file an application for approval of a preliminary plat on forms available at the office of the secretary to the
planning commission. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee and thirty (30) copies of the preliminary plat providing the following information:
(1) The title, or name, under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with the name and signature of the owner shown thereon. The title shall not
duplicate or be similar to the name of an existing subdivision or property. Written evidence of ownership, acceptable to the city attorney, shall be required in
order to identify ownership and various easements, conditions, restrictions, and covenants pertaining to the use of the land being subdivided.
(2) The meridian or north point.
(3) The scale of the map shall be shown and drawn on a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger.
(4) A key map embracing the area surrounding the proposed subdivision. On this key map the tract to be subdivided shall be indicated in a distinctive
manner.
(5) The location of existing streets, blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines, parks, watercourses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures, the
outline of wooded areas, and other natural features in the area affected, with principal dimensions, and all significant information in regard to property
immediately adjacent on all sides.
(6) The names or designations of existing streets or roads. The names or designations of all adjoining subdivisions and properties.
(7) Proposed plan of subdivision, showing streets, blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines, parks and other such areas, with principal dimensions. The
plan shall show how the streets and easements in the subdivision will connect with those in the surrounding subdivisions.
(8) The names of proposed streets. They shall conform with the names of any existing streets of which they may be or become extensions. They must not
duplicate or be similar to the recognized name of any other street located elsewhere in the community.
(9) The location of existing and proposed sewers, water and gas mains and other public utilities easements and improvements.
(10) The location of existing and proposed storm drainage easements and improvements. (A copy of all design computations shall be submitted along with
the plans.)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/376
(11) Topography is not usually required to be shown; however, if the surface is markedly uneven, the planning commission may require a contour map
showing contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet. Profiles of proposed streets and alleys may be required.
(12) The boundaries and flood elevations of all areas located in flood hazard areas as determined by the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) under the auspices of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(13) The location of all existing pipeline easements and information concerning the size of the pipe, type of product being transported and the pressure in the
pipeline.
(14) The name of the registered surveyor responsible for preparing the plat.
(15) A list of the proposed restrictive covenants, conditions, and limitations to govern the nature and use of the property being subdivided.
(b) The planning commission shall be required to act upon an application completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter within thirty (30) days from the
filing date. If the plat is disapproved, the planning commission shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons of such action. If said plat be not disapproved within
thirty (30) days from the filing date, it shall be deemed to have been approved by the planning commission. Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission
shall also constitute the conditional approval of the final plat subject to approval by the city engineer of all proposed improvement plans and a ministerial determination
by the secretary of the planning commission that the final plat is consistent with the approved preliminary plat and complies with all the requirements of this chapter.
(c) Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be valid for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval.
Failure to prepare a final plat and have it recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within twenty-four (24) months from the date of preliminary plat
approval shall result in the expiration of the previous approval.
(d) (1) Before the beginning of any construction on the proposed streets or public utilities pertaining to the subdivision, complete final construction plans
of such improvements in the form of plats, sketches or other satisfactory written description, certified by a registered professional engineer, shall be filed with
the city engineer. The subdivider shall submit with the construction drawings a development and review fee as specified in section 26.05.003 of this chapter.
These shall show such features as street cross-sections and longitudinal slope for drainage, full description of proposed pavement or street improvements,
dimensions and specifications for curbing, complete design and specification data concerning public utilities to be installed showing proposed position on the
ground, specifications of materials and construction, plan-profile maps of all water and sewerage lines and stormwater sewers or drainageways showing both
ground-surface and flow-line, and any other pertinent information of similar nature. If any part of the proposed construction is considered unsatisfactory by the
city engineer and below the standards required, construction operations shall not be started on the affected portion until alterations are made such that the
completed work shall conform to the official standard requirements of the city.
(2) Upon the completion of construction of any such utility or improvement, complete “as built” plans in detail, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in
charge, shall be filed with the city engineer showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, location, depth of elevation, numbers, ends of
lines, connections, wyes, valves, storm sewer drains, inlets and other such features. Connections with city utilities will not be allowed unless and until the
subdivider complies with this requirement.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 83-145, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/83; Ordinance 86-46, sec. 1, adopted 5/6/86; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 1, adopted
10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-8)
Sec. 26.02.003 Final plat
(a) After obtaining approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat and all construction plans by the city engineer, the applicant, if wishing to proceed with the
subdivision, shall file an application for approval of the final plat on forms available at the office of the secretary to the planning commission. The application shall be
accompanied by a filing fee with an original reproducible film, electronic file compatible with the Jefferson County Appraisal District's Geographic Information System
(GIS) computer files, and twenty-five (25) prints of the final plat. Patching and the pasting of paper attachments is not acceptable. All figures and lettering shall be neat
and easily legible. For final approval, the final plat must comply in all respects with the approved preliminary plat and provide the following information:
(1) The title, or name, by which the subdivision is to be identified, accompanied by at least a brief general description of the tract embraced; the meridian or
north point, and the scale of the map; the name of the surveyor, engineer or other person responsible for the surveys and the plat.
(2) A definite legal description and identification of the tract being subdivided, sufficient for the requirements of title examination. This may be embodied in
the title or shown elsewhere on the plat.
(3) The boundaries of the subdivided property referenced to the Texas State Plane Coordinate System shall be indicated on the map in a distinctive manner
with complete and accurate field notes of such boundaries; and, the location and designation of all streets, alleys and other areas intended to be dedicated to the
public use, with proper dimensions.
(4) The location of all adjacent streets and alleys, with their names, and the names of adjoining subdivisions.
(5) All block, lot and street boundary lines. Blocks and lots shall be numbered or lettered. House numbers shall be allocated to lots. Building lines and
easements shall be shown and shall be defined by dimensions. The actual width of all streets shall be shown, measured at right angles or radially, where
curved.
(6) All necessary dimensions, including linear, curvilinear and angular, shall be shown, and must be accurate. The linear and curvilinear dimensions shall be
expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. The angular dimensions may be shown by bearings. Curved boundaries must be fully described and all essential
information given, including the length of tangents, central angle of curve, and the chords and arcs of curve. Block corners, angle points, points of curve and
points of intersection of tangents shall be shown as permanently marked on the ground. Completed dimensional data shall be given on fractional lots or tracts.
(7) Benchmark elevations will be established on at least one block corner of each street intersection and in no case more than one thousand (1,000) feet from
any other benchmark. These elevations shall be clearly shown on the plat.
(8) The description and location of permanent survey reference monuments shall be shown. These shall be other than, and in addition to, markers set for
block or lot corners. They shall be located in suitable places throughout the subdivision and there shall be at least as many of them as there are blocks in the
subdivision, but not less than two (2) in the event there is only one block in the subdivision. The distance between successive monuments along any street or
reference line shall not be greater than one thousand (1,000) feet.
(9) A certificate of ownership in fee of all the land embraced in the subdivision or authenticity of the plat and dedication, including all properties intended
for public use, signed and acknowledged by all owners of any interest in such land and properties. Acknowledgement shall be in the form required in the
conveyance of real estate. Approval and acceptance by all lienholders shall be included. If all block corners have not been staked at the time such final plat is
submitted for final approval, the owner's certificate shall include a declaration and agreement that all such corners have been staked or have been contracted to
be staked.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/376
(10) A certificate by the responsible registered professional land surveyor in charge, duly authenticated, that the plat is drawn to scale, is true and correct and
in accordance with the determinations of surveys actually made on the ground. If all block corners in the subdivision have been staked at the time of final
approval, the surveyor's certificate shall so declare. The surveyor's certificate shall also state whether or not the tract is within five (5) miles of the city limits,
measured in a straight line between nearest points, unless this information is shown in suitable manner elsewhere on the face of the plat.
(11) All legal restrictions and requirements placed on the approval of the preliminary plat shall be indicated on the final plat.
(12) Certificates of approval to be signed by the chairman and secretary of the planning commission.
(13) The flood zones, boundaries and elevations of all areas located in flood hazard areas as determined by the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) provided
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall be shown on the final plat.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the secretary to the planning commission to promptly file the final plat with the county clerk. The applicant shall be responsible for
paying all recording fees and costs.
(c) A minor plat may be approved by the director of planning. The approved plat shall be signed by the secretary and chairman of the planning commission. A minor
plat is a final plat that consists of four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new streets or the extension of municipal
facilities. A minor plat shall comply with all the regulations of the subdivision and the zoning ordinances. The director of planning may, for any reason, elect to present
the plat to the planning commission to approve the plat. The planning director shall not disapprove a minor plat, but shall refer any plat which he refuses to approve to the
planning commission within thirty (30) days of submission of the plat in his office.
(d) The planning and zoning commission shall act on a plat within thirty (30) days after the date the plat is filed. If the planning and zoning commission fails to act on
the plat within the prescribed period, the planning and zoning commission on request shall issue a certificate stating the date the plat was filed and that the planning and
zoning commission failed to act on the plat within the thirty-day period. The certificate is effective in place of the endorsement required for the filing of the plat.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 83-145, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/83; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 1, adopted 10/8/91; Ordinance 92-55, sec. 1, adopted
7/28/92; 1978 Code, sec. 24-9)
Sec. 26.02.004 Vacation of plats, replats and resubdivisions
(a) Any such plan, plat or replat may be vacated by the proprietors of the land covered thereby at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written instrument
declaring the same to be vacated, duly executed, acknowledged and recorded in the same office as the plat to be vacated, provided the approval of the planning
commission shall have been obtained as above provided, and the execution and recordation of the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording
of the plan, plat or replat so vacated. In cases where lots have been sold, the plan, plat or replat, or any part thereof, may be vacated upon the application of all the owners
of lots in said plat and with the approval, as above provided, of the planning commission. The county clerk of the county in whose office the plan or plat thus vacated has
been recorded shall write in plain, legible letters across the plan or plat so vacated the word “vacated,” and also make a reference on the same to the volume and page in
which said instrument of vacation is recorded.
(b) In the event there is not compliance with subsection (a) of this section, a replat or resubdivision of a plat, or a portion thereof, without vacation of the previous plat,
is hereby expressly authorized to be recorded and shall be deemed valid and controlling, when approved, after a public hearing by the planning commission when:
(1) It has been signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the particular property which is being resubdivided or replatted;
(2) It has been approved by the planning commission or other appropriate governing body, as the case may be, after a public hearing in relation thereto at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard;
(3) It does not attempt to alter, amend, or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(4) There is compliance, when applicable, with subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(c) The following additional requirements for approval shall apply in any resubdivision or replatting of a subdivision, without vacating the immediate previous plat, if
any of the proposed area to be resubdivided or replatted was within the immediately preceding five (5) years limited by any interim or permanent zoning classification to
residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot, or if any lot in the immediate previous subdivision was limited by deed restriction to residential use for
not more than two (2) residential units per lot.
(1) Notice of such planning commission hearing shall be given in advance in the following manner:
(A) Publication at least fifteen (15) days in advance of hearing being published in a paper of general circulation in the city; and
(B) Written notice, with a copy of section 26.02.004(c)(2) attached to the notice of such hearing forwarded by the planning commission to owners (as
the ownerships appear on the current tax roll of the city) or, if the replat is in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, then the most recently approved county
tax roll of all lots in the immediately preceding subdivision plat within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed replat not less than fifteen (15) days prior
to the date of such hearing; such notice is considered served when it is deposited, properly addressed and postage paid, in a post office or postal
depository within the boundaries of the city.
(2) If the proposed replat is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at
least three-fourths of all members of the planning commission. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of
the area of the lots or land, including streets and alleys, immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending two hundred (200) feet
from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the secretary of the planning commission prior to the close of the public hearing.
(3) Provided, however, compliance with subsection (1) or (2) of this subsection shall not be required for approval of a replatting or resubdividing of a
portion of a prior plat if all of the proposed area sought to be replatted or resubdivided was designated or reserved for usage other than for single or duplex
family residential usage by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to such plat.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the planning commission is authorized to approve and issue an amending plat which is signed by the applicants
only, and which is for one or more of the purposes set forth in the following subsections (1) through (9), inclusive, and such approval and issuance shall not require notice,
hearing, or approval of other lot owners. This subsection shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is:
(1) To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior plat;
(2) To add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat;
(3) To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/376
(4) To indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting
monuments;
(5) To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown at the wrong
location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat;
(6) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by the planning commission; such errors and omissions may
include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application of plat amendment
and neither lot is abolished, provided that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a materially
adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
(8) To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement;
(9) To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots where the owner or owners of all such lots join in the application for the plat
amendment, provided that such amendment does not:
(A) Attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; or
(B) Increase the number of lots.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 85-113, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/85; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 1, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-10)
State law reference–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014.
Sec. 26.02.005 Acceptance of dedication offers
Acceptance of offer of dedication of streets, utilities, public areas and parks shall be by action of the city council. The approval by the planning commission of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city of any street or utility easements or improvements shown on said plat. (Ordinance
83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-11)
ARTICLE 26.03 GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND SPECIFIC DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 26.03.001 General design principles
The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the design quality of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design requires the
coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of land within the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in accordance with
the design principles, concepts and standards in the comprehensive plan document which includes the land use element, transportation elements, community facilities
element and utilities element as approved by the city and on file in the office of the city clerk, and in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Neighborhood unit concept. It is intended that the urban area shall be designed as a group of integrated residential neighborhoods with appropriate
activity centers and corridors and industrial areas. The following design principles are central to the neighborhood unit concept:
(A) Arterial streets are routed around the perimeter of the neighborhood.
(B) Collector streets should disperse local traffic to arterial streets without bisecting the neighborhood. Collector streets should be designed so as to
discourage their use as crosstown, arterial streets.
(C) Children can walk to school and play areas through pedestrian ways or open space corridors separated from streets and the hazards of moving
automobiles.
(D) Residential streets should provide good access to residential units, but should be planned so that they will not be used as through-traffic routes.
Cul-de-sacs, curved street layouts, and light-duty surfacing should be used to promote low traffic volumes and preservation of residential character.
(E) The elementary school and neighborhood park and playground should be located in the center of the residential area while major streets are routed
along the perimeter. Each family should be within one-half mile of the neighborhood center.
(F) Public buildings and multifamily dwellings are located so as to form a buffer between the more intense activity of the shopping center and the quiet
atmosphere of the single-family residential areas.
(G) The neighborhood shopping center is located on arterial streets. This gives good access both from within and outside of the neighborhood.
Residents of other areas can reach the shopping center without traveling through the neighborhood.
(2) Physical conditions. The arrangement of lots and blocks and the street system should be designed to make the most advantageous use of topography, and
natural physical features. Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The system of streets and sidewalks, and the layout and arrangement of
blocks and lots should be designed to take advantage of the natural and scenic qualities of the area. Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable
for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, adverse earth formations, utility or pipeline easements or other features which will
reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision or its surroundings, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission that will solve the problems
created by the unsuitable land conditions.
(3) The following general design requirements ensure that the proposed subdivision is coordinated with its immediate neighbors with respect to land use,
street connections, utilities, drainage facilities and the possible dedication of parks and open spaces:
(A) When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots, such lots shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of
future streets and possible resubdivision of lots with provisions for adequate utility easements and connections.
(B) When the plat to be submitted includes only part of the contiguous property owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan
of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.
(C) The subdivision plat shall provide for the logical extension of abutting and proposed utilities and drainage easements and improvements in order to
provide for system continuity and to promote future development of adjacent areas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/376
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-12)
Sec. 26.03.002 Streets
The arrangement, classification, character, extent, width, grade and location of all public and private streets shall conform to the major street and highway plan, the
official street construction standards and the official street construction specifications of the city and shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The subdivider shall be required to dedicate appropriate right-of-way for major arterial streets required within or abutting said subdivision in accordance
with the street and highway plan. The right-of-way required for major arterial streets shall be from eighty (80) feet to one hundred twenty (120) feet in width as
may be required. The pavement width of arterial streets shall be forty-four (44) feet to one hundred (100) feet from face to face of curb including
channelization and storage lanes as may be appropriate.
(2) The subdivider shall be required to dedicate appropriate right-of-way for minor arterial streets required within or abutting said subdivision in accordance
with the street and highway plan. The right-of-way required for arterial streets shall be from sixty (60) feet to ninety (90) feet in width as may be required. The
pavement width of arterial streets shall be thirty-six (36) feet to sixty (60) feet from face to face of curb including channelization and storage lanes as may be
appropriate.
(3) Industrial streets, as required, shall be constructed by the subdivider. The right-of-way required for industrial streets shall be a minimum of seventy (70)
feet in width. The pavement width of industrial streets shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from face to face of curb. The city will pay the difference in pipe
size costs when a larger storm sewer pipe than adequate for a particular subdivision is required by the city.
(4) Collector streets and minor collector streets shall be constructed in new subdivisions by the subdivider. A street serving more than sixty-four (64), but
less than four hundred fifty (450) dwelling units, shall be a minor collector street with a right-of-way of no less than sixty (60) feet and a thirty-six-foot face of
curb to face of curb pavement. A street serving more than four hundred fifty (450) dwelling units shall provide access to an arterial as a collector street with a
minimum right-of-way of sixty-five (65) feet and a pavement of forty-five (45) feet face of curb to face of curb. Collector streets should not be developed with
direct driveway access or parking. The city will pay the increase in cost when a larger storm sewer pipe than adequate for a particular subdivision is required
by the city. The increase in cost for a larger pipe will be calculated by determining the increase in pipe cost and multiplying by two (2).
(5) Residential streets shall be constructed in new subdivisions by the subdivider. The right-of-way required for residential streets shall be fifty (50) feet in
width. Pavement width shall be twenty-six (26) feet from face to face of curb. A single outlet residential street shall serve no more than thirty-two dwelling
units. A double outlet residential street, such as a loop configuration, shall serve no more than sixty-four (64) dwelling units. The city will pay the increase in
cost when a larger storm sewer pipe than adequate for a particular subdivision is required by the city. Increase in cost for a larger pipe will be calculated by
determining the increase in pipe cost and multiplying by two (2). Roll-type curbs are allowed.
(6) Minor residential streets shall be constructed in new subdivisions by the subdivider. The right-of-way required for minor residential streets shall be forty
(40) feet in width. Pavement width shall be twenty (20) feet from face to face of curb. Minor residential streets are either cul-de-sac streets servicing less than
fifteen (15) dwelling units or one-way loop streets with no on-street parking that service less than twenty (20) dwelling units. The city will pay the increase in
cost when a larger storm sewer pipe than adequate for a particular subdivision is required by the city. Increase in cost for a larger pipe will be calculated by
determining the increase in pipe cost and multiplying by two (2). Roll-type curbs are allowed.
(7) Offsets in street alignment shall be avoided. When a subdivision street is intersected by two (2) other subdivision streets, the intersecting streets should
form a four-leg intersection or two (2) three-leg intersections offset at their centers by at least one hundred fifty (150) feet. In the case of two (2) collector or
arterial street intersections, a larger street offset may be required to allow for left turn storage between intersections. Intersections of five (5) or more
approaches shall be avoided. The preferred angle of intersection of intersection streets is ninety (90) degrees. Acute angles between streets in subdivisions at
their intersection shall be avoided; provided, that when intersecting angles sharper than eighty (80) degrees are deemed necessary by the city, the property line
in the small angle of the intersection shall be rounded, or otherwise located, so as to permit the construction of curbs having a radius of not less than twentyfive
(25) feet without decreasing the normal width of the sidewalk area.
(8) (A) A cul-de-sac shall be no more than eight hundred (800) feet long, unless topography, density, adequate circulation, or other unusual
conditions necessitate a greater length, and shall terminate at a circle with a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet and a pavement radius of
thirty-three (33) feet back to back of curb.
(B) When the planning commission determines that there is a reasonable expectation that a dead-end street will be extended within two (2) years,
construction of a temporary cul-de-sac may be approved. The planning commission may waive temporary cul-de-sac requirements for dead-end streets
when the street is less than two hundred (200) feet in length. The portion of the temporary cul-de-sac which will serve as an extension of the street shall
be constructed in accordance with the city standards and that additional portion of the temporary cul-de-sac shall be in accordance with the city standards
for a permanent cul-de-sac or a cement stabilized base with an asphaltic concrete surface. The pavement radius shall be twenty-five (25) feet within a
fifty-foot right-of-way (in fee or easement). No parking shall be allowed on a street terminating with a temporary cul-de-sac. No curb shall be required on
a temporary cul-de-sac.
(C) If the street extension is not under construction within two (2) years of the date of city acceptance of the dead-end street on which a temporary culde-
sac was permitted, then the developer shall construct a permanent cul-de-sac in accordance with city standards within six (6) months of the end of the
two-year period.
(D) When the street is extended, the developer shall remove the temporary portion of the cul-de-sac and install curbs and other improvements
necessary to conform with city standards. Driveways shall be extended from the existing driveways to connect to the street after the extension.
(9) Where a residential subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission shall require that access to such
streets be limited by:
(A) The subdivision of lots so as to back into the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street with a non-access reservation strip along the rear
property line to prevent access from the arterial;
(B) Providing a series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped local streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to a parallel street, with
the rear lot lines of their terminal lots backing into the arterial street.
(10) Residential and minor residential streets should be designed so that at least eighty (80) percent of the buildings in the subdivision can be oriented on
streets parallel to nine (9) degrees south of west, with a possible variation to six (6) degrees north of west, or to twenty-five (25) degrees south of west.
Exceptions to this required orientation may be granted when it is shown that strict compliance is infeasible due to the size, configuration, or orientation of the
property, the nature of surrounding development, circulation patterns, improved design or existing physical features of the site.
(11) Rural streets may be provided in neighborhoods zoned Agricultural-Residential (A-R) or outside the city limits, but within our extraterritorial
jurisdiction with lots conforming to the A-R District. A single outlet rural street shall serve no more than twenty-four (24) dwelling units and may be eight
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/376
hundred (800) feet long as a cul-de-sac. A rural street shall have a sixty-foot right-of-way with a twenty (20) foot concrete pavement. Curbs are not required
and open roadside ditches may be used for drainage. No parking shall be allowed along a rural street right-of-way. Streetlights shall be at each street
intersection, but may be spaced at an average of six hundred (600) feet between intersections.
(12) For subdivisions located within the planning area, as defined herein, street design, construction and acceptance shall be in accordance with the
standards set forth in the Jefferson County Subdivision and Development Regulations and approved by the county engineer. Curbs are not required and open
roadside ditches may be used for drainage.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 84-167, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/84; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-13; Ordinance 16-
006, sec. 2, adopted 2/2/16)
Sec. 26.03.003 Alleys
The minimum width of any alley shall be twenty (20) feet, except that where both sides abut residential property a fifteen-foot alley may be used, with an easement and
building line on both sides of at least two and one-half (2-1/2) [feet] and a five-foot cutoff at all acute corners. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 91-
83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-14)
Sec. 26.03.004 Sidewalks
A certificate of occupancy and/or compliance for a lot shall not be issued until the sidewalk requirements for that lot are met. When platting, sidewalks shall be installed
prior to the final building inspection. If the lot is not developed within five (5) years of the recordation of the final plat, the current property owner shall construct the
sidewalk. A building permit includes the construction of any sidewalk that may be required for that lot. Sidewalks shall be constructed under the following conditions:
(1) Residential.
(A) To complete an existing sidewalk system.
(B) Within new subdivisions.
(C) On all arterial and collector streets.
(D) On all “safe school routes.” “Safe school routes” shall be those which have been developed and designated by the planning and zoning commission
with necessary assistance from the transportation division and appropriate affected school authorities.
(E) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet if built a minimum distance of two (2) feet from the back of the curb. Sidewalks constructed
at the back of the curb shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet.
(2) Commercial and industrial.
(A) To complete an existing sidewalk system.
(B) Within new subdivisions.
(C) On all arterial and collector streets.
(D) On all “safe school routes.” “Safe school routes” shall be those which have been developed and designated by the planning and zoning commission
with necessary assistance from the transportation division and appropriate affected school authorities.
(E) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet.
(3) The planning and zoning commission may grant a waiver to the sidewalk requirement if the applicant can prove that there is an engineering reason for
not installing a sidewalk.
(4) For subdivisions located within the planning area, as defined herein, sidewalks shall not be required.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-15; Ordinance 10-050, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/10; Ordinance 12-
074, secs. 1–3, adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 16-006, sec. 3, adopted 2/2/16)
Sec. 26.03.005 Easements
(a) Minimum utility easements of between ten (10) and twenty (20) feet shall be provided along rear and side lot lines when necessary for use by public and private
utilities. Provided, however, that the planning commission may require easements of greater widths for the extension of main storm sewers, water lines or sanitary sewers
and other utilities when it is deemed necessary.
(b) Minimum drainage easements shall be required when a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel, stream or underground conduits. Minimum
easements shall be adequate to provide for the drainage requirements as determined by the city engineer or any local drainage districts.
(c) Utility easements should be laid out with the following widths and locational order for each facility.
(1) A twenty-foot perimeter easement beginning at the property line; the phone line should be offset three and one-half (3-1/2) feet, the electrical lines offset
seven (7) feet and the poles nine (9) feet, the sanitary sewer offset thirteen (13) feet, the cable television offset sixteen (16) feet and gas line offset at eighteen
(18) feet.
(2) For a twenty-foot back-to-back easement beginning at the north or east line of the easement, the phone line should be offset two (2) feet, the electrical
lines offset five (5) feet and the poles seven (7) feet, the sanitary sewer line offset twelve (12) feet, the gas line offset sixteen (16) feet, and the cable television
line offset eighteen (18) feet.
(3) For a street right-of-way utility layout the storm sewer should be one and one-half feet behind the curb, the gas line five (5) feet, the sanitary sewer seven
(7) feet with the water line on the other side of the right-of-way, electrical lines ten (10) feet, cable television twelve (12) feet and telephone at fourteen (14)
feet. A five-foot utility easement adjacent to both sides of the right-of-way is required.
(4) All utilities placed underground shall be at a depth of not less than twenty-four (24) inches measured from top of curb or pavement.
(5) Storm sewers shall be located within a dedicated right-of-way or a dedicated storm sewer easement, but not within a utility easement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/376
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/84; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-16)
Sec. 26.03.006 Blocks
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following:
(1) Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Exceptions to this standard shall
be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways.
(2) Maximum block lengths for residential use should not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. Wherever practical, blocks along arterials should
not be less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-17)
Sec. 26.03.007 Lots
(a) Minimum width, depth and area. Lots shall have a minimum width, depth and area of not less than that required by the zoning ordinance for the zoning district in
which the lots are located. All lots shall abut a public or private street and shall abut the street no less than the required lot width for that lot with the exception of cul-desacs
which shall have no less than twenty-five (25) feet of frontage. Minimum lot widths within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall be based on proposed use
corresponding to the zoning requirements if developed within the city limits. Provided, however, that corner lots in RS, Residential Single-Family Dwelling Districts,
shall have a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet. Side lot lines should state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon the applicant [sic].
(b) Exception for lot splits; exemptions from preliminary plat requirements; appeals.
(1) Exceptions for lot splits. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the resubdivision of industrial lots or commercial lots when four (4) or fewer
lots are involved and the resulting lots meet all the minimum lot area, width, and depth requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(2) Exemptions from preliminary plat requirements. A preliminary plat shall not be required for the subdivision or resubdivision of a tract of land provided
the following conditions exist or have been met:
(A) Each block and subdivided lot fronts upon a dedicated street or a private street or drive previously approved by the planning commission;
(B) Provisions have been made for all utilities, easements, and improvements required to serve each block and lot in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter;
(C) The resulting lots meet the minimum lot area, width, depth and yard regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located; and
(D) Existing buildings and structures located on the lots are in compliance with the firewall regulations of the building code.
Applicants using this exemption from preliminary plat requirements must submit and obtain approval from the planning commission for the final
plat. Final plats accompanied by written evidence from the various utility agencies and departments that all drainage and utilities easements and
improvements are satisfactory shall be submitted not less than three (3) working days prior to the planning commission meeting at which
consideration is requested.
(3) Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the secretary of the planning commission involving the
administration, interpretation and enforcement of this section, may appeal the decision to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be made by filing an
application setting forth that such decision was improper in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds for the alleged impropriety.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 2, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-18)
Sec. 26.03.008 Streetlights
(a) Streetlights are required in all subdivisions developed after the effective date of this chapter, consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The minimum capacity of residential luminaires shall be one hundred (100) watt high pressure sodium (8,500 lumens) or an approved equal.
(2) Streetlights shall be installed at all intersections and at additional locations not less than two hundred (200) feet apart. Locations shall be designated so as
to provide an average separation of approximately two hundred fifty (250) feet. Variations shall occur only where lot widths and/or other conditions
necessitate.
(3) The subdivider, in cooperation with Gulf States Utilities Company, shall designate proposed streetlight locations on the preliminary plat.
(4) The director of transportation shall approve streetlight locations and may require relocation of designated streetlights and/or addition or deletion of
streetlights.
(b) All costs associated with the construction and installation of streetlights in subdivisions developed after the effective date of this chapter shall be paid by the
subdivider. Payment of said costs shall be a prerequisite to approval of the final plat of the subdivision.
(c) Upon installation and acceptance of any public streetlight at a location established in accordance with the above guidelines, the city shall assume the monthly power
and maintenance cost charges set in the current rate schedule.
(d) For subdivisions located within the planning area, as defined herein, streetlights shall not be required.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-19; Ordinance 16-006, sec. 4, adopted 2/2/16)
Sec. 26.03.009 House numbers
House numbers will be allocated to lots. The house numbers will be coordinated with the master plan of house numbering within the city limits; i.e., one house number to
be allocated for each twenty-foot strip of lot width, the even numbers on one side of the street beginning with ten (10) and the odd numbers on the other side of the street
beginning with five (5). (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-20)
Sec. 26.03.010 Street monuments, survey monuments and lot markers
(a) Concrete monuments, eight (8) inches in diameter by thirty (30) inches long, shall be placed at all corners of boundary lines and at curve points and angle points of a
subdivision, and in any case, not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart. The exact intersection point on the monument shall be marked by a copper pin one-fourth of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/376
an inch in diameter embedded at least three (3) inches in the monument. The top of the monument shall be placed flush with the natural ground or in the event grading is
required it shall be placed flush with the finished grade.
(b) The description and location of permanent survey reference monuments shall be shown. These shall be other than, and in addition to, markers set for block or lot
corners. They shall be of concrete, of the same type as street monuments, and wherever practical, they shall be set so that the top of the monuments will be not less than
twelve (12) inches below the ground surface after contemplated improvements are completed.
(c) Lot markers shall be metal, concrete or other reasonably permanent material and shall be placed flush with the ground, or countersunk, if necessary, in order to
avoid being disturbed.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9-13-83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-21)
Sec. 26.03.011 Water and sanitary sewers
Utility easements and water and sewer facilities shall be provided by the subdivider in accordance with the standards and specifications for minimum water and sanitary
sewer requirements on file in the office of the water utilities director for the city. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-22)
Sec. 26.03.012 Drainage and storm sewers
The subdivider shall provide for all stormwater easements and improvements in accordance with the plans approved by the city engineer. Such plans shall be identical to
the plans which were submitted for purposes of approval of the preliminary and final plat. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-23)
Sec. 26.03.013 Shade trees in single-family residential districts
As a requirement of subdivision approval, the subdivider shall plant or retain one (1) shade tree in the required front yard of each lot. Acceptable shade trees shall include
oaks, pines, Chinese tallows, elms, ginkgos (male preferred), sycamore, or other similar native shade tree species. Such trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height
immediately upon planting and have a two (2) inch caliper measured eighteen (18) inches from the ground. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec.
24-24)
ARTICLE 26.04 ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 26.04.001 Completion of improvements
Before the final plat is signed by the chairman of the planning commission and filed by the secretary of the planning commission, the subdivider shall complete, in a
manner satisfactory to the city engineer, all improvements required in these regulations as approved by the planning commission. Final plat approval and recordation shall
not be granted until the subdivider has dedicated by instrument on the plat all public easements, property, and improvements, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances,
and they have been accepted by the city council. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-25)
Sec. 26.04.002 Alternatives to completion of improvements
In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements, except sidewalks (see subsection (5) below), prior to the approval and the recording of the final plat, the city
manager or his designee may, at his discretion, enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall provide one of the following guarantees:
(1) The applicant shall post cash, a payment or performance bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city in an amount equal to one hundred
thirty (130) percent of the estimated cost. This amount shall include the city's cost of administering the completion of the improvement in the event the
subdivider defaults as provided herein. The security shall be deposited with the city or in escrow with a bank at the option of the city. Such bond or letter of
credit shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in
these regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the city manager or his designee and shall be
incorporated in the bond or letter of credit. In those cases where a bond or letter of credit has been posted and the required improvements have not been
installed within the terms of the bond or letter of credit, the government body may thereupon declare the bond or letter of credit in default and require that all
of the improvements be installed.
(2) If a bank escrow is chosen, or if a letter of credit is submitted, the subdivider shall file with the city an agreement between the bank and the subdivider
guaranteeing the following:
(A) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security
in any other matter during that period; and
(B) That in the case of a default on the part of the subdivider, the bank shall immediately make the escrowed funds available to the city for use in the
completion of the required improvements.
(3) In those cases where improvement guarantees have been made under the provisions of this section, the amount of the required guarantee may be reduced
by the city manager upon acceptance of the dedicated portion of the required improvements. The amount of the reduction shall not exceed the percentage
which the newly accepted improvements are of all originally required improvements. In no case, however, shall the guarantee be reduced to less than fifteen
(15) percent of the original amount. Upon acceptance of the dedication of the final portion of improvements, the city shall authorize the release of the
remaining portion of the improvement guarantee.
(4) Connections to city utilities shall not occur until all improvements, except for sidewalks, have been accepted by the city and the final plat has been
approved and recorded.
(5) On collector and higher classification streets, except for residential streets, sidewalks are required prior to the approval and recordation of the final plat.
On non-major streets, in lieu of requiring sidewalks prior to the approval and recording of the final plat, the subdivider will place a note on the plat that
sidewalks are required prior to the final building inspection and will deed restrict each lot requiring the owner of each lot to construct the sidewalk prior to the
completion of the structure and the final building inspection. At all street intersections, sidewalk ramps will be built to meet ADA requirements prior to the
approval and recordation of the final plat.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; Ordinance 92-56, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/92; Ordinance 00-76, sec. 1, adopted 9/5/00; 1978 Code, sec. 24-26; Ordinance 12-074,
secs. 4–6, adopted 9/25/12)
Sec. 26.04.003 Deferral of waiver of required improvements
(a) The planning commission may defer, reduce or waive at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such improvements
as, in its judgment, are not necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of
connecting facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/376
(b) Whenever it is deemed necessary by the planning commission to defer the construction of any improvements required herein because of incompatible grades, future
planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements prior to approval and
recording of the final plat. In lieu of a cash payment, the subdivider may use one of the other improvement guarantees set forth in section 26.04.001 [26.04.002].
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-27)
ARTICLE 26.05 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 26.05.001 Enforcement, violations and penalties, and civil remedies
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designate.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation or entity that violates or assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Each day such a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city attorney is authorized to institute any civil action in the appropriate court upon the prior approval of the
city manager.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-29)
Sec. 26.05.002 Variances, exceptions and appeals
(a) (1) Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations
or that public interest may be served by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured provided that such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the general intent and purpose of these regulations; and
further provided that the planning commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that:
(A) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property.
(B) The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property.
(C) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict terms of these regulations are enforced.
(D) The variance will not in any significant way vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance, zoning map, or comprehensive plan.
(2) In approving variances, the planning commission may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards
or requirements of these regulations.
(3) A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the
planning commission or when a final plat is filed for consideration of the planning commission under the terms of this chapter. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon the applicant.
(b) (1) Exemptions for lot splits. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the resubdivision of industrial lots, commercial lots, multiple-family
lots (or portions of such lots), or condominium or “townhouse” regimes in subdivisions legally platted and filed for record in Jefferson County when the
resulting lots meet all the minimum lot area, width and depth requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(2) Exemptions from preliminary plat requirements. A preliminary plat shall not be required for the subdivision or resubdivision of a tract of land provided
the following conditions exist or have been met:
(A) Each block and subdivided lot fronts upon a dedicated street or a private street or drive previously approved by the planning commission;
(B) Provisions have been made for all utilities, easements, and improvements, required to serve each block and lot in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter;
(C) The resulting lots meet the minimum lot area, width, depth and yard regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located; and
(D) Existing buildings and structures located on the lots are in compliance with the firewall regulations of the building code.
Applicants using this exemption from the preliminary plat requirements must submit and obtain approval from the planning commission for the
final plat. Final plats accompanied by written evidence from the various utility agencies and departments that all drainage and utilities easements
and improvements are satisfactory shall be submitted not less than three (3) working days prior to the planning commission meeting at which
consideration is requested.
(3) Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the secretary of the planning commission involving the
administration, interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, may appeal the decision to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be made by filing an
application setting forth that such decision was improper in whole or in part and specifying the grounds for the alleged impropriety.
(Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/83; 1978 Code, sec. 24-30; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 26.05.003 Application fees
An application processing fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid at the time of the filing of an application for preliminary final plat, replat, or vacation of a
plat. An application processing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid at the time of filing of an application for a minor or amended plat. For
resubdivision or replats involving advertising and public notification of surrounding property owners, an additional application processing fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00) shall be paid at the time of the filing of the application. When construction is required, such as on a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall pay a development
review fee equal to two (2) percent of estimated construction cost at the time construction drawings are submitted to the city engineer for approval or a registered
professional engineer shall certify to the city that the development has been built according to the approved construction drawings and city standards after the completion
of construction. (Ordinance 83-95, sec. 2, adopted 9/13/88; Ordinance 91-83, sec. 3, adopted 10/8/91; 1978 Code, sec. 24-31)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/376
CHAPTER 27
RESERVED
CHAPTER 28
ZONING
ARTICLE 28.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 28.01.001 Title
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beaumont, Texas.” (Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978
Code, sec. 30-1)
Sec. 28.01.002 Adoption of statutes authorizing zoning ordinances
The statutes of the state authorizing and empowering cities to zone their cities and regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other
structures; the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; and in the case of designated places and areas of historical and cultural importance, to regulate and
restrict the construction, alteration, reconstruction or razing of buildings and other structures; and authorizing and empowering the local legislative body to divide the
municipality into districts of such numbers, shapes and areas as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes set out in such statutes, and within such districts to
regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land, the same being chapter 211 Local Government Code
are hereby adopted for and on behalf of the city; and the city, acting through its duly authorized officials, shall have all of the rights, powers, privileges and authority
authorized and granted by and through such statutes. (Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-2)
Sec. 28.01.003 Purpose
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community,
and for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical and cultural importance and significance. The zoning regulations and districts have been made in
accordance with a comprehensive plan and are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of lands; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools,
parks and other public requirements. The zoning regulations and districts have been made with reasonable consideration of the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for the particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-3)
Sec. 28.01.004 Definitions
(a) Interchange. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the
singular number; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the word “lot” includes the words “parcel,” “plot,” or “tract”; the word “shall” is mandatory and not
discretionary.
(b) Definitions. In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and terms are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter:
Accessory building. A subordinate building, located on the same lot as the main building, or a portion of the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with the main building or principal use of the land.
Accessory use. A use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal use of the premises and which is located on the same lot as the
principal use.
Adult bookstore. Any establishment which has as a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or periodicals that contain material which, under the Penal
Code of the state, may not be displayed or sold to a minor unless such minor is accompanied by a consenting parent, guardian or spouse.
Adult motion picture theater. Any establishment in which motion pictures, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and which regularly, under the Penal
Code of the state, excludes minors by virtue of age, unless such minor is accompanied by a consenting parent, guardian, or spouse.
Apartment house. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three (3) or more separate dwelling units which may share
means of egress and other essential facilities.
Brewpub. A retail establishment that manufactures, brews, bottles, cans, packages and labels malt liquor, ale and beer for sale or offer without charge, on the premises of
the brewpub, to ultimate consumers for consumption on or off those premises, malt liquor, ale or beer produced by the holder, in or from a lawful container, to the extent
the sales or offers are allowed under the holder's other permits and licenses and where food is sold on the premises of the brewpub as an accessory use.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
Building height. The vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries
when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Certificate of occupancy. An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and authorizes
legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
City council. The governing and legislative body of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/376
City manager. The chief administrative officer of the city, or his designee.
Cluster housing development. A residential development containing attached or detached units on a limited portion of land with the remaining land areas consolidated into
common open space areas.
Commission. The “planning and zoning commission” of the city.
Community home. A residential home for no more than six (6) disabled persons and two (2) staff persons and meeting all of the requirements of Vernon's Code Annotated,
Human Resources Code, Chapter 123.
Comprehensive plan. Graphic and textual form policies which govern the future development of the city and which consists of various components governing specific
geographic areas and functions and services of the city.
Digital billboard. An off-premise advertising sign displaying digital static images controlled by electronic communications.
District or classification. A section of the city within which regulations governing the area or use of land and buildings apply under this chapter.
Dwelling, multiple-family. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or intended to be occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units or
apartments and which includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Dwelling, single-family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one (1) family. Only one (1) single-family dwelling shall be
permitted as a primary use on a lot or parcel of land.
Dwelling, two-family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than two (2) families. In calculating minimum lot area, a two-family
dwelling shall be considered to be two (2) dwelling units.
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters for one family.
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than three (3) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or
adoption.
Floor area, gross. The total floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level.
Floor area, net. The area actually occupied not including accessory unoccupied areas such as corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, toilet room,
mechanical area or other features.
Garage sale. Sale of used household or personal articles such as furniture, tools, or clothing held on the seller's premises. Yard sales, sidewalk sales, rummage sales, estate
sales and similar activities are considered garage sales and are classified under Used Merchandise Stores, SIC Group #593.
Group residential care facility. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of residential social and personal care for persons with some limits on ability for selfcare,
but where medical care is not a major element. These establishments are listed in the U.S. Office of Management and Budget's Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) Manual as Industry, #8361.
Heliport. Any area which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant area including buildings or other facilities for
activities such as refueling, parking, storage, maintenance and repair of helicopters.
Helistop. An area used, or intended for use, for the landing, boarding and takeoff of helicopters, which does not have facilities for such activities as refueling, storage,
maintenance or repair of helicopters.
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity conducted within a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling
purposes; provided that:
(1) No retail business of any sort is involved;
(2) No stock in trade is kept nor commodities sold except those made or used on the premises;
(3) Only members of the family residing on the premises are employed;
(4) No internal or external alterations, special construction, or features are involved;
(5) There is no on-premise advertising or any other display or storage of materials or exterior identification of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the main building or any accessory buildings;
(6) No equipment is used which creates offensive noises, vibrations, sound, smoke or dust, odors, heat, glare, X-ray or electrical disturbance to radio or
television. In particular, a home occupation includes the following and similar uses: artist's studio; dressmaking and millinery; limited professional practice
provided no clients or customers are permitted on the premises (such as lawyer, engineer, architect, or accountant); music teaching limited to not more than two
(2) pupils at one time; the keeping of up to three (3) unrelated children apart from their parents, guardians or custodians for regular periods of time for
compensation. This type of child care facility shall be known as a listed family home. (See definition.)
(7) Repair of racing automobiles shall not be permitted.
Industrialized housing. A residential structure that is designed for the occupancy of single-family or duplex use; which bears an approved decal or insignia, clearly visible,
under rules promulgated by the State of Texas signifying the dwelling as “industrialized”; that is intended to be installed on a permanent foundation system approved by
the locally adopted building codes; that meets all other state and local requirements for industrialized housing.
Kennel (commercial). Any premises where dogs, cats or other pets are kept for commercial purposes, including boarding, breeding, sale of pet related goods or animals or
the rendering of services. No person shall operate a kennel without first having obtained a valid commercial kennel license from the animal control division. For the
purpose hereof, the breeding and sale of the litter of animals kept and maintained as household pets by the holder of a dog and cat fancier's permit shall not be deemed and
considered a commercial kennel.
Landscaping. Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees. Landscaped open spaces and landscaped edges shall be
landscaping.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/376
Licensed child care center. A child care facility where the caregiver provides care for seven (7) or more children under the age of fourteen (14) at a location other than at
the permit holder's home. A licensed child care center shall not include or apply to bona fide schools, custody fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage
within the third degree of the custodial person, or churches and other religious or public institutions caring for children within an institutional building.
Licensed child care home. A home-based child care facility where the caregiver provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14).
Listed family home. A home-based child care facility where the caregiver is compensated to provide regular child care for at least four (4) hours per day, three (3) or more
days a week for no more than nine (9) consecutive weeks in their own home for one (1) to three (3) unrelated children.
Loading space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot or lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Jefferson County or a parcel of land, the
deed for which is recorded in the office of the county clerk of Jefferson County prior to January 22, 1980.
Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
(1) Lot line, front. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street or place; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest
street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line.
(2) Lot line, rear. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
(3) Lot line, side. Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the side lot lines at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
Main building. The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
Mobile home. A mobile home is a single-family residential structure suitable for year-round occupancy, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Mobile home includes the terms trailer coach and modular home.
Model dwelling unit. A single-family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the
subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision.
Nonconforming building. A building, structure, or portion thereof which does not conform to the height, area or yard regulations of this chapter and which lawfully
existed at the time the regulations with which it does not conform became effective.
Nonconforming lot. A lot whose width, area or other dimension does not conform to the district regulations of this chapter and which was a lot of record or lawfully
existed at the time the regulations with which it does not conform became effective.
Nonconforming use. A nonresidential use of a building or land which does not conform to the use district regulations of this chapter and which lawfully existed at the time
the regulations with which it does not conform became effective. A lawful conforming use existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall not become
nonconforming as a result of a specific use permit requirement.
Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of
cornices, eaves, porches and plant material.
Planned unit development. A district with development characterized by a unified site development plan which may provide for a mixture or combination of residential,
recreation and open space, and commercial uses.
Registered child care home. A home-based child care facility where the caregiver cares for up to six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14); they may also take in up
to six (6) more school-age children. The number of children allowed in a home is determined by the ages of the children. No more than twelve (12) children can be in care
at any time, including children of the caregiver.
Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments which is planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit related in its location, size and type of shops to the
trade area that the unit serves.
Sign. Any permanent, temporary, or portable structure or part thereof, or any device attached to, painted on, or represented on a building, fence, or other structure, upon
which is displayed or included any letter, word, mode, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, decoration, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an
announcement, direction, advertisement, or other attention-getting device.
Sign, advertising. Any sign, other than an accessory owner identification sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity, or service.
Sign area. The sign area shall be the area of rectangular enclosures of the entire sign other than structural supports.
Sign, electronic reader board. A sign or portion thereof that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and
the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes which is attached to or a part of a detached owner identification sign. A sign
on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time/temperature” portion of a sign and not a
commercial message or an electronic reader board sign for purposes of this chapter.
Sign, owner identification. A sign which is located on the same lot or development and pertains only to the use of that premises and which contains information pertaining
to the name of the owner, occupant, or management associated with the use of the property, the kind of business or the brand name of the principal commodity sold on the
premises, or other information relative to a service or activity involved in the conduct of the business, but not including the names of subsidiary products being sold.
Sign, portable. Any sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or any other structure and is designed to be moved from place to place.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/376
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting or structural members of a building, including but not limited to bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in exterior walls.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having permanent location on the
ground.
Temporary portable storage container. A purpose-built, fully enclosed, box-like container that is designed for the temporary storage of furniture, clothing or other
personal or household belongings as part of the process of household renovation or moving or the relocation of household belongings to an off-site commercial storage
location. Such containers shall not be used to store solid waste, business inventory, commercial goods or any illegal or hazardous materials, nor shall such containers be
used for human or animal occupation. Such containers are uniquely designed for ease of loading to and from a transport vehicle.
Townhouse. A row of three (3) or more attached, one-family dwellings, separated by vertical party or lot-line walls, and each having private entrances.
Trailer park. See recreational vehicle court or park, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision in article 24.06 of the city code.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained.
Winery. A retail establishment that manufactures, bottles, labels and packages wine containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume for an adult in
an amount not to exceed fifty (50) gallons annually for the personal use of the adult and where wine is dispensed for consumption on the premises of the winery.
Yard. An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for fences and walls.
Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot as specified in each zoning district.
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot as specified in each zoning district. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimensions. On both
corner and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
Yard, side. A yard between a building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the
required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of the building.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-39, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/82; Ordinance 82-89, sec. 1, adopted 8/17/82; Ordinance 82-109, sec. 1, adopted 9/14/82;
Ordinance 84-123, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/84; Ordinance 85-120, sec. 1, adopted 11/26/85; Ordinance 86-89, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/86; Ordinance 87-74, sec. 1, adopted
9/22/87; Ordinance 89-21, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/89; Ordinance 91-66, sec. 1, adopted 8/27/91; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 1, adopted 8/11/92; Ordinance 92-63, sec. 1, adopted
8/25/92; Ordinance 06-036, sec. 1, adopted 7/11/06; 1978 Code, sec. 30-4; Ordinance 07-078, sec. 1, adopted 7/24/07; Ordinance 07-096, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/07;
Ordinance 08-021, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/08; Ordinance 08-066, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/08; Ordinance 09-022, sec. 1, adopted 4/28/09; Ordinance 12-074, sec. 7, adopted
9/25/12; Ordinance 13-004, secs. 1–6, adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 28.01.005 Zoning district establishment
(a) Enumeration. In order to uniformly regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings, structures, or land, the city
is hereby divided into the following districts or classifications:
(1) A-R, Agricultural-Residential District.
(2) R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling District.
(3) RM-M, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Medium Density District.
(4) RM-H, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Highest Density District.
(5) RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District.
(6) RCR-H, Residential Conservation and Revitalization-H District.
(7) NC, Neighborhood Commercial District.
(8) NSC, Neighborhood Shopping Center.
(9) GC-MD, General Commercial-Multiple Family Dwelling District.
(10) GC-MD-2, General Commercial-Multiple Family Dwelling-2 District.
(11) Central Business District.
(12) C-M, Commercial Manufacturing District.
(13) LI, Light Industrial.
(14) HI, Heavy Industrial.
(15) PUD, Planned Unit Development.
(16) HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation.
(17) HC, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation Overlay District.
(18) PD, Port Development District.
(19) OP, Office Park District.
(b) Zoning map adopted. The official zoning map of the city is hereby adopted and made a part hereof [by reference] for all purposes and shall be filed with the city
clerk. The boundaries of the various districts as enumerated in subsection (a) of this section are hereby established as identified on said map. All notations, references,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/376
legends, scales, and every detail shown on said map are incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. In interpreting the official zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) The district boundaries are the centerlines of either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the district designated on the zoning map is
bounded approximately by a street or alley, the centerline of street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
(2) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district
boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the district designated on the zoning map is bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall
be the boundary of the district.
(3) In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
(4) Any property on the zoning map which does not have a zoning district designation shall be classified as an R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling
District.
(c) District boundary uncertainty. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the conflict shall be
resolved by utilizing the appeal power of the board of adjustment as set forth in section 28.02.002 [28.02.005] of the zoning chapter.
(d) General restrictions. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land or building shall be used, and no building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected,
constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or repaired, for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirements established in the district in which such
land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(e) Residential use restrictions. Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit residential uses of a more restricted district, such residential
uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district unless otherwise specifically stated.
(f) General purpose and description provisions. Paragraphs included within the district regulations in article 28.03 hereof entitled “general purpose and description”
contain general descriptive information to provide the reader with a conceptual understanding of the general legislative intent of the district indicated. The provisions of
such paragraphs are directory and not mandatory.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-62, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/82; Ordinance 90-18, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/90; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/98;
Ordinance 05-034, sec. 1, adopted 3/29/05; 1978 Code, sec. 30-5; Ordinance 08-106, sec. 1, adopted 11/25/08)
Sec. 28.01.006 Annexation zoning policy
(a) Temporary designation; proceeding to give permanent designation. All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be temporarily designated as R-S, Single-Family
Dwelling District, until permanently zoned by the city council. The planning commission shall, as soon as practicable after annexation of any territory to the city, institute
proceedings on its own motion to give the newly annexed territory a permanent zoning classification, and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as is provided by
law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
(b) Building permits. In an annexed area temporarily classified as R-S, Single-Family Dwelling District, no permit for the construction of a building other than those
permitted in an R-S, Single-Family Dwelling District, shall be issued by the building official unless such permit has been specifically authorized by the city council.
Permits for the construction of buildings in newly annexed areas prior to permanent zoning may be authorized by the city council under the following conditions: An
application for any use shall be made to the building official in accordance with the provisions of the building code, and if such application is for a building other than one
permitted in an R-S, Single-Family Dwelling District, it shall be referred by the building official to the planning commission for consideration and recommendation to the
city council. When such a recommendation is filed with the city council, it shall be advisory only, and the city council may grant or deny the application as the facts may
justify.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-6)
ARTICLE 28.02 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 28.02.001 Enforcement, violations and penalties
(a) Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the planning director or his designee. Each application for a building permit shall
be accompanied by a site plan in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape, and location of the building and/or
structure to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity that violates or assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any plan or permit submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Each day such a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(c) Civil remedies. In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city attorney is authorized to institute any civil action in the appropriate court upon the prior
approval of the city manager.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 8, adopted 12/14/82; 1978 Code, sec. 30-34)
State law reference–Enforcement of land use restrictions in plats and other instruments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.005.
Sec. 28.02.002 Issuance of building permits and utility service
No building permit shall be issued, or public utilities extended or connected to a building or structure unless the application for the building permit provides for
compliance with the building code, fire code, zoning code, subdivision code and other applicable codes of the city. (Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance
92-62, sec. 6, adopted 8/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 30-35)
Sec. 28.02.003 Allowable building types
(a) No accessory building shall be permitted in the absence of a main building.
(b) All main buildings shall be located on a permanent foundation, as defined by the chief building official of the city.
(Ordinance 09-007, sec. 1, adopted 2/24/09)
Sec. 28.02.004 Certificate of occupancy and compliance
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/376
(a) No existing building, structure or lot shall be changed in use; [and] no building, structure, lot or newly erected, enlarged or structurally altered part of a building or
structure shall be occupied or used for its intended purpose unless a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall first have been issued by the building official of the city
certifying that the use, building, structure, lot or newly erected, enlarged or structurally altered part of a building or structure complies with the building code, fire code,
zoning code, subdivision code and other applicable codes of the city.
(b) Before an irrigation water meter can be installed at vacant lots that are to be used for agricultural purposes or for the keeping of livestock, a water meter permit must
first be obtained. A backflow prevention device must meet the requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 6, adopted 8/11/92; 1978 Code, sec. 30-36; Ordinance 12-059, sec. 1, adopted 8/28/12)
Sec. 28.02.005 Board of adjustment
(a) Creation. There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) regular members and four (4) alternate members who shall serve in the absence of one
or more regular members when requested to do so by the city manager. Each member of the board of adjustment shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
city council for a term of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and shall be removable for cause by the mayor and city council upon written charge and
after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the same manner as the original
appointment was made. The members of the board of adjustment heretofore existing shall continue to serve as members of the board until the terms for which they were
originally appointed expire. Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(b) Proceedings. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this chapter or statutes
of the state. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
(c) Appeal process. Appeals to the board can be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, or board or bureau of the municipality affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
(d) Stay of proceeding. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on
application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(e) General powers. The board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter. The board must find the following in order to grant an appeal:
(A) That there is a reasonable difference of interpretation as to the specific intent of the zoning regulations or zoning map.
(B) That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to one property inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly situated.
(C) The decision of the board must be such as will be in the best interest of the community and consistent with the spirit and interest of the city's
zoning laws.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter. The term “special exception” shall mean a deviation from the requirements of the
zoning ordinance, specifically enumerated herein, which shall be granted only in the following instances, and then only when the board finds that such special
exception will not adversely affect the value and use of adjacent or neighboring property or be contrary to the best public interest:
(A) To reconstruct, extend or enlarge a building occupied by a nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided that the
reconstruction, extension, or enlargement does not prevent the return of the property to a conforming use.
(B) To deviate yard requirements in the following circumstances:
(i) An exception from the front yard requirements where the actual front yard setback of an abutting lot does not meet the front yard requirement
or a rear yard exception where the actual rear yard setback of any four (4) or more lots in the same block do not meet the rear yard requirements of
these regulations.
(ii) A yard exception on corner lots.
(iii) An exception where the existing front yard setbacks of the various lots in the same block are not uniform, so that any one of the existing front
yard setbacks shall, for a building hereafter constructed or extended, be the required minimum front yard depth.
(iv) An exception from the minimum front yard requirements for owner identification signs where a structure existing at the effective date of this
chapter precludes locating a sign in compliance with the setback regulation.
(v) An exception from a minimum interior side yard setback requirement for owner identification signs for existing businesses which were
developed prior to April 1, 1981, where there is no safe place to erect a sign in compliance with the minimum setback requirements. A condition for
granting of the exception is that the applicant must demonstrate that the sign shall not screen or obstruct the view of an existing sign, building, or
outdoor display area.
(vi) An exception from the minimum side yard setback requirement where a nonconforming building was in existence at the time of the passage
of this ordinance [January 17, 1984].
(C) To waive or reduce off-street parking and loading requirements when the board finds the same are unnecessary for the proposed use of the building
or structure for which the special exception request applies.
(D) To grant an exception for ten (10) additional feet in height for an advertising sign when, in the board's judgment, the sign, at a lower height, will
block an existing sign or structure from view or itself be blocked from view.
(3) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of said laws will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/376
and substantial justice done. The term “variance” shall mean a deviation from the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance which is granted by the board when
strict conformity to the zoning ordinance would cause an unnecessary hardship because of circumstances unique to the property on which the variance is
granted. Except as otherwise prohibited under subsection (j) [(f)] hereof, the board is empowered to authorize a variance from a requirement of the zoning
ordinance when the board finds that all of the following conditions have been met:
(A) That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest; and
(B) That literal enforcement of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography or
other extraordinary or exceptional physical situation or physical condition unique to the specific piece of property in question. “Unnecessary handicap
[hardship]” shall mean physical hardship relating to the property itself as distinguished from a hardship relating to convenience, financial considerations
or caprice, and the hardship must not result from the applicant's or property owner's own actions; and
(C) That by granting the variance, the spirit of the chapter will be observed and substantial justice will be done.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving to the board that the foregoing conditions have been met.
(f) Use variance prohibited. No variance shall be granted to permit a use in a zoning district in which that use is prohibited.
(g) Additional conditions. The board is empowered to impose upon any variance or special exception any condition reasonably necessary to protect the public interest
and community welfare.
(h) Revocation or modification.
(1) A variance or special exception may be revoked or modified for any of the following reasons:
(A) That the variance or special exception was obtained or extended by fraud or deception.
(B) That one or more of the conditions imposed by the board in granting such variance or special exception has not been complied with or has been
violated.
(C) That the variance or special exception, although granted in accordance with all requirements hereof, has caused a nuisance or is otherwise
detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
(2) An action to revoke or modify a previously granted variance or special exception may be initiated by order of the city council, the city manager, any
member of the board, or the person who obtained the variance or special exception.
(3) The board of adjustment shall hear a request for the revocation or modification of a variance or special exception in accordance with the same
notification and hearing procedures established for original variances and special exceptions.
(i) Notification and hearing process. Any request for an appeal, variance or special exception shall require a public hearing before the board. Notice of said hearing
shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of the city, at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the hearing. A written notice of the hearing shall be sent to owners
of property situated within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the property with respect to which such appeal, variance or exception is requested. It shall
be sufficient that such written notice is addressed to the owner appearing on the most current tax roll of the city and addressed to such owner at the address stated on said
roll. If no owner is stated on the tax roll, or no address appears thereon, the written notice to such property owner shall not be required. A processing fee of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid to the city in advance of the hearing. In the event the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the required written notification
of publication in the official newspaper, the fee shall be refunded.
(j) Action of the board. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variation in
such ordinance.
(k) Appeal from decision of board. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department or other board or commission of the
city or the city council, may appeal the decision or action of the board of adjustment by filing a petition for same in a court of competent jurisdiction, setting forth that
such decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds for the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be filed with the court within ten (10) days from the
day the board renders its decision, and not thereafter. The time period set forth herein shall be deemed jurisdictional.
(l) Reapplication. No application for a variance, special exception, or appeal which has been denied shall be again filed earlier than one year from the date of original
denial.
(m) Validity. If an application is granted by the board, all permits necessary for the prosecution of the work must be obtained within one (1) year and construction
completed within the time established by the building code. All previous applications approved by the board for which building permits have not been issued shall be
valid only if a building permit is obtained within one (1) year after receipt of a written notice of the requirements of this section and construction must be completed
within the time limits set forth in the building code. Written notice shall be considered received on the date such notice is mailed to the person, firm or corporation who
received the variance addressed to the address of such person, firm or corporation as the same shall appear in the records of the planning department relating to the
granting of such application.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 81-58, sec. 3, adopted 7/28/81; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 13, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 83-144, sec. 1, adopted
10/25/83; Ordinance 84-09, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 84-87, sec. 1, adopted 6/26/84; Ordinance 86-30, sec. 3, adopted 3/25/86; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 7, adopted
8/11/92; Ordinance 03-098, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 30-37)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
Sec. 28.02.006 Planning commission
(a) Creation. The planning commission, created in accordance with article XVII, section 24, of the city charter, shall have the duties and responsibilities of the zoning
commission provided for in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, section 211.007.
(1) The planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members and three (3) alternate members who are resident citizens and qualified voters of the city.
The alternate members shall serve in the absence of a regular member in the conducting of commission business. The members of the planning commission
shall be appointed by the city council for two (2) year terms, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years, or until a successor is appointed. The three
alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval of the city council for two (2) year terms, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered
years, or until a successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the
same manner as the original appointment was made. The members of the planning commission existing on the effective date of this chapter shall continue to
serve as members of the commission until the terms for which they were originally appointed expire.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/376
(2) Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation.
(3) Members of the planning commission shall be subject to removal at the will and pleasure of the city council.
(b) Proceedings. The planning commission shall adopt rules, regulations and bylaws to govern its proceedings; provided that such rules shall not be inconsistent with
this chapter or the laws of the state. All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. A full complement of the voting commission shall be nine (9).
Five (5) regular and/or alternate members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(c) Powers and duties. The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To make studies and project plans for the improvement of the city, with a view toward its future development and extension, and to recommend to the
city council all matters for the development and advancement of the city's facilities, layout and appearance, and to perform all duties imposed upon the city
planning commission by the statutes of the state.
(2) To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the city and of land outside the city located within five (5) miles of the city which, in the opinion
of the planning commission, bears a relation to the planning of the city, and to make changes in, additions to and extensions of such plans or maps when it
deems same advisable.
(3) To confer with and advise property owners pertaining to location and erection of structures in order to promote conformity to the overall city plan.
(4) To aid and assist the city council in the preparation of budgets and determination of sources of funds, and in the procuring of financial and other aid and
assistance for the city from the state and federal governments and their agencies, for each and all of the purposes herein enumerated.
(5) To assist all other municipal and governmental agencies, and especially the city council, in formulating and executing proper plans of municipal
development.
(6) To plan and recommend the location, plan, and extent of city alleyways, viaducts, bridges, subways, parkways, parks, playgrounds, airports, automobile
parking places and other public properties, and of public utilities, including bus terminals, railroads, railroad depots, and terminals, whether publicly or
privately owned, for water, lights, sanitation, sewerage, sewage disposal, drainage, flood control, transportation, communication, marketing, and shipping
facilities, power and other purposes, and for the removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the
foregoing public places, works, buildings, facilities, or utilities.
(7) To select and recommend to the city council routes of streets, avenues, and boulevards, and particularly to investigate and recommend the opening,
widening, or abandonment of streets, avenues, boulevards, and alleys or the changing thereof to conform with the city's system, present and future, of
boulevards, streets, avenues, alleyways, parks and parkways.
(8) To investigate, consider and report to the city council upon the layout or platting of new subdivisions of the city or of property situated within five (5)
miles of the city limits, and to approve all plans, plats, or replats of additions within the city limits, or within five (5) miles of the city limits.
(9) To recommend to the city council for adoption and promulgation rules and regulations governing plats and subdivision of land within the corporate limits
of the city to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community, and the safe, orderly and healthful development of such community.
(10) To recommend plans to the city council for improving, developing, expanding and beautifying the parks, parkways, bayous and streams, riverfront and
yacht basins in or adjoining the city, and to cooperate with the city council and other agencies of the city in devising, establishing, locating, improving,
selecting, expanding and maintaining the public parks, parkways, playgrounds and places for public recreation.
(11) To aid and assist the city council by recommending plans for the development of civic centers.
(12) To recommend the boundaries of the various districts or zones, to recommend appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, to make their preliminary
report as to such zoning districts and regulations and to hold a public hearing or public hearings on the same before submitting a final report, and to submit a
final report to the city council and to perform all other duties and exercise all other powers conferred upon it by the statutes of the state.
(13) To suggest plans for clearing the city of slums and blighted areas.
(d) Cooperation by other department heads and officials. All department heads and officials of the city shall be available to the planning commission for advice and
consultation, and they shall cooperate with and render such services for the department of planning as shall come within the scope of the duties of such department heads
and officials. All such department heads and officials shall attend meetings of the planning commission upon the request of the city planning commission or its duly
authorized official or officials.
(Ordinance adopted 4/2/46, sec. 4; Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 11, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 03-036, sec. 3, adopted 5/6/03;
1978 Code, sec. 30-38; Ordinance 15-050, sec. 1, adopted 11/10/15)
Charter reference–Planning commission, art. XVII, sec. 24.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 28.02.007 Historic landmark commission
(a) Creation of historic landmark commission. For the purpose of recommending historic-cultural landmark preservation designations and districts and for the purpose
of approving or making recommendations on the construction, alteration, reconstruction, demolition, or relocation of buildings and structures on sites located within HC-L
and HC-D zones, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, there is hereby created a historic landmark commission. The historic landmark commission shall
be composed and appointed as follows:
(1) The historic landmark commission shall consist of twelve (12) members appointed by the city council, including the following:
(A) One member shall be a member of the city planning commission.
(B) One member shall be a licensed architect.
(C) One member shall be a licensed attorney.
(D) One member shall be a professional historian.
(E) One member shall be a member of the Beaumont Heritage Society.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/376
(F) One member shall be a member of the Jefferson County Historical commission.
(G) Six (6) members shall be appointed from the community at large. All members shall have knowledge and experience of the architectural,
archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history of Beaumont.
(2) The members of the historic landmark commission shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, expiring on September 30 of odd-numbered years.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant for any cause.
(3) Members of the historic landmark commission shall serve without compensation.
(4) Members of the historic landmark commission shall be subject to removal at the will and pleasure of the city council.
(5) Operational procedures shall be established by the historic landmark commission as follows:
(A) The historic landmark commission shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided that its rules are not in conflict with this chapter, other
ordinances of the city, or laws of the state.
(B) The city council shall select from the membership of the commission a chairman and vice-chairman of the commission.
(C) The director of planning of the city shall serve as secretary for the commission and shall be responsible for taking minutes of the commission's
proceedings and filing them in the office of the city clerk.
(D) The historic landmark commission shall meet on a monthly basis at an agreed-upon specified time and place. Special meetings shall be called by
the commission chairman or by three (3) commission members.
(E) Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum, and all issued shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the members present and voting.
(F) Notices of commission meetings shall be governed by V.T.C.A. Government Code, chapter 551 (Open Meetings Law), all meetings shall be open
to the public, and minutes shall be kept of all commission proceedings.
(G) All historic landmark commission public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness for exterior changes and on requests for the
approval of demolitions or removals shall be noticed and advertised once by publication in a newspaper stating time, date and place of public hearing
thereon at least seven (7) days prior to the date on which the public hearing is held.
(b) Functions of the historic landmark commission. The historic landmark commission shall:
(1) Thoroughly familiarize itself with buildings, structures, sites, districts, areas, places and lands within the city which may be eligible for designation as
historic-cultural landmarks.
(2) Establish criteria and make recommendations to the planning commission and city council for determining whether certain buildings, structures, sites,
districts, areas, places and lands should be awarded an historic-cultural landmark preservation designation or district status.
(3) Establish guidelines for review, approval or denial of all requests for certificates of appropriateness and certificates of demolition of buildings, structures
and sites located in HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation or HC-D, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation Districts.
(4) Formulate plans and programs for public and private action for encouraging and promoting the preservation of historic-cultural landmarks.
(5) Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration activities and acquisitions, including federal, state, private, and foundation sources.
(6) Provide information and counseling to owners of historic-cultural landmarks.
(c) Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation. The following procedure shall be followed in establishing an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation
designation:
(1) Application process. An application for an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation may be submitted by the owner, or by a
representative who has the expressed written approval of the owner, or by the city manager. The public hearing and notification procedures for a rezoning
request shall be followed; provided that an additional public hearing before the historic landmark commission shall be required for an HC-L, Historic-Cultural
Landmark Preservation designation, request.
(2) Historic landmark commission. The historic landmark commission shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of the zoning
application. Notice of public hearing before the historic landmark commission shall be given as provided for zoning hearings in section 211.007 of the Local
Government Code of the state. The recommendation of the historic landmark commission shall be forwarded to the planning commission and city council.
(3) Criteria to be used in designations. The historic landmark commission, and the city council shall consider, but not be limited to, one or more of the
following criteria in establishing an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation:
(A) Existing or proposed recognition as a national historic landmark, or Texas Historic Landmark, or entry or proposed entry into the National Register
of Historic Places;
(B) Existence of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen, or of the social, economic, or political heritage of the city;
(C) Identification as the work of a designer, architect, or builder whose work has influenced the growth or development of the city;
(D) Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation or an
outstanding example of a particular historical, architectural or other cultural style or period;
(E) Relationship to other buildings, structures, or places which are eligible for preservation as historic places;
(F) Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, ethnic, or historical heritage of the city, county, state or nation;
(G) Location as the site of a significant historical event;
(H) Listing in the S.P.A.R.E. Beaumont Survey;
(I) Identification with a person or person who significantly contributed to the culture or development of the city, county, state or nation; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/376
(J) A building, structure, or place that because of its location has become of historic or cultural value to a neighborhood or community.
(d) Certificates of appropriateness. No person or entity shall construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove or demolish any exterior architectural feature of a
building or structure located in an H-C, Historical-Cultural Landmark Preservation District, unless an application has been made to the historic landmark commission for
a certificate of appropriateness and such certificate shall have been granted. The applicant shall pay a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness. The term “exterior architectural feature” shall include but not be limited to the kind, color and basic texture of all exterior building materials and such
features as windows, doors, lights, signs and other exterior fixtures.
(1) Application procedure. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be made to and on a form furnished by the secretary of the commission, and
shall include two (2) copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives, specifications, and other necessary documents pertaining to the work.
(2) Public hearing. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness, the historic landmark commission
shall hold a public hearing. Public notice of such hearing, and the purpose thereof, shall be published in a newspaper one time at least seven (7) days prior to
the date scheduled for such hearing.
(3) Review. Upon review of the application in open meeting, the historic landmark commission shall determine whether the proposed work is of a nature
which will adversely affect any exterior architectural feature, and whether such work is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter. The
historic landmark commission shall forward, through its secretary, either a certificate of appropriateness or its written determination of disapproval, and their
reasons therefor, to the applicant and the building official. If no action has been taken by the commission within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, a
certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed issued by the historic landmark commission.
(4) Changes. No change shall be made in the plans on which a certificate of appropriateness was issued, without resubmittal to the historic landmark
commission and approval thereof in the same manner as provided above for processing the original application.
(5) Exemptions. Ordinary repair and maintenance which do not involve changes in architectural and historical style or value, general design, structural
arrangement, type of building material, primary color or basic texture are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(e) Certificates of demolition or relocation. No person or entity other than a state, city, county, or federal government fee simple owner, shall demolish or relocate any
building or structure awarded an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, unless a certificate of demolition or relocation has first been issued.
(1) Application procedure. Applications for certificates of demolition or relocation shall be made to, and on a form furnished by, the secretary of the historic
landmark commission.
(2) Public hearing. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a completed application for a certificate of demolition or relocation, the historic landmark
commission shall hold a public hearing. Public notice of such hearing, setting forth the date, time and place scheduled for such hearing, and the purpose
thereof, shall be published in a newspaper one time at least seven (7) days prior to the date scheduled for such hearing. Notice thereof shall also be mailed to
all owners of real property within a two-hundred-foot radius of the subject property, such notice to be given not less than seven (7) days prior to the date set for
hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
(3) Review. In evaluating a request for a certificate of demolition or relocation, the historic landmark commission shall consider the following: its
architectural or historical significance, the state of repair of the building or structure in question, the reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair; the
existing and/or potential usefulness of the property including economic usefulness; the effect that such removal or demolition will have upon buildings,
structures, and places in the vicinity of the property in question; and all other factors it finds necessary and appropriate to carry out the intent of this chapter. If,
based upon such considerations, the historic landmark commission determines that the building or structure should not be demolished, this decision shall be
forwarded to the city council for review and final decision. If no action is taken by the historic landmark commission within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a
completed application, a certificate of demolition or relocation shall be deemed issued. The city council shall act upon a request for a certificate of demolition
or relocation within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the application from the historic landmark commission.
(4) Conditions for approval. In granting a certificate of demolition or relocation, the historic landmark commission or the city council must find that the
interests of preserving historical values and the purposes and intent of this chapter will not be adversely affected by the requested demolition or removal, or
that the interests will be best served by removal or relocation to another specified location.
(f) Omission of necessary repairs. Buildings and structures awarded an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, shall be maintained so as to ensure
the exterior and interior structural soundness and integrity of the landmark and its exterior architectural features.
(1) Determination of omission. If the historic landmark commission determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a building or structure or an
exterior architectural feature thereof is structurally unsound, the commission shall notify the owner of record of the property and hold a public hearing to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Mandated repairs. If, at the conclusion of the public hearing, the historic landmark commission finds that the building or structure or its architectural
features are structurally unsound or in immediate danger of becoming structurally unsound, said commission shall advise the property owner and direct repair
of the property. The property owner shall satisfy the commission, within ninety (90) days of the decision of said commission, that all necessary repairs and
maintenance to safeguard structural soundness and integrity have been carried out and completed.
(g) Appeals. Appeals from a decision of the historic landmark commission or from the city council must be filed in district court within thirty (30) days of said decision.
(h) Demolition. Any person or entity other than a city, county, state, or federal government fee simple owner that demolishes, causes to be demolished, or otherwise
adversely affects the structural, physical, or visual integrity of a historic structure or property located within the city that has been designated as historic by the city,
county, or federal government and on file with the county clerk, without first obtaining the appropriate demolition of building permits before beginning to demolish, cause
the demolition of, or otherwise adversely affect the structural, physical or visual integrity of the structure or property shall be subject to the remedies allowed under
section 315 of the Local Government Code of the state. The secretary of the historic landmark commission shall maintain a list of the historically designated properties
within the city limits and file it with the county clerk for the enforcement of this section.
(i) Notice. No building permit shall be issued for the demolition, relocation, or adverse modification of the structural, physical, or visual integrity of any building or
structure as determined by the secretary that has been designated historical by a county, state or federal government without first giving the secretary of the historic
landmark commission thirty (30) days' written notice.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-102, sec. 1, adopted 8/31/82; Ordinance 84-88, sec. 7, adopted 6/26/84; Ordinance 90-60, sec. 1, adopted
10/9/90; Ordinance 92-3, secs. 1, 2, adopted 1/7/92; Ordinance 93-28, sec. 2, adopted 6/29/93; Ordinance 03-098, sec. 2, adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 30-39;
Ordinance 15-050, sec. 2, adopted 11/10/15; Ordinance 16-012, secs. 1–2, adopted 3/15/16 )
State law reference–Liability for adversely affecting historic structure or property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 315.006.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/376
Sec. 28.02.008 Changes, amendments, and specific use permits
(a) Authorization. The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the zoning districts or the regulations herein
established, or issue or revoke specific use permits. Zoning changes may be initiated by the city council, planning commission or city planning staff. Zone change
applications from the public shall be accepted only from property owners, their agents with written authorization, or those with valid contracts for purchase of the property
for which rezoning is being requested.
(b) Recommendation by planning commission. Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement, change or a specific use permit, the city council
shall submit the same to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing before submitting its
recommendation and report to the city council.
(c) Public hearing and notification requirements.
(1) No regulation, restriction or zoning district boundary shall be amended, supplemented or changed and no specific use permit approved or revoked until
after a public hearing in relation thereto is held by the planning commission and city council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity
to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of general circulation in the
city. The city council may hold any public hearing jointly with any public hearing required to be held by the planning commission.
(2) Written notice of all public hearings before the planning commission and city council on proposed changes in classification shall be sent to owners of
real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed, such notice to be given, not less than ten
(10) days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved
city tax roll. Protests must be received prior to the close of the public hearing in order to invoke the protest provisions of this section of the chapter. Protests
shall be accepted only if made in writing and the signature of one owner shall be sufficient for property owned under joint tenancy.
(d) Protest. The city council shall not amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal any regulation, restriction or boundary or approve a specific use permit where a
protest against such change [has been filed], signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of the
lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the
city council.
(e) Application fee. Any person, firm or corporation applying for a change in the zoning district classification of any property or a specific use permit shall be required
to pay an application processing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if the property involved is less than one-half (1/2) acre; four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) if
the property involved is greater than one-half (1/2) acre but less than five (5) acres; and six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) if the property involved is greater than five (5)
acres. The processing fees as established herein shall be paid at the time of the filing of an application. In the event the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the
required written notification or publication in a newspaper, the fee shall be refunded. Any person, firm or corporation requesting an abandonment of city right-of-way or
easements shall be required to pay an application processing fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) at the time of such application. The fee for processing other requests
under the other business category shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), required at the time of application.
(f) Time of action. If city council does not approve a request for a specific use permit or a zone district boundary change within sixty (60) days of the public hearing at
which the request was heard, the request shall be automatically denied unless this time limit is extended by action of the city council. This time limit can be waived with
consent of the applicant.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-110, sec. 1, adopted 9/14/82; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 9, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 83-144, sec. 2, adopted
10/25/83; Ordinance 85-120, sec. 3, adopted 11/26/85; Ordinance 92-62, secs. 8, 9, adopted 8/11/92; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 12, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 03-098, sec. 3,
adopted 12/9/03; 1978 Code, sec. 30-40)
ARTICLE 28.03 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 28.03.001 A-R, Agricultural-Residential District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. This district is intended to provide a location for land situated on the fringe of an urban area and used for agricultural purposes, but
that may become an urban area in the future. Generally, A-R, Agricultural-Residential Districts, will be near development; therefore, the agricultural activities conducted
in the A-R, Agricultural-Residential District, should not be detrimental to urban land uses. The types of uses and the area and intensity of use permitted in this district
shall encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an A-R, Agricultural-Residential District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an A-R, Agricultural-Residential District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-7)
Sec. 28.03.002 R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling District, is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land in this
district is for low density single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a
balanced, orderly, convenient, and attractive residential area. Low density residential areas shall be protected from higher density residential development and from the
encroachment of incompatible uses. Internal stability, harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for
dwellings and related facilities and by consideration of the proper functional relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this district.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an R-S, Residential Single-Family Dwelling District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-8)
Sec. 28.03.003 RM-M, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Medium Density District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The R-M, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Medium Density District, is intended to provide for medium density multiplefamily
dwellings which may have a relatively intense concentration of dwelling units served by large open spaces consisting of common areas and recreation facilities,
thereby resulting in medium gross densities. The principal use of land may be one or several dwelling types, ranging from single-family to low-rise multiple-family
dwellings, and including two-family dwellings, garden apartments, condominiums and townhouses. Recreational, religious and educational uses normally located to
service adjacent residential areas are also permitted to meet the basic needs of a balanced, orderly, convenient, economical and attractive residential area. The RM-M,
Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling District, functions as a buffer or transition between major streets, or commercial or higher density residential areas, and lower
density residential areas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/376
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an RM-M, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Medium Density District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an RM-M, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Medium Density District, are set forth in section
28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-9)
Sec. 28.03.004 RM-H, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Highest Density District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The RM-H Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Highest Density District, is a residential district intended to provide for the
highest residential density ranging up to twenty-nine (29) dwelling units per acre. The principal use of land in this district is for a wide variety of dwelling types, including
single-family dwellings, low-rise multiple-family dwellings, garden apartments, condominiums, and townhouses and, subject to a specific use permit, high-rise
apartments. Recreational, religious, health and educational uses normally located to service residential areas are permitted in this district in order to provide the basic
elements of a balanced, orderly, convenient, and attractive residential area. The RM-H, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Highest Density District, is usually located
adjacent to a major street and serves as a buffer or transition between commercial development or heavy automobile traffic and medium density residential development.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an RM-H, Residential Multiple-Family Dwelling–Highest Density District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an RM-H, Highest Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-10)
Sec. 28.03.005 RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District, is intended for predominantly residential areas of the city which
are characterized by significant concentrations of poor or fair structural housing conditions and which may have a mixture of residential and commercial uses.
Conservation, protection and revitalization of existing residential areas is achieved in this district by providing the city council with the opportunity to review and
conditionally approve or deny requests for higher density residential development and compatible selected services and retail uses that are needed for the comfort,
economy and convenience of the neighborhood. Approval of the specific use and the site plan by the city council will encourage future multifamily and commercial uses
that will stimulate the normal, orderly development and improvement of the area without adversely affecting residential livability or diminishing or impairing property
values.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District regulations, are set forth in section 28.03.023. The commercial,
retail and service uses permitted in this district shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet in gross floor area for any lot or tract.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-11)
Sec. 28.03.006 RCR-H, Residential Conservation and Revitalization District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The RCR-H, Residential Conservation and Revitalization-H District, is intended for predominately residential areas in the Old
Town Area of the city which are characterized by significant concentrations of poor or fair structural housing conditions and which may have a mixture of residential and
commercial uses. Conservation, protection and revitalization of existing residential areas is achieved in this district by providing city council with the opportunity to
review and conditionally approve or deny requests for higher density residential development and compatible selected commercial uses. Approval of the specific use
permit and the site plan by the city council will encourage future multifamily and commercial uses that will stimulate the normal, orderly development and improvement
of the area without adversely affecting residential livability or diminishing or impairing property values.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an RCR-H, Residential Conservation and Revitalization-H District, are set forth in section 28.03.023. The commercial uses
permitted in this district shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet in gross floor area for any lot or tract.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an RCR-H, Residential Conservation and Revitalization-H District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 08-106, sec. 2, adopted 11/25/08)
Sec. 28.03.007 OP, Office Park District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. This district is intended to encourage and permit general professional and business offices of high site quality and appearance in
attractive landscaped surroundings with the types of uses, and design exterior appearance so controlled as to maintain the integrity and be generally compatible with
existing and future adjacent and surrounding single-family or multiple-family development. This district should generally be located in areas abutting arterial and/or
collector streets which are, because of location and trends, suitable for development of office uses that are compatible with residential uses thereby maintaining the
character and integrity of existing and developing neighborhoods. This district is also ideally located in transitional areas between commercial and residential
development which is adaptable to occupancy by certain office uses. The ultimate development must provide a low intensity of land usage and site coverage to enable the
site to retain its park-like image for the residential neighborhoods nearby and for the tenants that seek pleasant landscaped surroundings.
(b) Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this district subject to special conditions, section 28.04.008(b)(12):
(1) Professional offices;
(2) Consultant's offices;
(3) Medical and dental offices;
(4) Oil and gas extractions;
(5) Pharmacy, when in support of or an integral part of an on-premise medical or dental office;
(6) Accessory uses.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-11.1; Ordinance 08-106, sec. 2, adopted 11/25/08)
Sec. 28.03.008 NC, Neighborhood Commercial District regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/376
(a) General purpose and description. The NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, is primarily intended for retail sale of convenience goods or personal services
primarily for persons residing in adjacent residential areas. It also includes selected retail and service uses that are similar in land use intensity and physical impact to the
neighborhood retail sales and service uses permitted in this district. Because the retail and personal service uses permitted may be an integral part of the neighborhood,
closely associated with the residential, religious, recreational and educational uses in the neighborhood, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space,
landscaping, and off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. The NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, is located on the periphery of
the residential neighborhood on a major street in close proximity to the intersection of two (2) major streets.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, are set forth in section 28.03.023. The commercial, retail and service uses permitted
in this district shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet in gross floor area for any lot or premise.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-12)
Sec. 28.03.009 NSC, Neighborhood Shopping Center District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The NSC, Neighborhood Shopping Center District, is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of several,
typically between five (5) and twenty (20), retail and service shops or stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in
adjacent residential neighborhoods. Gross floor area in a neighborhood center typically ranges from thirty thousand (30,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet, and land area consists of two (2) to ten (10) acres in size. It is intended that the neighborhood shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking
for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening to ensure compatibility with surrounding residential environment. This district is located
adjacent to several residential neighborhoods, ideally at the intersection of two (2) or more arterial or major streets with a service area of up to one and one-half (1-1/2)
miles. Development of a neighborhood shopping center requires approval of a development site plan by the city council, after recommendation from the planning
commission.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an NSC, Neighborhood Shopping Center District, are set forth in section 28.03.023. Office uses permitted in this district shall not
exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the shopping center. A specific use permit for a shopping center as a particular use is required before any building
permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued in this district.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a NSC, Neighborhood Shopping Center District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-13)
Sec. 28.03.010 GC-MD, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The mixed GC-MD, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling District, is intended for the conduct of community-wide
personal and business services, specialty shops, general highway commercial uses, shopping centers, and multifamily residential development. The need for communitywide
accessibility dictates that this district be located ideally at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, along frontage roads adjacent to the interstate, or along selected
major streets which have been designated for strip commercial development. Minimum lot width, depth, area, and yard requirements, buffer strips, and landscaping bonus
provisions have been established to reduce or modify the harmful impact and negative consequences associated with typical strip commercial development. Multifamily
development in this district is permitted in order to serve as a buffer or transition between commercial and medium density residential development.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a GC-MD, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a GC-MD, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-15)
Sec. 28.03.011 GC-MD-2, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling-2 District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The mixed GC-MD-2, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling-2 District, is intended for the conduct of community-wide
personal and business services, specialty shops, general commercial uses, shopping centers, and multiple-family residential development. Typically, this district will be
located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, along frontage roads adjacent to the interstate, or along selected major streets which have been designated for strip
commercial development. However, this district recognizes that there are circumstances whereby city council would be more willing to grant approval of a specific use
permit for a particular use or parcel of property than to permit a use by right. Therefore, all uses require a specific use permit. Minimum lot width, depth, area and yard
requirements, buffer strips, and landscaping bonus provisions have been established to reduce or modify the harmful impact and negative consequences associated with
typical strip commercial development.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a GC-MD-2, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling-2 District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a GC-MD-2, General Commercial Multiple-Family Dwelling-2 District, are set forth in section
28.03.024.
(Ordinance 98-7, sec. 3, adopted 2/3/98; 1978 Code, sec. 30-15.1)
Sec. 28.03.012 CBD, Central Business District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The CBD, Central Business District, is intended to accommodate the commercial, office, service, residential and public activities
and uses commonly found in a central business district. There shall be only one contiguous CBD, Central Business District.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a CBD, Central Business District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a CBD, Central Business District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-16)
Sec. 28.03.013 C-M, Commercial-Manufacturing District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The C-M, Commercial-Manufacturing District, is designed for intensive commercial uses and those selected manufacturing uses
which are compatible with commercial development. The permitted manufacturing uses are either free of objectionable influences in their operations and appearance or
can eliminate or control objectionable characteristics by landscaping, screening, and other abatement devices. Because most of the uses in the C-M, Commercial-
Manufacturing District, often require direct access to major streets, rail or air facilities, this district should be located near major transportation routes. The C-M,
Commercial-Manufacturing District, should be used as a buffer or transition between industrial development and commercial or multifamily residential development.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/376
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a C-M, Commercial-Manufacturing District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a C-M, Commercial-Manufacturing District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-17)
Sec. 28.03.014 LI, Light Industrial District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The LI, Light Industrial District, is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication, and for
warehousing, wholesaling, and service operations that do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but that may require good accessibility
to major rail, air facilities, or highways. This district is designed to upgrade industrial development standards, prevent industrial blight, and protect light industrial
development from incompatible residential, commercial or heavy industrial uses. This district should function as a buffer or transition between heavy industrial
development and commercial development.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an LI, Light Industrial District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an LI, Light Industrial District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-18)
Sec. 28.03.015 HI, Heavy Industrial District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The HI, Heavy Industrial District, is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the
other districts. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it necessary to separate it from all residential districts and most commercial districts wherever
possible.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an HI, Heavy Industrial District, are set forth in section 28.03.023.
(c) Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an HI, Heavy Industrial District, are set forth in section 28.03.024.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-19)
Sec. 28.03.016 PUD, Planned Unit Development District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, is to encourage the unified design of residential, commercial, office,
professional services, retail and institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof in accordance with an approved comprehensive development plan. This district
provides for greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts, and circulation than provided by other districts.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a PUD, Planned Unit Development District, are set forth in section 28.03.023. A specific use permit is required before a building
permit may be issued in this district except for single-family residential development and accessory uses.
(c) Development standards and regulations. Minimum standards for developments in this district are set forth in section 28.04.004.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-20)
Sec. 28.03.017 HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation
(a) General purpose and description. The HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, in general is intended to provide for the protection, preservation
and enhancement of buildings, structures, sites and areas of architectural, historical, archaeological or cultural importance or value. More specifically, this district has the
following expressed purposes:
(1) To stabilize and improve property values;
(2) To encourage neighborhood conservation;
(3) To foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
(4) To protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors;
(5) To strengthen and help diversify the economy of the city; and
(6) To promote the use of historic-cultural landmarks for the education, pleasure and welfare of the community.
This district supplements the regulations of the underlying zoning district classification. The zoning map shall reflect the designation of a Historic-Cultural Landmark
Preservation designation by the letters “HC-L” as a suffix to the underlying zoning district classification.
(b) Permitted uses. The permit uses in the HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, shall be determined by the underlying zoning district
classification. Historical use activities within the HC-L designation, such as museums or historical organizational offices, shall be permitted when granted by a specific
use permit as set forth in section 28.04.001, when the underlying zoning is residential or would otherwise not permit the historical use. Accessory uses, including
fundraising activities, may be approved as a part of the specific use permit.
(c) Area and height regulations. The area and height regulations shall be determined by the underlying zoning district classification.
(d) Supplemental regulations. Buildings, structures, sites and areas zoned “HC-L” shall be subject to the following regulations and to the regulations set forth in section
28.02.007 of this chapter.
(1) Exterior alterations and changes. No person or entity shall construct, alter, change, restore, remove, demolish, or obscure any exterior architectural
feature of a building or structure located in an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, unless first applying to and receiving from the
historic landmark commission a certificate of appropriateness as set forth in section 28.02.007.
(2) Demolition or removal of a building or structure. No building or structure awarded an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, shall
be demolished or removed without the approval of the historic landmark commission or the city council as set forth in section 28.02.007.
(3) Omission of necessary repairs. Buildings and structures awarded an HC-L, Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation designation, shall be maintained so
as to ensure the structural soundness and integrity of the building or structure and its exterior architectural features as set forth in section 28.02.007.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/376
(Ordinance 93-28, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/93; 1978 Code, sec. 30-21.1)
Sec. 28.03.018 Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation Overlay District
(a) Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this section:
Attention-getting device. Any device, except for permitted signs and flags, that is used for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to a commercial
establishment. An attention-getting device shall include, but not be limited to, streamers, flags (other than U.S. or state), balloons, pennants or decorations.
Banner. A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
Blockface. All of the lots on one side of a block.
Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate issued by the city to authorize the alteration of the physical character of real property in a district, or any portion of the
exterior of a structure on the property, or the placement, construction, alteration, nonroutine maintenance, expansion, or removal of any structure on or from the property.
Column. The entire column including the base and capital, if any.
Contributing structure. A structure which physically or historically contributes to the historic value of an historic district.
Corner side facade. The main building facade facing the side street.
Director. The director of the planning division or his/her representative.
Educational land uses. (See “Institutional land uses.”)
Exterior architectural feature. Means, but shall not be limited to, the kind, color and basic texture of all exterior building materials and such features as windows, doors,
lights, signs and other exterior fixtures.
Fluorescent color. Colors defined (Munsell Book of Color) as having a minimum chroma value of eight (8) and a maximum of ten (10).
Front facade. The main building facade facing the street upon which the main building is addressed.
Furniture, street. Man-made, above-ground items that are usually found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies, shelters and phone booths.
Institutional land uses. Those properties owned or otherwise administered by organizations of higher education, vocational training centers and museums. Churches,
synagogues, social, civic, fraternal and professional organizations, specialty schools, residential care facilities, day care centers, nursing homes, clinics and hospitals and
all other uses not specifically excluded are bound by the terms of this section.
Masonry paver. A solid brick or block of masonry material used as a paving material.
Metallic color. A paint color which has pigments that incorporate fine flakes of bronze, aluminum, or copper metal.
Move-in building. A building that has been moved onto an existing lot.
Preservation criteria. The standards considered by the director and the historic landmark commission to determine whether a certificate of appropriateness should be
granted or denied.
Rehabilitation. The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving
those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
Sign, fence. Signs attached or affixed to any type of fence.
Sign, mobile. Business signs used to advertise an establishment or service which are on or, otherwise affixed to, trucks, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles used
primarily to support or display such signs while parked.
Sign, moving. Signs which in whole, or part, do not remain stationary at all times, regardless of power source which effects movement.
Trim color. A paint color other than the dominant color. Stain is not a trim color. Trim color does not include the color of screen and storm doors and windows, gutters,
downspouts, porch floors and ceilings.
(b) Reconciliation with other ordinances. All city codes, as amended, apply to all historic districts unless expressly modified by ordinance.
(c) Enforcement.
(1) Certificate of appropriateness required. A person commits an offense if (s)he is responsible for an alteration of the physical character of any real property
located in an historic district, or any portion of the exterior of a structure on the property, or the placement, construction, maintenance, expansion, or removal
of any structure on or from the property, unless the act is expressly lawfully authorized by a certificate of appropriateness.
(2) Exceptions. An alteration may by excused from strict enforcement under subsection (1) hereinabove if it is:
(A) In a rear yard not exceeding six (6) feet in height;
(B) In a side yard, six (6) feet or less in height, and totally screened by a fence, as permitted by this section, or hedge that is at least six (6) feet in
height;
(C) The installation, maintenance, or replacement of:
(i) A yard sprinkler system; or
(ii) A central air conditioning unit in the side or rear yard; or
(iii) A room air conditioning unit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/376
(D) Temporary in nature. An alteration is temporary in nature if it occurs no more than two (2) time periods per calendar year for a maximum of five
(5) days per time period.
(3) Additional offenses. A person commits an offense if (s)he is responsible for a violation of the use regulations or development standards of this section.
(4) Responsibility. A person is responsible for a violation if (s)he:
(A) Commits or assists in the commission of an act in violation; or
(B) Owns part or all of the land or a structure on the land where a violation exists.
(d) Use regulations for historic districts. All previous uses legally permitted by the underlying zoning district receiving Historic-Cultural Landmark Preservation
designation shall remain so upon adoption of this section.
(e) Development standards for historic districts. The following development standards apply to historic districts:
(1) Density. Structures within an historic district must comply with standards established in the city Code of Ordinances (section 28.03.024).
(2) Height. Structures within an historic district must comply with standards established in the Code of Ordinances (section 28.03.024) for the underlying
zoning district or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
(3) Story limitation. For the purposes of this section, the maximum permitted number of stories is three (3).
(4) Lot size. Lots within an historic district must comply with standards established in the city Code of Ordinances (section 28.03.024).
(5) Special exception. Lots platted, meaning already approved by the city planning division or planning commission, on or before the effective date of this
section, are legal building sites even though they may not conform to the requirements of this section.
(6) Setbacks. All structures within an historic district must comply with the standards established in the city Code of Ordinances (section 28.03.024).
(7) Off-street parking. All structures within a historic district must comply with the standards established in the City of Beaumont Code of Ordinances
(section 28.04.002). In addition:
(A) In general. All off-street parking, whether used to fulfill minimum parking requirements or as excess parking, must be provided on the lot occupied
by the primary use or on a separate lot located within one hundred (100) feet of said property. All off-street parking must be set back along street
frontages not less than the required yard setbacks or as far back as the front of immediately adjacent buildings, whichever is greater.
(B) Parking on vacant lots. On vacant lots, no permanent off-street surface parking is permitted on grassed areas. Said grassed areas may not be paved
or otherwise destroyed without a certificate of appropriateness.
(C) Parking in front or side yards. Within front or side yards, off-street surface parking is not permitted on grassed areas. Said grassed areas may not be
paved or otherwise destroyed without a certificate of appropriateness. Vehicles may only be parked on paved surfaces.
(D) Structured parking. Vehicular access to parking structures with a vehicle storage capacity of three (3) or more is not permitted to or from the street
on which the main building fronts, unless the lot abuts no other street or alley.
(E) Screening. Screening of off-street parking for multiple-family, commercial and industrial uses must comply with standards established in the Code
of Ordinances (section 28.04.006).
(F) Surface materials. The only permitted off-street parking surface materials are brushed or aggregate concrete, hot mix asphalt, masonry pavers or
pervious parking surface materials capable of accommodating vehicles up to five thousand (5,000) pounds of gross vehicle weight and that allow the
growth of lawn. Grass, caleche, dirt, gravel, shell, slag and clay surfaces are not permitted.
(G) Driveways. Driveway widths shall not exceed the following dimensions:
(i) Residential:
a. Single-family: 20 feet.
b. Two-family: 20 feet.
c. Multiple-family: 24 feet.
(ii) Commercial: 24 feet.
(iii) Industrial: 35 feet.
(8) Signs. Signs must not obscure significant architectural features, windows or doors of the building. The shape, materials, color, design, and letter style of
signs must be typical of and compatible with the style and period of the architecture of the building and complement the district. Signs shall only be allowed
where permitted by section 28.04.003 of this code. In addition, all signs within the district must comply with the following standards:
(A) Detached signs. Only one (1) detached sign is permitted on each lot and subject to the following restrictions:
(i) The structural support of the sign must be located at least five (5) feet from any public right-of-way or property line dividing properties of
different ownership. No part of any sign shall overlay any property line.
(ii) The sign must be six (6) feet or less in height;
(iii) The sign shall not be illuminated; and
(iv) The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
(B) Attached signs. No more than two (2) attached signs are permitted on each building. Each sign must:
(i) Not be illuminated, except by one external floodlight not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) watts in power;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/376
(ii) Not exceed six (6) square feet in area; and
(iii) Not be located in or in front of any window or doorway.
(C) Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in an historic district:
(i) Advertising signs;
(ii) Illuminated signs;
(iii) Neon or fluorescent signs;
(iv) Signs affixed, either permanently or temporarily, to street furniture;
(v) Portable signs, excluding political and realty signs as defined in section 28.04.003, sign regulations, as outlined in the city Code of
Ordinances;
(vi) Mobile signs;
(vii) Moving signs; and
(viii) Fence signs.
(ix) Banners for commercial use, to exclude one (1) U.S. and one (1) state flag, neither to exceed four (4) feet by six (6) feet in size.
(x) Other attention-getting devices used by commercial establishments.
(9) Litter/trash and junk. Section 12.07.001 [article 12.07], litter control and sections 22.05.051 through 22.05.061, solid waste collection by the city, as
outlined in the city Code of Ordinances, applies to all properties within any historic district. In addition, an approved container as defined by same must be
located in the rear yard of the subject property with exception allowed for pickup and disposal of said litter not to exceed a twenty-four-hour period. All fixed
or otherwise immobile trash containers must be set back from the property line no less than twenty-five (25) feet or be completely screened from view from
any street via landscaping and fencing.
(10) Outdoor furniture. Furniture or appliances which are constructed of materials which are intended for indoor use only or would otherwise be susceptible
to water damage, rot or destruction must not be placed on an open porch or outdoors.
(11) Outdoor merchandising. No business shall display any merchandise outdoors within a historic district.
(f) Rehabilitation guidelines. The following standards for rehabilitation shall be employed by the director and the historic landmark commission to evaluate a certificate
of appropriateness.
(1) Every reasonable effort should be made to provide compatible uses for properties mandating minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its
environment.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The removal or alteration
of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures, and sites should be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create
an earlier appearance will be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These
changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and should be recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site should be treated with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced if possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should
match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the
availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures should be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the
historic building materials should not be undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort should be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties should not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy
significant historic, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property and its
environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures should be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in
the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired.
(g) Preservation criteria for an historic designation.
(1) Building placement form and treatment.
(A) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings are only permitted in the rear yard and the interior side yard and must be compatible with the scale,
shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color of the main building. Accessory buildings must have pitched roofs. Prefabricated metal accessory
buildings are permitted if they are completely screened from view from any abutting street.
(B) Additions. Additions to a main building are only permitted on the side and rear facades, except that a porch may be added to the front facade. All
additions to a building must be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical characteristics, scale, shape, roof form, materials, detailing, and color
of the building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/376
(C) Architectural detail. Materials, colors, structural and decorative elements, and the manner in which they are used, applied, or joined together must
be typical of the style and period of the other buildings, if any, on the blockface and compatible with the contributing structures in the historic district.
(D) Awnings. Awnings on the front and corner side facade must be made of fabric or wood and complement the main building in style and color. Metal
and corrugated plastic awnings are only permitted on an accessory building or the rear facade of a main building. Other awnings must be typical of the
style and period of the main building, and compatible with the contributing structures of a similar style in the historic district.
(E) Building placement. All structures within an historic district must comply with the standards established in the city Code of Ordinances (section
28.03.024).
(F) Building widths. All structures within an historic district must comply with the property setback standards established in the city Code of
Ordinances (section 28.03.024).
(G) Chimneys. All chimneys must be compatible with the style and period of the main building and the contributing structures of a similar style in an
historic district. Chimneys on the front fifty (50) percent of a main building or on a corner side facade must be:
(i) Constructed of brick or other materials that look typical of the style and period of the main building; and
(ii) Of a style and proportion typical of the style and period of the main building.
(H) Color.
(i) In general. When painting the exterior of structures, property owners shall use dominant colors that comply with the officially adopted
acceptable color range as maintained in the office of the planning director. Any dominant colors that are not within the officially adopted acceptable
color range must be reviewed and approved by the historic landmark commission based on their appropriateness to and compatibility with the
structure, blockface and the historic district.
(ii) Brick surfaces. Brick surfaces not previously painted may not be painted unless the applicant establishes that the color and texture of
replacement brick cannot be matched with that of the existing brick surface or that the painting is necessary to restore or preserve the brick itself.
(iii) Certain colors prohibited. Fluorescent and metallic colors are not permitted on the exterior of any structure in an historic district.
(iv) Dominant and trim colors. All structures must have a dominant color and no more than five (5) trim colors. Trim colors must complement the
dominant color of a structure and be appropriate to and compatible with the structure, blockface and the overall character of the historic district. The
colors of a structure must be complementary to each other and the overall character of the historic district.
(v) Gutters and downspouts. Where appropriate, gutters and downspouts must be painted or colored to match the trim color or the roof color of
the structure.
(vi) Roof colors. Roof colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the structure.
(vii) Stain. The use and color of stain must be typical of the style and period of the building.
(I) Columns.
(i) Function. Columns are only permitted as vertical supports near the front entrance of the main building or as vertical supports for porches.
(ii) Materials. Columns must be constructed of brick, wood, aluminum or other materials that look typical of the style of the main building.
(J) Facade materials.
(i) In general. The only permitted facade materials are brick, wood siding, vinyl siding and wood and fiber cement products that look like wood
siding. All facade treatments must be done in a manner so as not to change the character of the building or irreversibly damage or obscure the
architectural features and trim of the building.
(ii) Facades. Existing facades must be preserved to appear in a manner for which they were originally intended (no existing wood or stucco
facade may be bricked). Wood shingles are not permitted as a primary facade material unless same is historically correct.
(K) Front entrances and porches.
(i) Detailing. Railings, moldings, tilework, carvings, and other detailing and architectural decorations on front entrances and front porches must
be typical of the style and period of the main building and the contributing structures of a similar style in the historic district.
(ii) Enclosures. A front entrance or front porch may not be enclosed with any material, including iron bars, glass, or mesh screening without a
certificate of appropriateness.
(iii) Floor coverings. Carpeting is not permitted as a front porch floor or step covering.
(iv) Style. Each front porch and entry treatment must have a shape, roof form, materials, and colors that are typical of the style and period of the
building, and must reflect the dominant horizontal or vertical characteristics of the main building and the contributing structures of a similar style in
the historic district.
(L) Porte cocheres. Porte cocheres must be preserved as architectural features and not be enclosed by fences, gates, or any other materials without a
certificate of appropriateness.
(M) Roof forms.
(i) Materials and colors. Roof materials and colors must complement the style and overall color scheme of the building or structure. On
residential structures, tar and gravel (built-up) is permitted only as a roof material on covered porches and porte cocheres with flat roofs. Carpet is
not permitted as a roof material. Composition shingle, cedar shingle, and metal roofing materials may be permitted.
(ii) Overhang. The minimum permitted roof overhang for a new or move-in main building is twelve (12) inches. A replacement roof on an
existing building must have an overhang equal to or greater than the overhang of the roof it replaces.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/376
(iii) Patterns. Roof patterns of a main building must be typical of the style and period of the architecture of the building and the contributing
structures of a similar style in the historic district.
(iv) Slope and pitch. The degree and direction of roof slope and pitch must be typical of the style and period of the main building and compatible
with existing building forms in the historic district. In no case is a roof permitted with a pitch less than a four and one-half (4-1/2) inch rise in any
twelve (12) inch horizontal distance. Flat roof designs are not permitted on main or accessory buildings or structures, except that a covered porch or
porte cocheres may have a flat roof that is typical of the style and period of the main building.
(N) Windows and doors.
(i) Front facade openings.
a. Glass. Clear, decorative stained, beveled, etched, and clear leaded glass may be permitted in any window opening. Reflective, tinted,
opaque, and mirrored glass and plastic are not permitted in any opening. Translucent glass is not permitted, except in a bathroom window. No
glass pane may exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area unless part of the original design.
b. Screens, storm doors, and storm windows. A screen, storm door, or storm window on a front or side facade of a main building may be
permitted only if:
1. Its frame matches or complements the color scheme of the main building; and
2. It does not obscure significant features of the window or door it covers.
c. Security and ornamental bars. Security and ornamental bars are permitted pending review by the director on any side of a main or
accessory building abutting a street.
d. Shutters. Shutters must be typical of the style and period of the building and appear to be installed in a manner to perform their intended
function.
e. Style.
1. All windows and doors in the front or side facade of a main building must be proportionally balanced in a manner typical of the style
and period of the building.
2. No single, fixed plate glass is allowed except as part of an original period design. The size and proportion of window and door
openings located on the front and side facades of a main building must be typical of the style and period of the building.
3. All windows, doors, and electrical lights in the front and side facades of a main building must be typical of the style and period of the
building. Windows must contain at least two (2) window panes. Sidelights must be compatible with the door or windows with which they
are associated.
4. The frames of windows should be trimmed in a manner typical of the style of the building.
(2) Landscaping. All properties within an historic district must comply with all existing landscaping requirements as illustrated in section 28.04.006 of the
city Code of Ordinances.
(3) Fences. The director may approve a fence not in compliance with this paragraph if the applicant establishes the fence is historically sensitive or unless
the absence of said fence poses a significant hazard to life or property.
(A) Form. Fences must be constructed and maintained in a vertical position.
(B) Height. Within a front yard, no solid fence or wall shall be erected to exceed a height of four (4) feet, unless a taller fence is required to screen offstreet
parking or screen incompatible land uses as required in section 28.04.006 of the Code of Ordinances. In no circumstances shall a solid wall or fence
located in a front yard exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet. A fence or wall that is at least eighty (80) percent open may be erected to a maximum
height of six (6) feet.
(C) Location.
(i) A fence in an interior side yard must be located no further forward on the lot than the front of the main building.
(ii) A fence in a corner side yard must not be directly in front of the corner side facade, except that the director may allow a fence that is directly
in front of the corner side facade if:
a. More screening is necessary to insure privacy due to unusually high pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and
b. The fence does not screen all or any portion of a significant architectural feature of the main building.
(iii) A fence must run either parallel or perpendicular to a building wall or lot line.
(D) Materials. A fence in a front or corner side yard must be constructed of wrought iron, wood or brick. Concrete block fences are not permitted.
(E) Masonry columns and bases.
(i) The color, texture, pattern and dimensions of masonry and the color, width, type and elevation of mortar joints in a fence column or base must
match the masonry and mortar joints of the main building as nearly as practicable.
(ii) All exposed brick in a fence column or base must be fired brick as defined by the American Standard Testing Materials Designation C-126-
75A, Type Grade FBS-SW.
(F) Metal fences. Wrought iron and metal fences must be compatible with the style and period of the main building. Chain-link, barbed wire and razor
wire fences are permitted only in back yards and must not be visible from any street.
(G) Wooden fences.
(i) All wooden structural posts must be at least four (4) inches by four (4) inches in diameter (nominal size).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/376
(ii) The side of the wooden fence facing a public street must be the finished side.
(iii) Wooden fences may by painted or stained a color that is complementary to the main building.
(h) Review procedures for certificates of appropriateness in an historic district.
(1) In general. The review procedure for maintenance, replacement, additions, deletions and new construction apply to any historic district except as
expressly modified by this section.
(2) Time limit. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from time of issuance. One or more extensions of time for periods
of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the planning manager for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and
justifiable cause is demonstrated. If work ceases for ninety (90) days, the applicant must reapply.
(3) Actions not requiring review.
(A) Routine maintenance and replacement. Routine maintenance and replacement includes processes of cleaning (including water blasting and
stripping) and replacing with like kind, duplicating, or stabilizing deteriorated or damaged architectural features (excluding paint color).
(B) Minor alterations. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for the following minor alterations:
(i) The maintenance of:
a. Fences;
b. Signs;
c. Pavement.
(ii) The restoration of original architectural elements to original specifications.
(iii) Interior renovations and remodeling.
(4) Actions requiring review by the planning manager. In addition to other applicable permitting, the planning manager shall review, within thirty (30) days
of acceptance, an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the following minor exterior alterations. Applications requiring review by the historic
landmark commission shall be forwarded by the planning manager to the commission within thirty (30) days of receipt of said application. The planning
manager shall determine whether the proposed work complies with the preservation criteria and regulations contained in this section and all other applicable
ordinances. If the proposed work complies, the manager shall grant the certificate.
(A) The application, installation or replacement of:
(i) Fences;
(ii) Existing paint of any legally nonconforming color;
(iii) Paint that complies with the officially adopted acceptable color range as maintained in the office of the planning manager;
(iv) Trim colors;
(v) Signs;
(vi) Pavement;
(vii) Security bars;
(viii) Windows.
(B) The demolition, construction, placement or relocation of an accessory structure.
(5) Review by the historic landmark commission.
(A) The standards contained in this section should be used by the historic landmark commission in making its decisions concerning a certificate of
appropriateness.
(B) The historic landmark commission shall review, within thirty (30) days of receipt, all applications for certificates of appropriateness forwarded to it
by the manager, most notably including the demolition, construction placement or relocation of any main structure. In reviewing an application, the
historic landmark commission shall determine whether the proposed work complies with the preservation criteria and regulations contained in this section
and all other applicable ordinances. If the proposed work complies, the historic landmark commission shall grant the certificate.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this section, if the proposed work does not comply with the preservation criteria and regulations contained in this
or any other applicable ordinance, the historic landmark commission shall deny the certificate.
(D) If the proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the external architectural features, future preservation, maintenance, or use of a structure or
blockface in an historic district, or of an historic district as a whole, the historic landmark commission shall grant the certificate. In determining whether
the proposed work constitutes the restoration of original architectural elements, the historic landmark commission shall consider all available materials,
including but not limited to photographs and drawings showing the original appearance of the building and its surrounding property at the time of
construction.
(E) If the proposed work is not addressed by the preservation criteria and regulations contained in this section and all other applicable ordinances, and
will not have an adverse effect on the external architectural features, future preservation, maintenance, or use of a structure or blockface of an historic
district, or of an historic district as a whole, the historic landmark commission shall grant the certificate.
(6) Who may appeal. Only the applicant and/or the property owner may appeal a decision by the manager or the historic landmark commission to deny a
certificate of appropriateness. An appeal of a decision of the planning manager must be undertaken in the manner outlined in the city's Code of Ordinances
(section 28.02.005). An appeal from a decision of the historic landmark commission must be taken to city council within ten (10) business days after the
decision has been rendered.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/376
(7) Exceptions. Properties which are determined by the planning manager to be threats or hindrances to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city shall be automatically exempted from the certificate of appropriateness review.
(i) Nonconforming uses and structures.
(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this section, section 28.04.005 of the city Code of Ordinances relating to nonconforming uses and structures,
applies to all historic districts.
(2) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed buildings or structures. If a lawful nonconforming building or structure in an historic district is damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God or other calamity, the building or structure may be rebuilt at the same location with the approval of the director as long as the building
does not increase whatsoever the degree of nonconformity. New construction that replaces damaged buildings and would increase the degree of nonconformity
must comply with the design guidelines provided in this section.
(3) Amortization of nonconforming structures and gravel and shell parking lots. With exception provided for main and accessory structures and fences, all
structures and gravel and shell parking lots which are not erected under the terms of this section at the time of the adoption of same must be removed or
otherwise made to conform with the terms of this section within four (4) years of the effective date of this section. There shall be granted no exceptions or
extensions.
(j) Designation as a contributing structure. For the purposes of this section, a property owner may wish to have a structure within an historic district to be singularly
distinguished as a contributing structure. To obtain this designation, a property owner must follow the standard procedure set forth in section 28.02.007 (HC-L, Historic-
Cultural Landmark Preservation designation).
(Ordinance 93-28, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/93; Ordinance 93-50, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; Ordinance 95-50, sec. 1, adopted 8/29/95; Ordinance 98-27, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/98;
Ordinance 00-83, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/00; Ordinance 01-018, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/01; Ordinance 02-008, secs. 1–3, adopted 1/29/02; 1978 Code, sec. 30-21.2; Ordinance
10-040, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/10; Ordinance 13-003, secs. 1–2, adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 28.03.019 PD, Port Development District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The PD, Port Development District, is intended to accommodate the port or port-related development of property owned by the
Port of Beaumont Navigation District. This district is located in close proximity to the Port of Beaumont in the area which is bordered generally on the west by Cypress,
Main, Blanchette, Sabine Pass and Carroll Streets, on the north by the Neches River, and on the south by Buford and Grant Streets.
(b) Permitted uses. Any use which is not otherwise prohibited by applicable local codes or ordinances.
(c) Area and height regulations. There shall be no area and height regulations in the PD, Port Development District.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-22)
Sec. 28.03.020 UC, Urban Corridor Overlay District regulations
(a) General purpose and description.
(1) The UC, Urban Corridor Overlay District, in general is intended to preserve and improve the physical environment along Martin Luther King Parkway;
promote the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic along this corridor; ensure that signage provides the
essential identity of facilities along this roadway; and prevent needless clutter in appearance along this corridor.
(2) This district supplements the regulations of the underlying zoning district classifications. The zoning map shall reflect the designation of an Urban
Corridor Overlay District by the letters “UC” as a suffix to the underlying zoning district classifications.
(b) Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this section:
Sign, attached. A sign which is attached to or painted on the outside face of a building. An attached sign is also erected parallel to the face of the building, supported by
the building and does not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the building wall or above the roof line of the building to which the sign is affixed.
Sign, detached. A sign which is wholly supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground and has no support to a building, canopy or facade.
Sign, electronic reader board. A sign or portion thereof that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and
the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes which is attached to or a part of a detached owner identification sign. A sign
on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time/temperature” portion of a sign and not a
commercial message or an electronic reader board sign for purposes of this chapter.
Sign, fence. A sign attached or affixed to any type of fence.
Sign, mobile. A business sign used to advertise an establishment or services which are on or affixed to trucks, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles used primarily to
support or display such signs while parked.
Sign, moving. A sign which in whole, or part, does not remain stationary at all times, regardless of the power source which affects movement.
Sign, portable. Any sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or any other structure and is designed to be moved from place to place.
(c) Permitted uses. The permitted uses in the UC, Urban Corridor Overlay District, shall be determined by the underlying zoning district classification.
(d) Boundaries. The boundaries of the Urban Corridor Overlay District shall extend a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the street right-of-way of Martin Luther
King Parkway from I-10 East to Cardinal Drive.
(e) Area and height regulations. The area and height regulations shall be determined by the underlying zoning district classification.
(f) Sign regulations. Signs shall not be permitted within an Urban Corridor Overlay District except as specifically authorized in this section.
(1) Permit requirements. No sign, unless herein excepted, shall be located, constructed, erected, altered, posted, attached or painted until a building permit
has been approved by the chief building inspector in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the International Building Code.
(2) Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in this Urban Corridor Overlay District:
(A) Off-premises advertising signs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/376
(B) Mobile signs.
(C) Moving signs.
(D) Portable signs. For the purpose of this section, trailer signs and signs on benches are considered to be portable signs.
(E) Fence signs.
(F) Banners, except for grand opening signs.
(3) Signs in residential–UC districts. Signs shall not be permitted in urban corridor overlay residential districts except as specifically authorized in this
section.
(A) One (1) detached identification sign may be constructed to identify a single-family residential development of ten (10) acres or more. Such signs
will be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) Building wall signs will be prohibited.
(ii) The sign must be for permanent identification of a subdivision.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
(iv) The sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the ground.
(v) The sign shall not be illuminated except by reflective floodlight type illumination. There shall not be any flashing or intermittent light.
(vi) The sign shall be placed within a landscaped setting containing not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(vii) All parts of the sign shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
(viii) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(B) One (1) detached owner identification sign shall be permitted for a multiple-family development, nonresidential, or institutional building for each
abutting street subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
(iii) Except for electronic reader board signs, no sign shall be lighted except by reflective floodlight type illumination. There shall not be any
flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as allowed below:
a. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
b. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
c. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
d. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
e. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall not be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
f. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted in an historic district.
(iv) All parts of the sign shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.
(v) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(vi) The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(C) One (1) attached owner identification sign per multiple-family dwelling development or institutional building shall be permitted for each street
abutting the development subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall be attached to or painted on the outside face of the building.
(ii) The attached sign shall be erected parallel to the face of the building, supported by the building and shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the face of the building wall.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
(iv) The sign shall not be lighted except by reflective floodlight type illumination. There shall not be any flashing or intermittent lights.
(v) No sign shall exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached, or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is less.
(D) One (1) detached owner identification sign shall be permitted for each commercial use with a specific use permit in the RCR, Residential
Conservation and Revitalization District, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign is included in the site plan approved in the specific use permit.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(iv) The sign shall not have any flashing lights, intermittent illumination nor revolve nor rotate in any manner, except as allowed below:
a. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached identification sign.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/376
b. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
c. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
d. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
e. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
f. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted in a historic district.
(v) All parts of the sign shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line.
(vi) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements set forth in the building code.
(vii) The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(E) One (1) attached owner identification sign shall be permitted for each commercial use in the RCR, Residential Conservation and Revitalization
District, for each street abutting the lot upon which the use is located, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall be attached to or painted on the outside face of the building.
(ii) The attached sign shall be erected parallel to the face of the building supported by the building and shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the face of the building wall.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
(iv) The sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is
less.
(v) The sign shall not have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination.
(4) Signs in commercial and industrial–UC districts.
(A) One (1) detached owner identification sign, and one (1) additional detached sign for each thoroughfare more than one (1) that abuts the property,
shall be permitted in the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, and OP, Office Park District for each commercial or office park establishment subject
to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(iii) No portion of the sign shall have flashing lights, intermittent illumination, nor shall it revolve nor rotate in any manner, except as allowed
below:
a. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
b. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
c. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
d. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
e. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(iv) The sign shall not be located in any required yard.
(v) The sign must meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(vi) The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(B) One (1) attached owner identification sign, and one (1) additional attached sign for each thoroughfare more than one (1) that abuts the property,
shall be permitted in the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, and OP, Office Park District for each commercial or office park establishment subject
to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall be attached to or painted on the outside face of the building.
(ii) The attached sign shall be erected parallel to the face of the building supported by the building and shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the face of the building wall.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
(iv) The sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is
less.
(v) The sign shall not have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination.
(C) One (1) detached owner identification sign, and one (1) additional detached sign for each thoroughfare more than one (1) that abuts the property,
shall be permitted per establishment, located in the NSC, GC-MD, CM, LI and HI Districts subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall not be greater than twenty (20) feet in height. The maximum height being measured from the point established by a
perpendicular line connecting the crown of the roadway immediately abutting the property on which the sign is to be installed with the sign's
nearest vertical support to the property line.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/376
(iii) All parts of the sign shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any property line or street right-of-way. Where a structure existing at the
effective date of this section precludes locating a sign in compliance with the setback regulations, the board of adjustment shall be authorized to
grant a variance to the setback requirement.
(iv) The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(v) The sign not revolve or rotate in any manner nor shall it have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as allowed below:
a. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
b. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
c. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
d. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
e. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(D) One (1) attached owner identification sign, and one (1) additional attached sign for each thoroughfare more than one (1) that abuts the property,
shall be permitted per establishment, in the NSC, CSC, GC-MD, CM, LI and HI district subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall be attached to or painted on the outside face of the building.
(ii) The attached sign shall be erected parallel to the face of the building supported by the building and shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the face of the building wall.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
(iv) The sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is
less.
(v) The sign shall not have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination.
(5) Exemptions. The following signs are exempted from the requirements of this section:
(A) Changing of permitted copy of an existing bulletin board, general advertising poster or paint panel(s), display encasement, marquee, flat sign,
projecting sign, detached sign, or roof sign, provided no increase occurs with respect to either the area or [of] any such sign or the manner in which it is
structurally supported.
(B) Signs on trucks, buses, or passenger vehicles which are used in the normal conduct of business.
(C) Nameplate and street address signs, less than three (3) square feet in size.
(D) Nonilluminated real estate signs, temporary in nature, not exceeding more than eight (8) square feet in area, advertising real estate for sale or lease
or announcing contemplated improvements of real estate; provided that only one (1) such sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property.
(E) Construction signs, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area and not located in any required yard, denoting the owner, architect, financial
institution, general contractor, subcontractor, or any statement pertaining to the project; provided that there is only one (1) sign for each street abutting the
premises.
(F) Warning, security, and traffic directional signs, less than eight (8) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height.
(G) Election signs temporary in nature, sixty (60) days minimum, less than eight (8) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height and not illuminated,
when placed within a residentially zoned area. Election signs must be removed within ten (10) days after the election.
(H) Grand opening signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area when it is an attached sign and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area
and five (5) feet in height when it is a detached sign. The sign shall contain the words “Grand Opening” only and must receive a fifteen-day building
permit from the city.
(I) Traditional and seasonal national, state, and religious holiday displays erected without advertising shall not be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, but shall be subject to the fire code and [other regulations] of the city.
(Ordinance 93-62, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/93; 1978 Code, sec. 30-23; Ordinance 08-021, secs. 3-5, adopted 3/18/08; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 12-031, secs. 1–
4, adopted 6/26/12; Ordinance 12-074, sec. 8, adopted 9/25/12)
Sec. 28.03.021 Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Sign Overlay District regulations
(a) General purpose and description. The Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Sign Overlay District, in general recognizes that this area will be the major growth area of
the city and is therefore intended to provide for the essential identity of facilities along the streets and prevent needless clutter in the area through uniform signage; to
preserve and improve the physical environment in the city; and promote the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic along
the streets in this area. This district supplements the regulations of the underlying zoning district classifications. The zoning map shall reflect the designation of a
Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Sign Overlay District by the letters “MD” as a suffix to the underlying zoning district classifications.
(b) Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this section:
Attention-getting device. Any device, other than a permitted sign, that is used to attract the attention of the public to a particular business, location, product or service.
Frontage. That portion of any tract of land which abuts a public street right-of-way, measured along the street line.
Multi-tenant business development. A development under the same ownership consisting of two (2) or more business establishments separated by a tenant separation wall,
using common driveways and on-site parking facilities, including, but not limited to, shopping centers, office complexes, office buildings and business parks. Retail cobranding
shall not be considered a multi-tenant business development.
Sign, advertising. A sign, other than an accessory owner identification sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity or service.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/376
Sign, banner. A type of sign that is generally constructed of lightweight plastic, fabric or a similar non-rigid material, and that is mounted/tethered to a pole(s), building or
other structure at one (1) or more edges. A banner typically exhibits a text message and/or a symbol(s) for the business located on the property, or for a product or service
provided by that business. National, state or local government flags are not considered banners.
Sign, detached. A sign which is wholly supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground and has no support to a building, canopy or facade.
Sign, double-faced. A single sign with two (2) parallel sign faces back-to-back.
Sign, electronic reader board. A sign or portion thereof that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and
the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes which is attached to or a part of a detached owner identification sign. A sign
on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time/temperature” portion of a sign and not a
commercial message or an electronic reader board sign for purposes of this chapter.
Sign facing. The facing of any sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated; provided however, for signs in which the words, letters or
symbols are independently mounted, the sign facing shall mean the smallest regular geometric form containing all of the individual words, letters and symbols. Size of the
sign shall be determined by the lettering. However, if there is background in addition to the lettering, background material shall be included if the background is uniquely
associated with the letters.
Sign, fence. A sign attached or affixed to any type of fence.
Sign, mobile. A business sign used to advertise an establishment or services which is on or affixed to trucks, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles used primarily to
support or display such signs while parked.
Sign, monument. A sign that is an independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base.
Sign, moving. A sign which in whole, or part, does not remain stationary at all times, regardless of the power source which affects movement.
Sign, owner identification. A sign which is located on the same lot or development and pertains only to the use of that premises and which contains information pertaining
to the name of the owner, occupant, or management associated with the use of the property, the kind of business or the brand name of the principal commodity sold on the
premises, or other information relative to a service or activity involved in the conduct of the business, but not including the names of subsidiary products being sold.
Sign, pennant. A sign consisting of a series of flags constructed of cloth or other limp material.
Sign, portable. A sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, which is designed to permit removal and reuse.
Single-tenant business establishment. A project or undertaking which involves the use of any property, building or structure, permanent or temporary, for the primary
purpose of conducting on said property a legitimate commercial enterprise, or other nonresidential use, in compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city.
Multiple services and/or goods offered by a business establishment shall be considered a single-tenant business establishment for the purposes of this section. This
definition shall include, but not be limited to, retail co-branding such as convenience stores with gas pumps and restaurants, grocery stores with banks and discount stores
with other incidental uses.
Tenant separation. A partition or floor/ceiling assembly or both constructed between tenants as per the adopted building code.
(c) Permitted uses. The permitted uses in the MD, Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Sign Overlay District, shall be determined by the underlying zoning district
classification.
(d) Boundaries.
For place of beginning, begin at a point in the north right-of-way line of Tolivar Road, a 60-foot-wide street right-of-way, said point also being in the southwest corner of
Lot 7 and the same being the southeast corner of Lot 8, Neches Terrace Addition, an unrecorded subdivision out of the Daniel Easley Survey, Abstract No. 20, Beaumont,
Jefferson County, Texas;
Thence in a northerly direction along the common side lot lines of said Lots 7 and 8, a distance of 322.4 feet, more or less, to a point in the south right-of-way line of State
Highway 105; thence continuing north a distance of 50 feet to the centerline of said State Highway 105 to a point for corner; thence west along the centerline of State
Highway 105 a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to a point for corner; thence north a distance of 50 feet to a point in the north right-of-way line of State Highway 105;
Thence north 750 feet to a point for corner; thence east 870 feet to a point for corner in the west right-of-way line of Major Drive (FM 364); thence continuing east a
distance of 60 feet to a point in the centerline of Major Drive (FM 364); thence south a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to a point for corner; thence east a distance of 60
feet to a point in the east right-of-way line of Major Drive (FM 364);
Thence east along the south line of Block 1, Griffing Villa, Unit 1, recorded in the Jefferson County Map Records in Vol. 12, Page 80, and also being in the north line of
Lot 2, Rand Addition, recorded in the Jefferson County Map Records in Vol. 15, Page 39, a distance of 660 feet to a point for corner in the northeast corner of Lot 2, Rand
Addition; thence south a distance of 526.07 feet to a point for corner;
Thence east along a line which is 200 feet north of and parallel to the north right-of-way line of State Highway 105 to a point in the west line of a 60-foot-wide Drainage
District #6 drainage easement; thence in a southeasterly course along the west line of the DD#6 drainage easement to a point which is 100 feet north of the north right-ofway
line of State Highway 105; thence east a distance of approximately one mile to a point in the west line of Tract A out of Lot 1, out of Lot 2, Block 2, W.E. Johson
Addition, said point lying 100 north of State Highway 105;
Thence south to a point in the centerline of Highway 105; thence east approximately 250 feet to a point in the centerline of Highway 105 and approximately 100 feet east
of the east right-of-way line of Old Dowlen Road; thence south along a line 100 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Old Dowlen Road to a point in the north property
line of the Wal-Mart Stores Subdivision; thence east along the north line of said subdivision a distance of 954.83 feet to the northeast corner of said subdivision; thence
south along the east side of said subdivision a distance of 896.70 feet to a point in the north right-of-way line of the 100-foot wide Dowlen Road; thence south a distance
of 200 feet to a point 100 feet south of Dowlen Road;
Thence in a northeast and easterly direction along a line 100 feet south of Dowlen Road to a point in the west line of the Ed Snowden Properties Subdivision (Vol. 13, Pg.
120, Jefferson County Map Records); thence south along the west line of the Ed Snowden Subdivision and then continuing south along the west line of Tract 3 of the
South Parkdale Addition (Vol. 14, Page 234, J.C.M.R.), and continuing south along the west line of a 60-foot-wide Drainage District No. 6 drainage easement to a point in
the north line of a 70-foot-wide DD#6 drainage easement (Hillebrandt Bayou); thence south a distance of 35 feet to the centerline of the Hillebrandt Bayou; thence in a
southerly direction along the centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou and following the meanderings of the bayou and crossing Folsom Drive and Delaware Street a total distance
of approximately 6,500 feet to a point for corner in the centerline of Hillebrandt Bayou;
Thence west to the northeast corner of Lot 7, Block 1, Park West Addition; thence continuing west a distance of 261.69 feet to a point, and continuing west across the
north lines of Lots 1–4, Block 1, Park West Addition (J.C.M.R Vol. 15, p. 208) an additional distance of 370.32 feet to a point in the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block 1,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/376
Park West to a point for corner in the centerline of Dowlen Road, a 100-foot-wide right-of-way;
Thence south for 700 feet along the centerline of Dowlen Road to a point at the north intersection of Dowlen Road and Wellington Place, a 60-foot-wide street right-ofway,
said point lying in the east line of Dowlen Road; thence east a distance of 30 feet to a point in the centerline of Wellington Place; thence south along the centerline of
Wellington Place a distance of 1,800 feet, more or less, to a point for corner; thence due west and continuing along the centerline of Wellington Place a distance of 900
feet, more or less, to a point for corner, said point lying 100 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Dowlen Road;
Thence south along a line 100 feet east of and parallel to Dowlen Road a distance of 1,600 feet, more or less, to a point for corner 100 feet south of the south right-of-way
line of Gladys Avenue;
Thence west crossing Dowlen Road and continuing west along a line 100 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Gladys Avenue to a point for corner 100 feet west of
the west right-of-way line of North Major Drive (FM 364) and 100 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Gladys Avenue;
Thence north along a line 100 feet west of the west right-of-way line of North Major Drive (FM 364) to a point in the south right-of-way line of Dishman Road, said point
being the corporate limits of the City of Beaumont; thence east to a point in the centerline of North Major Drive (FM 364) being the corporate city limits; thence north
approximately 3647 feet along the centerline of North Major Drive (FM 364) to a point; thence west approximately 50 feet to the west right-of way line of Major Drive
(FM 364) and the southeast corner of Tract 2, Abstract 33, A Houston Survey (33.5870 acres);
Thence west along the south property line of Tract 2, Abstract 33, A Houston Survey (33.5870 acres) approxinnately1004 feet to the southwest corner of Tract 2, Abstract
33, A Houston Survey (33.5870 acres); thence north approximately 3286 feet to a point in the north line of the A. Houston Survey and the south line of the D. Easley
Survey said point lying 941 feet west of the west right-of-line of North Major Drive (FM 364); thence east to a point being in the south line of the D. Easley Survey and in
the north line of the A. Huston Survey, said point lying 100 feet west of the west right-of-way line of North Major Drive (FM 364);
Thence continuing north along a line 100 feet east of and parallel to North Major Drive to a point in the north right-of-way line of the L.N.V.A. Canal (Lower Neches
Valley Authority Canal); thence in a southwest direction along the northerly line of the L.N.V.A. Canal a distance of 800 feet, more or less, to a point for corner;
Thence north 1,400 feet, more or less, to a point at the southeast corner of Western Hills, Unit 2, mobile home subdivision recorded in the J.C.M.R.'s in Vol. 11, Page 42;
thence continuing north along the east line of Western Hills, Unit 2 a distance of 810 feet to a point for corner in the south right-of-way line of the 60-foot-wide Tolivar
Road right-of-way; thence north 32° east a distance of 70 feet to the place of beginning, containing an area of 2,613 acres or 4.08 square miles, more or less.
(e) Area and height regulations. Minimum lot area, width, depth, yard and building height shall be determined by the underlying zoning district classification.
(f) Sign regulations. Signs shall not be permitted within the Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Sign Overlay District except as specifically authorized in this section.
(1) Permit requirements. No sign, unless herein excepted, shall be located, constructed, erected, altered, posted, attached or painted until a building permit
has been approved by the building official in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the International Building Code.
(2) Prohibited signs. In addition to the prohibited signs listed in section 28.04.003(f), the following types of signs are prohibited in this overlay district:
(A) Advertising signs.
(B) Mobile signs.
(C) Moving signs.
(D) Portable signs. For the purpose of this section, trailer signs and signs on benches are considered to be portable signs.
(E) Fence signs.
(F) Pennants, decorations or other attention-getting devices.
(3) Sight distance. No sign shall be located within a 30-foot by 30-foot triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections and
driveway/street intersections in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight line of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. A two (2) square foot in
area directional sign may be located within the required sight triangle.
(4) Signs in residential-MD districts. Signs shall not be permitted in Major/Dowlen/ Gladys/Hwy. 105 sign overlay residential districts except as specifically
authorized in this section.
(A) One (1) detached identification sign may be constructed at each entrance to identify a single-family residential development. Such signs will be
subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) Building wall signs will be prohibited.
(ii) The sign must be for permanent identification of a subdivision.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
(iv) The sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the ground.
(v) The sign shall not be illuminated except by reflective floodlight type illumination. There shall not be any flashing or intermittent lights.
(vi) All parts of the sign may be located at the property line.
(vii) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(B) One (1) detached owner identification monument sign shall be permitted for a multiple-family development, nonresidential or institutional building
for each abutting street, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(iii) The sign shall not have any flashing lights, any type of intermittent illumination or revolve in any manner, except as allowed below:
a. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/376
b. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
c. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
d. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
e. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
f. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted in historic district.
(iv) All parts of the sign may be located at the property line.
(v) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(vi) The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(C) One (1) attached owner identification sign per multiple-family dwelling development or institutional building shall be permitted for each street
abutting the development subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) The sign shall be attached to or painted on the outside of the building.
(ii) The attached sign shall be erected parallel to the face of the building, supported by the building and shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the face of the building wall.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
(iv) The sign shall not be lighted except by reflective floodlight type illumination. There shall not be any flashing or intermittent lights.
(v) No sign shall exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached, or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is less.
(5) Signs in commercial and industrial-MD districts. Detached signs shall not be permitted in Major/Dowlen/Gladys/Hwy. 105 Overlay commercial and
industrial districts except as specifically authorized in this section.
(A) Single-tenant business establishment.
(i) Developments with less than eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in gross building area shall be permitted one (1) detached owner
identification monument sign per street frontage that abuts the property. Developments with eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of gross building
area or greater or developments with six hundred (600) feet or more of street frontage shall be permitted two (2) detached owner identification signs
per street frontage that abuts the property.
(ii) These signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
a. The sign shall not be greater than six (6) feet in height, the maximum height being measured from twenty-four (24) inches above the curb
height adjacent to the property.
b. The sign shall not exceed seventy (70) square feet in area with the sign facing not to exceed sixty (60) square feet.
c. All parts of the sign may be located at the street right-of-way and shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any other property
line.
d. The sign shall not revolve or rotate in any manner nor shall it have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as
allowed below:
1. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
2. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
3. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
4. Electronic reader board sign that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
5. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
e. The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
f. The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(B) Multi-tenant business development.
(i) Developments with less than eighty (80,000) square feet in gross building area shall be permitted one (1) detached owner identification
monument sign for each street frontage that abuts the property. Developments with eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of gross building area or
greater or developments with six hundred (600) feet or more of street frontage shall be permitted two (2) detached owner identification signs per
street frontage that abuts the property.
(ii) These signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
a. The sign shall not be greater than twenty (20) feet in height, the maximum height being measured from twenty-four (24) inches above the
curb adjacent to the property.
b. The sign shall not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet in area with the sign facing not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
c. All parts of the sign may be located at the street right-of-way and must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any other property
line.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/376
d. The sign shall not revolve or rotate in any manner nor shall it have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as
allowed below:
1. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
2. No more than sixty (60) square feet shall be dedicated to electric changeable copy.
3. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
4. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
5. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
6. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
e. The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
f. The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(C) Gasoline retailers owner identification/pricing board signs. One (1) detached owner identification/pricing board sign for each street frontage that
abuts the property shall be permitted subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(i) Dowlen Road, Hwy. 105 and Major Drive.
a. The sign shall not be greater than fifteen (15) feet in height, the maximum height being measured from twenty-four (24) inches above the
curb height adjacent to the property.
b. The sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area with the sign facing not to exceed eighty-five (85) square feet.
c. All parts of the sign may be located at the street right-of-way and must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any other property
line.
d. The sign shall not revolve or rotate in any manner nor shall it have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as
allowed below:
1. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
2. No more than sixty (60) square feet shall be dedicated to electric changeable copy.
3. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
4. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
5. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
6. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
e. The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
f. The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(ii) All other streets in the MD Sign Overlay District.
a. The sign shall not be greater than six (6) feet in height, the maximum height being measured from twenty-four (24) inches above the curb
height adjacent to the property.
b. The sign shall not exceed seventy (70) square feet in area with the sign facing not to exceed sixty (60) square feet.
c. All parts of the sign may be located at the street right-of-way and shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any other property
line.
d. The sign shall not revolve or rotate in any manner nor shall it have flashing lights or any type of intermittent illumination, except as
allowed below:
1. Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
2. The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
3. Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
4. Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
5. As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
e. The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
f. The sign shall be placed in a landscaped setting of not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(g) Exemptions. The following signs are exempted from the requirements of this section:
(1) Changing of permitted copy of an existing bulletin board, general advertising poster or paint panel(s), display encasement, marquee, flat sign, [or]
detached sign provided no increase occurs with respect to either the area or [of] such sign or the manner in which it is structurally supported.
(2) Signs on trucks, buses or passenger vehicles which are used in the normal conduct of business.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/376
(3) Nameplate and street address signs, less than three (3) square feet in size.
(4) Non-illuminated real estate signs, temporary in nature, not exceeding more than sixty-four (64) square feet in area, advertising real estate for sale or lease
or announcing contemplated improvements of real estate; provided that only one (1) such sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property. The sign
must be located on the property subject to sale or improvement.
(5) Construction signs, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area and not located in any required yard, denoting the owner, architect, financial institution,
general contractor, subcontractor, or any statement pertaining to the project; provided that there is only one (1) sign for each street abutting the premises.
(6) Warning, security and traffic directional signs less than eight (8) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height.
(7) Election signs temporary in nature, sixty (60) days maximum, less than eight (8) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height and not illuminated, when
placed within a residentially zoned area. Election signs must be removed within ten (10) days after the election or runoff election, if applicable.
(8) Banner signs, when attached to a building. Detached banner signs, not exceeding twenty-one (21) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height, shall be
allowed for each individual establishment or entity. Detached banner signs shall not be placed on any one (1) property more than five (5) times per calendar
year and shall not be displayed for longer than thirty (30) consecutive days at any one (1) time with one (1) 30-day extension allowed for a total of sixty (60)
days. Under no circumstances shall banner signs on any one property be allowed for more than one hundred fifty (150) days per calendar year. A banner permit
of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required from the building codes division of the city for each display period. No banner sign shall be placed on city right-ofway.
Banner signs shall be supported by non-permanent supports that are not permanently set in the ground. These supports shall be removed with the sign at
the expiration of each allowed time period.
(9) Traditional and seasonal national, state and religious holiday displays erected without advertising shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter, but
shall be subject to the fire code of the city.
(10) Attached advertising signs located on nonprofit recreational facilities.
(h) Continuation of nonconforming signs.
(1) All lawful nonconforming on-premise owner identification signs shall be allowed to exist in the MD Sign Overlay District except as provided for herein.
Provided however, when a nonconforming sign falls into disrepair, or is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the cost of
reconstruction or repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the sign, such nonconforming signs shall no longer be permitted.
(2) All nonconforming advertising signs existing in the MD Sign Overlay District on the effective date of this provision may be required to be relocated,
reconstructed, or removed by the city council. Any sign required to be relocated, reconstructed, or removed shall be accomplished in accordance with the
procedures as provided for in chapter 216 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 00-58, sec. 1, adopted 7/11/00; Ordinance 04-043, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/04; 1978 Code, sec. 30-23.1; Ordinance 08-021, secs. 6, 7, adopted 3/18/08; Ordinance
adopting Code; Ordinance 12-031, secs. 5–8, adopted 6/26/12; Ordinance 17-070 adopted 10/24/17)
Sec. 28.03.022 Neighborhood Design Overlay District
(a) General purpose and description. The purpose of the ND, Neighborhood Design Overlay District, is to provide for the protection, preservation and design
compatibility of buildings, sites and areas within the overlay district. More specifically, this district has the following expressed purposes:
(1) To encourage neighborhood conservation;
(2) To stabilize property values;
(3) To prevent the construction of buildings of a size and scale not compatible with the established built character of the district.
This district supplements the regulations of the underlying zoning district classification. The zoning map shall reflect the designation of a Neighborhood Design Overlay
designation by the letters “ND” as a suffix to the underlying zoning district classification.
(b) Reconciliation with other ordinances. All city codes, as amended, apply to all Neighborhood Design Districts unless expressly modified by this ordinance.
(c) Applicability and boundaries. This ordinance shall apply to all lands zoned as Neighborhood Design (ND) as described below and as shown on the adopted zoning
map:
Being Lots 1-13, Block 1, Lots 1-13, Block 2, Lots 1-26, Block 3, Lots 1-26, Block 4, Lots 1-26, Block 5, Lots 1-26, Block 6, Lots 1-26, Block 7, Lots 1-
26, Block 8, Lots 1-26, Block 9, Lots 1-26, Block 10, Lots 1-14, Block 11, Lots 1-13, Block 12, Lots 2-12, Block 13, Lots 1-10, Block 14, Calder Place
Addition, City of Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas, containing 47.58 acres, more or less.
(d) Use regulations of Neighborhood Design Districts. All previous uses legally permitted by the underlying zoning district receiving Neighborhood Design designation
shall remain so upon adoption of this ordinance.
(e) Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this section:
Buildable area. The area in which development subject to this subchapter [this section] may occur, and which is defined by the side and rear setback planes required by
this subchapter, together with the area defined by the front, side, and rear yard setbacks and the maximum height limit.
Height. In this subchapter, the height of a building or setback plane shall be measured as follows: Height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average
contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
(f) Nonconforming uses and structures. Except as otherwise provided in this section, section 28.04.005 of the city Code of Ordinances relating to nonconforming uses
and structures, applies to all Neighborhood Design Districts.
(g) Review procedures, modifications and appeals. Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of the planning manager. Appeals of
the provisions of this subchapter shall be made to the board of adjustment as outlined in section 28.02.005 of this zoning ordinance.
(h) Supplemental regulations. Parking in front or side yards. Within front or side yards, off-street surface parking is not permitted on grassed and non-paved areas.
(i) Development standards for Neighborhood Design Districts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/376
(1) Building height. Except where these regulations are superseded, the maximum building height for development subject to this subchapter is thirty-five
(35) feet. Section 28.03.024(c) (height limit exceptions) does not apply to development subject to this subchapter, except for allowances for belfries,
ornamental towers or spires, antennas and flagpoles. Building height shall be measured under the requirements defined in the definition of “height” in
subsection (e) of this section.
(2) Front yard setback.
(A) Minimum setback required. The minimum front yard setback required for development subject to this subchapter is the average front yard setback,
as provided in subsection (B) below.
(B) Average front yard setback.
(i) An average front yard setback is determined based on the setbacks of each principal residential structure that is built within 50 feet of its front
lot line.
(ii) Except as provided in paragraph (iii), the four structures that are closest to the subject property on the same side of the block shall be used in
the calculation of average front yard setback. If there are less than four structures on the same side of the block, the lesser number of structures is
used in the calculation.
(iii) If there are no structures on the same side of the block, the four structures that are closest to the subject property and across the street are
used in the calculation. If there are less than four structures across the street, the lesser number is used in the calculation. See figure 1.
Figure 1: Average Front Yard Setback
In this example, the minimum required front setback in the underlying zoning district is 25 feet. However, because of the variety of existing
setbacks of buildings on the same block face, new development on lot C may be located with a setback of only 20 feet, which is the average of
the setbacks of lots B, D, and E. The building on lot A is not included in the average because it is located more than 50 feet from the property
line.
(3) Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback in a Neighborhood Design District shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(4) Side yard setback. The minimum side yard setback in a Neighborhood Design District shall be as follows:
(A) For an interior lot the setback shall be five (5) feet for one-story buildings and seven and one-half feet (7.5) for multi-story buildings.
(B) For a corner lot backing up to an abutting side yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
(C) For a corner lot backing up to an abutting rear yard: Ten (10) feet.
(5) Setback planes. This subsection prescribes side and rear setback planes in order to minimize the impact of new development and rear development on
adjacent properties. A structure may not extend beyond a setback plane except as authorized by subsection (7) below. The height of a setback plane shall be
measured under the requirements defined in the definition of “height” in subsection (e) of this section.
(A) Side setback plane. Except as provided in subsection (7) below, an inwardly sloping 45-degree angle side setback plane begins at a horizontal line
fifteen (15) feet directly above the side property line. See figure 2.
Figure 2: Side and Rear Setback Planes Measured from Side/Rear Property Line
In this illustration, the side or rear setback plane is shown as a line extending 15 feet above the side or rear property line and then angled
inward at a 45° angle.
(B) Rear setback plane. Except as provided in subsection (7) below, an inwardly sloping forty-five (45) degree angle rear setback plane begins [at] a
horizontal line fifteen (15) feet directly above the rear property line.
(6) Buildable area. The buildable area, as defined in subsection (e) of this section, consists of the smallest area within the front, side, and rear yard setbacks;
maximum height limit; and the combined side and rear setback planes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/376
Figure 3: Side Setback Plane Measured from Side Property Line
In this illustration, the side and rear setback planes are shown as lines extending 15 feet above the side and rear property lines and then angled
inward at a 45° angle.
(7) Exceptions. A structure may not extend beyond a yard setback line or a setback plane, except for:
(A) A roof overhang or eave, up to eighteen (18) inches beyond the setback plane;
(B) A chimney, vent, antenna, or energy conservation or production equipment or feature not designed for occupancy; and
(C) Gable roof and dormer exceptions (see figure 4):
(i) Side-gabled roof exception. A side-gabled roof structure on each side of the building, with a total horizontal length of not more than eighteen
(18) feet on each side of the building, measured along the intersection with the setback plane;
(ii) Dormers exception. Dormers, with a total horizontal length of not more than fifteen (15) feet on each side of the building, measured along the
intersection with the setback plane.
Figure 4: Gable and Dormer Exception
In this illustration, a side-gabled roof may encroach into the setback plane for not more than 18' in width. Also shown are dormers which
may encroach into the setback plane not more than a total width of 15'.
(Ordinance 07-095, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/07)
Sec. 28.03.023 Permitted uses
(a) Use of land and buildings. Buildings, structures, land or premises shall be used only in accordance with the uses specifically permitted in the zoning district
classification for the site subject to compliance with parking regulations, height and area requirements, “special conditions” and all other requirements of the zoning
ordinance.
(b) Permitted use table. The permitted uses in each specific zoning district are shown by means of symbols in the permitted use tables on the following pages. The letter
“P” in the zoning district column opposite the listed permitted use means the use is permitted as a use of right in that district subject to (1) providing of off-street parking
in the amounts required by reference to the “parking group” column, and (2) subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in the section or sections whose
number appears in the “special conditions” column opposite the permitted use. The letter “S” in the zoning district column opposite the permitted use means the use is
permitted in that zoning district only after (1) providing off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the “parking group” column, (2) subject to compliance
with all of the requirements specified in the section or sections whose number appears in the “special conditions” column opposite the permitted use and (3) obtaining a
specific use permit as set forth in section 28.04.001. No primary use shall be permitted in any district other than a use shown in the following tables and no primary use
shall be permitted in any district unless the letter “P” or the letter “S” appears opposite the listed permitted use.
(c) Uses not listed. Primary uses not listed in the permitted use table may be permitted in any district where similar uses are permitted. The function and locational
requirements of the unlisted use must be consistent with the purpose and description of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the district, and be
similar in traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibration, dust, odor glare and heat producing characteristics.
(d) Accessory use. A use which is customarily incidental to that of the primary existing use, which is located on the same lot or premises as the primary existing use,
and which has the same zoning district classification shall be permitted as an accessory use without being separately listed as a permitted use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/376
(e) Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) group numbers. The group description in the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification Manual prepared by the Statistical
Policy Division for the United States Office of Management and Budget shall be used to determine the classification of primary uses when reference is made in the tables
to a designated standard industrial classification (SIC) group number. Such SIC manual shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for public inspection during business
hours.
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
P P P 01 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION–
CROPS (except as noted)
40
P S P P P S S P P P S
018 Horticultural Specialties (including
retail sales)
8
P P 02 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION–
LIVESTOCK
15
P P P P S
07 AGRICULTURAL SERVICES (except
as noted)
7
P S P P P S S P P P S 074 Veterinary Services 14 17
P S S S S S P P P S 0752 Kennels 14 17
S P P S S P P P S
076 Farm Labor and Management Services
(except as noted)
14
P S S P P S P P P P S
078 Landscape/ Horticultural Services
(except as noted)
14
P S S S P P P S 0782 Lawn and Garden Services 14
P S S S P P P S 0783 Tree Services 7
P 08 FORESTRY 6
P 09 FISHING, HUNTING AND
TRAPPING
7
S P 10 METAL MINING 7
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P 13 OIL AND GAS EXTRACTION 7
S
P
14 MINING AND QUARRYING OF
NONMETALLIC MINERALS,
EXCEPT FUELS
7
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/376
S S S P P P S
15 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION–
GENERAL CONTRACTORS
7 23
S S S P P P S
16 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION OTHER
THAN BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
7 23
S S S P P P S
CONSTRUCTION–SPECIAL TRADE
CONTRACTORS
7 23
S S P 20 FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS
(except as noted)
7 18
S P P 2013 Sausage and Other Prepared Meat
Products
7 18
S P P 202 Dairy Products 7 18
S P P 203 Canned and Preserved Fruit and
Vegetables
7 18
S P P 2045 Prepared Flour Mixes and Doughs 7 18
S S P P P P 205 Bakery Products 7 18
S S P P P P 2064-67 Candy and Other Confectionery
Products
7 18
S P P 2085 Distilled and Blended Liquors 7 18
S P P
2086 Bottled and Canned Soft Drinks and
Carbonated Waters
7 18
S P P 2087 Flavoring Extracts and Syrups, not
elsewhere classified
7 18
S P P 209 Miscellaneous Food Preparations and
Kindred Products
7 18
S P P 21 TOBACCO PROUCTS 7 18
S P P 22 TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS 7 18
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/376
S P P P 23 APPAREL AND OTHER FINISHED
PRODUCTS MADE FROM FABRICS
AND SIMILAR MATERIALS
7 18
S P
24 LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS,
EXCEPT FURNITURE (except as
noted)
7 18
S P P 243 Millwork, Veneer, Plywood, and
Structural Wood Members
7 18
S P P 244 Wood Containers 7 18
S P P 2499 Wood Products, Not Elsewhere
Classified
7 18
S P P 25 FURNITURE AND FIXTURES 7 18
S P 26 PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
(except as noted)
7 18
S P P 265 Paperboard Containers and Boxes 7 18
S P P 267 Converted Paper and Paperboard
Products, except containers and boxes
7 18
S S S P P P 27 PRINTING, PUBLISHING AND
ALLIED INDUSTRIES
7
S P 28 CHEMICALS AND ALLIED
PRODUCTS (except as noted)
7
S P P 283 Drugs 7
S 2892 Explosives 7
S P
29 PETROLEUM REFINING AND
RELATED INDUSTRIES (except as
noted)
7
S S P 295 Temporary Batching Plants 7 10
S P 30 RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS
PLASTIC PRODUCTS
7 18
S P P 31 LEATHER AND LEATHER
PRODUCTS (except as noted)
7 18
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/376
S P 311 Leather Tanning and Finishing 7 18
S P P
32 STONE, CLAY, GLASS AND
CONCRETE PRODUCTS (except as
noted)
7 18
S P P 324 Cement, Hydraulic 7 18
S P P 327 Concrete, Gypsum and Plastic Products
(except as noted)
7 18
S S P 3273 Temporary Batching Plant 7 18
S P 329 Abrasive, Asbestos, and Miscellaneous
Nonmetallic Mineral Products
7 18
S P 33 PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES 7
S P P
34 FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS,
EXCEPT MACHINERY AND
TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
(except as noted)
7 18
S P 3441 Fabricated Structural Steel 7 18
S P 3443 Fabricated Plate Work (Boiler Shops) 7 18
S P 346 Metal Forgings and Stampings 7 18
S P 348 Ordnance and Accessories except
Vehicles and Guided Missiles
7 18
S P 349 Miscellaneous Fabricated Metal
Products
7 18
35 INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL
MACHINERY AND COMPUTER
EQUIPMENT (as noted)
18
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S P 351 Engines and Turbines 7 18
S P 3523 Farm Machinery and Equipment 7 18
S P P 3524 Garden Tractors and Lawn and Garden
Equipment
7 18
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/376
S P 353 Construction, Mining and Materials
Handling Machinery and Equipment
7
S P P 354 Metalworking Machinery and
Equipment
7 18
S P P 355 Special Industrial Machinery Except
Metalworking Machines
7 18
S P 356 General Industrial Machinery and
Equipment
7 18
S S P P 357 Computer and Office Equipment 7 18
S P P 358 Refrigeration and Service Industry
Machinery
7 18
S P P 359 Miscellaneous Industrial and
Commercial Machinery and Equipment
7 18
S S S P P P 36 ELECTRONIC AND OTHER
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
7
S P 37 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
(except as noted)
7 18
S P P P S 3732 Boat Building and Repair 7
S S S P P P
38 MEASURING, ANALYZING, AND
CONTROLLING INSTRUMENTS;
PHOTOGRAPHIC; MEDICAL AND
OPTICAL GOODS; WATCHES AND
CLOCKS
7
S S S S P P 39 MISCELLANEOUS
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
7
S S S P P P S 40 RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION 7
S S S P P P S
41 LOCAL, SUBURBAN TRANSIT AND
INTERURBAN HIGHWAY
PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION
(except as noted)
7
P S S P P P S
4119 Local Passenger Transportation, Not
Elsewhere Classified
7
S S S P P P S
42 MOTOR FREIGHT
TRANSPORTATION AND
WAREHOUSING
20 20
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/376
S S P P P P S 4225 General Warehousing and Storage
S P S P P P P S 43 U.S. POSTAL SERVICE 7
S S P P S 44 WATER TRANSPORTATION 7 18
S P P P S
45 TRANSPORTATION BY AIR (except
as noted)
7
S S S S S S S S
Heliport and Helistops 41 16
P S P P S S P P P P S P P P S
46 PIPELINES, EXCEPT NATURAL
GAS
S S S P P P S
47 TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
(except as noted)
7
S S S S P S P P P P S 4724 Travel Agencies 14
S S P P S S P P P S 48 COMMUNICATIONS 7
S S S P P P S
49 ELECTRIC, GAS AND SANITARY
SERVICE (except as noted)
7
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4971 Irrigation Systems 7
S S S P P P S
50 WHOLESALE TRADE–DURABLE
GOODS (except as noted)
8
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S S P S 5015 Motor Vehicle Parts, Used 8
S S P P P P S
5074 Plumbing and Heating Equipment and
Spls.
S S P S 5093 Scrap and Waste Materials 8
S S S P P P S
51 WHOLESALE TRADE–
NONDURABLE GOODS (except as
noted)
8
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/376
S S P P P P S 514 Groceries and Related Products
S S P S 515 Farm Product–Raw Materials 8
S S P S
5169 Chemicals and Allied Products, Not
Elsewhere Classified
8
S S P P P P S
518 Beer, Wine and Distilled Alcoholic
Beverages
P P P S S P P P S
52 BUILDING MATERIALS,
HARDWARE, GARDEN SUPPLY
AND MOBILE HOME DEALERS
(except as noted)
8 13
S S S S P P P S 527 Mobile Home Dealers 8
S P P P S S P P P S
53 GENERAL MERCHANDISE
STORES
13 13
S P P P S P P P P S 54 FOOD STORES 12 13
55 AUTO DEALERS AND GASOLINE
SERVICE STATIONS (except as
noted)
13
P P S S P P P S 551 Motor Vehicle Dealers (New and Used) 24
S P S S P P P S 552 Motor Vehicle Dealers (Used Only) 23
S P P P S S P P P S 553 Auto and Home Supply Stores 13
S S P P S S P P P S 554 Gasoline Service Stations 38
P P S S P P P S 555 Boat Dealers 24
P P S S P P P S 556 Recreational and Utility Trailer Dealers 24
P P S S P P P S 557 Motorcycle Dealers 14
S P S S P P P S 559 Auto Dealers, Not Elsewhere Classified 23
S P P P S P P P P S
56 APPAREL AND ACCESSORY
STORES
13 13
S P P P S P P P P S
57 HOME FURNISHINGS,
FURNITURE, AND EQUIPMENT
STORES
14 13
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/376
58 EATING AND DRINKING PLACES
(as noted)
S S S P P S P P P P S 5812 Eating Places (Inc. Carry Out Caterers) 26(9) 11, 31
S S S S P P P S 5813 Drinking Places 26
S S S 2082 Brewpubs 26
S S S 2084 Wineries 26
59 MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL (as
noted)
13
S P P P S P P P P S 591 Drug Stores and Propriety Stores 13
S P P S S P P P S 592 Liquor Stores 13
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S P P P S P P P P S 593 Used Merchandise Stores 14 21
S P P P S P P P P S 5941 Sporting Goods and Bicycle Shops 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5942 Book Stores (General) 13
P P P 5942 Book Stores (Adult) (including gifts
and novelties)
13 2
S P P P S P P P P S 5943 Stationery Stores 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5944 Jewelry Stores 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5945 Hobby, Toy and Game Shops 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5946 Camera and Photography Supply Stores 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5947 Gift, Novelty and Souvenir Stores 13
S P P P S P P P P S 5948 Luggage and Leather Goods Stores 13
S P P P S P P P P S
5949 Sewing, Needlework and Piece Goods
Stores
13
S P P P S P P P P S 596 Nonstore Retailers 7
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/376
S P P P S S P P P S 598 Fuel Dealers 15
S P P P S S P P P S 599 Retail Stores, Not Elsewhere Classified 13
S P P P S P P P P S 60 DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS 14
S P P P S P P P P S 61 NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS 14
S S P P P S P P P P S
62 SECURITY AND COMMODITY
BROKERS, DEALERS,
EXCHANGES AND SERVICES
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S 63 INSURANCE CARRIERS 14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
64 INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS
AND SERVICE
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S 65 REAL ESTATE (except as noted) 14
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
6553 Cemetery Subdivision and Developers
(subject to state statutes)
41
S S S P P P S P P P P S
67 HOLDING AND OTHER INVEST.
OFFICES
14
70 HOTELS, ROOMING HOUSES,
CAMPS, AND OTHER LODGING
PLACES (as noted)
S P S S P P P S 701 Hotels, Motels and Tourist Camps 1
S S S S S S S S 701 Bed and Breakfast Facilities 42 22
S S S S S S S 702 Rooming and Boarding Houses 1
S S S S S S S S S S S 703 Camps and Recreational Vehicle Parks 5 28
S S S P S S S
704 Organization Hotels and Lodging
Houses, on Membership Basis
1
72 PERSONAL SERVICES (as noted)
S P P P S S P P P S
7211 Power Laundries, Family and
Commercial
7
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/376
S P P P S P P P P S 7212 Garment Pressing and Agents for
Laundries and Dry Cleaning
7
S P P P S P P P P S 7213 Linen Supply 7
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S S P P P S S P P P S
7215 Coin-Operated Laundries and Dry
Cleaning
39
S P P P S S P P P S 7216 Dry Cleaning Plants 7
S P P P S S P P P S 7217 Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning 7
S P P P S S P P P S 7218 Industrial Launderers 7
S P P P S S P P P S
7219 Laundry and Garment Services, Not
Elsewhere Classified
7
S S P P P S P P P P S 722 Photographic Studios, Portrait 14
S S P P P S P P P P S 723 Beauty Shops 11
S S P P P S P P P P P 724 Barber Shops 11
S P P P S P P P P S
725 Shoe Repair Shops, Shoe Shine
Parlors and Hat Cleaning Shops
13
S S S S S S P P P S 726 Funeral Service and Crematories 25
S P P P S S P P P S
729 Misc. Personal Services (except as
noted)
14
P P P
Massage Parlors 14
P P P
Adult Modeling or Photo Studio 14
S S P P P S S P P P S 7291 Tax Preparation Services 14
73 BUSINESS SERVICES (as noted)
S S S P P P S P P P P S 7311 Advertising Agencies 14
S S S S S P P P S 7312 Outdoor Advertising Services 14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
7313 Radio, Television and Publishers'
Advertising Representatives
7
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/376
S S P P P S P P P P S 7319 Advertising, Not Elsewhere Classified 14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
732 Consumer Credit Reporting Agencies,
Mercantile Reporting Agencies and
Adjustment and Collection Agencies
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
733 Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial
Art and Photography, and
Stenographic Services
14
S S S P P S S P P P S
734 Services to Dwellings and Other
Buildings
7
S S S P P P S
735 Miscellaneous Equipment Rental and
Leasing (as noted)
7 13
S S P P P S P P P P S
7352 Medical Equipment Rental and
Leasing
7 13
S S S P P P S
7353 Heavy Const. Equipment Rental and
Leasing
7 13
S S S P P P S
7359 Equipment Rental and Leasing, Not
Elsewhere Classified
7 13
736 Personnel Supply Services (as noted)
S S S S P P S P P P P S 7361 Employment Agencies 14
S S P P S S P P P S 7633 Help Supply Services 14
S S S P P S P P P P S
737 Computer and Data Processing
Services and Other Computer Related
Services
14
S S S P P S S P P P S
738 Miscellaneous Business Services
(except as noted)
14 13
S S S S P P S S P P P S
7389 Business Services, Not Elsewhere
Classified (of a general office
character)
7/14
75 AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, SERVICES
AND PARKING (as noted)
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S S S P S S P P P S 751 Automobile Rental and Leasing 24
S S S P S S P P P S 752 Automobile Parking 0 26, 30
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/376
S S S P S S P P P S 7532 Top and Interior Repair Shops 19 9
S S S P P P S 7532 Paint and Body Repair Shops 19 9
S P P S P P P S
7533 Automotive Exhaust System Repair
Shops
19 9
S S S P P P S 7534 Tire Retreading Shops 19
S S P P S S P P P S 7534 Tire Repair Shops 19 9
S P P S S P P P S 7536 Automotive Glass Replacement Shops 19 9
S P P S P P P S 7537 Automotive Transmission Repair Shops 19 9
S S P P S S P P P S 7538 General Automotive Repair Shops 19 9
S S P P S S P P P S
7539 Automotive Repair Shops, Not
Elsewhere Classified
19 9
S S P P S S P P P S 754 Automotive Services, Except Repair 19 15
76 MISCELLANEOUS REPAIR
SERVICES (as noted)
S P P P S P P P P S 762 Electrical Repair Shop 13
S S P P P S P P P P S 763 Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair 13
S S S P P S S P P P S 764 Reupholstery and Furniture Repair 14
S S S P P P S 765 Welding Repair 7
S S S P P P S 7694 Armature Rewinding Shop 7
S P P S S P P P S
7699 Repair Shops and Related Services, Not
Elsewhere Classified
7
78 MOTION PICTURES (as noted)
2
S S P P S P P P P S
781 Motion Picture Production and Allied
Services
7
S S P P S P P P P S
782 Motion Picture Dist. and Allied
Services
7
S S P P S S P P P S
7832 Motion Picture Theaters (except Drive-
In)
25
P P P 7832 Adult Motion Picture Theaters 25 2
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/376
P S S P P P S 7833 Drive-in Motion Picture Theaters 6
S P P P S P P P P S 7841 Video Tape Rental 14 2
79 AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION
SERVICES, EXCEPT MOTION
PICTURES (as noted)
2
S S S P P S P P P P S 791 Dance Studios, Schools and Halls 14
S S P P S P P P P S
792 Theatrical Producers, Bands,
Orchestras and Entertainers
14
S S P P S P P P P S 793 Bowling Centers 32
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S S P P P P S 794 Commercial Sports 25
S P P P S P P P P S 7991 Physical Fitness Facilities 14
P P P P P P P P P S P P P P 7992 Public Golf Courses 33
S S P P S P P P P S 7993 Coin-Operated Amusement Devices 12
S S S S S P S
Gaming Rooms and Devices 12
S P P S S P P P S 7996 Amusement Parks 41
S S S S S P P P S P P P P P 7997 Membership Sports and Rec. Clubs 13
S S S S S S P P S S P P P P
7999 Amusement and Recreation Services,
Not Elsewhere Classified
26
80 HEALTH SERVICES (as noted)
S S S P P P S P P P P S
801 Offices and Clinics of Doctors of
Medicine
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S 802 Offices and Clinics of Dentists 14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
803 Offices and Clinics of Doctors of
Osteopathy
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
804 Offices and Clinics of Other Health
Practitioners Including Massage
Therapists
14
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/376
S S P P P S P P P P S 805 Nursing and Personal Care Facilities 28
S S S S S S P P S P P P P S 806 Hospitals 28
S S P P P S P P P P S 807 Medical and Dental Laboratories 7
S S S P P P S P P P P S 808 Home Health Care Facilities 14
S S S S S S P P P S P P P P S
809 Miscellaneous Health and Allied
Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
18
S S S P P P S P P P P S 81 LEGAL SERVICES 14
82 EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (as
noted)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 821 Elementary Schools 30
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 821 Secondary Schools 30/31
S P P S S P P P S
822 Colleges, Universities, Professional
Schools and Junior Colleges
30/31
P S S P P P P P P S S P P P P 823 Libraries 8
S P P P S S P P P P 824 Vocational Schools 30/31
S P P P S S P P P S
829 Schools and Educational Services, Not
Elsewhere Classified
30/31
S S P P P S P P P P S 8299 Tutoring 30/31
S S S P P P S S P P P S 83 SOCIAL SERVICES (except as noted) 41
S S S S S S S S S S 8351 Home-Based Care 41
P P P S S P P P S 8351 Center-Based Care 41
P P S P S S S 8361 Residential Care (except as noted) 41 19
S S S S S S S
Halfway Homes for Delinquents and
Offenders
41 19
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/376
S S S P P P S P P P P S 84 MUSEUMS, ART GALLERIES AND
BOTANICAL AND ZOOLOGICAL
GARDENS
86 MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS
(as noted)
18
S S S P P S P P P P S 861 Business Associations 14
S S S P P S P P P P S 862 Professional Membership Organizations 14
S S P P S P P P P S 863 Labor Unions and Similar Labor Organ. 14
S S P P S P P P P S 864 Civic, Social and Fraternal Associations 14
S S S P P S P P P P S 865 Political Organizations 14
S S S S S S S P P S P P S S S 866 Religious Organizations 18
S S S P P S P P S S S
869 Membership Organizations, Not
Elsewhere Classified
14
S S S P P P S P P P P S
87 ENGINEERING, ACCOUNTING,
RESEARCH (COMMERCIAL AND
NON-COMMERCIAL),
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED
SERVICES (except as noted)
14
S S S S P S P P P P S
873 Research, Development and Testing
Services (except as noted)
7
S S P P P P S 8734 Testing Laboratories 14
S S S P P P S S P P P S
89 SERVICES NOT ELSEWHERE
CLASSIFIED
14
91-97 GOVERNMENT USES (Public-
Admin.)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Federal, State and Local Government,
Excluding Districts and Authorities
14
S S S S S S S P P S P P P P S
Districts and Authorities 14
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
99 NONCLASSIFIABLE
ESTABLISHMENTS (except as noted)
41
S S S S S S S S
9991 Jails, Correctional Facilities, Detention
Centers, Prisons and Prison Camps,
Privately Owned and Operated
41
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/376
NON-CLASSIFIED USES
RESIDENTIAL USES
P P P P P P S P
Single-Family Dwellings 3 27
S S P P P S S S
Two-Family Dwellings 3 27
P P S S P S S S
Multifamily Dwellings 2
P P P P P S S P
Cluster Housing 3 1
S S S S S
Mobile Home Park 4 4
S S S S S
Mobile Home Subdivision 4 4
P P P P P P S
Model Dwelling Unit 3
P P P P P P S P
Family Home (see definition) 41
ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES
P P P P P P P P P P
Accessory Building, Structure or Use
7/14
S P P P S S
Garage Apartment 1 5
P P P P P P P
Home Occupation 14
Zoning District Permitted Primary Use
A-R R-S RM-M RM-H RCR RCR-H NC NSC GCMD
GCMD-
2
CBD C-M LI HI PUD SIC Group Parking
Group
Special
Cond.
S S S S S S P S S P
Servant's or Caretaker's Quarters 1 6
P P P P P P P P S P
Private Recreational Facility
8
P P P P P P P P P P
Swimming Pool
3
P P P P P P P P S P
Solar Collectors
P P P P P P P P S P
Temporary Portable Storage
Containers
25
PUBLIC UTILITIES
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Cable Television, Transmission Line
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/376
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Electrical Transmission Line
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Fiber Optic Cable Communications
Line
S S S S P P P S
Electrical Generating Plant 41
S S S S S S S S S S S P P P S
Electrical Substation 41
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Local Utility Service Line 41
S S S S S S
Radio, Television, Microwave and
Cellular Telephone Transmission
Towers
41 24
S S S S S S S S S S S S P P S
Railroad Tracks and Switching Yards
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Sewage Pumping Station 41
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Sewage Treatment Facilities 41
P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Telephone Exchange, Switching Relay
or Transmitting Station
41
S S S P P P S
Utility Service or Storage Yard or
Buildings
41
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P
Water Standpipe or Elevated Water
Supply, Water-Reservoir Well or
Pumping Station
41
P P P P P P P P P P S P P P S
Water Treatment Plant 41
S P P P P S S P P P S
Utility Business Office 41
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 81-51, sec. 1, adopted 7/14/81; Ordinance 81-58, sec. 2, adopted 7/28/81; Ordinance 81-79, secs. 2, 4, adopted
10/6/81; Ordinance 82-88, sec. 1, adopted 8/17/82; Ordinance 82-99, sec. 1, adopted 8/31/82; Ordinance 82-109, sec. 4, adopted 9/14/82; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 2,
adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 83-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/83; Ordinance 83-45, sec. 1, adopted 4/26/83; Ordinance 84-12, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 84-13, sec. 1,
adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 86-89, sec. 2, adopted 8/26/86; Ordinance 87-33, secs. 1, 3, 10, 12, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 87-74, sec. 2, adopted 9/22/87; Ordinance 89-
10, sec. 2, adopted 2/28/89; Ordinance 89-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/89; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 2, adopted 8/11/92; Ordinance 92-63, sec. 2, adopted 8/25/92; Ordinance 93-
69, sec. 1, adopted 11/23/93; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 4, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 04-054, sec. 1, adopted 7/27/04; Ordinance 05-010, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/05; Ordinance
05-034, sec. 2, adopted 3/29/05; Ordinance 06-036, sec. 2, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 06-062, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/06; 1978 Code, sec. 30-24; Ordinance 07-096, sec. 2,
adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance 07-124, sec. 1, adopted 12/4/07; Ordinance 08-066, sec. 2, adopted 8/26/08; Ordinance 08-097, sec. 1, adopted 11/4/08; Ordinance 08-106,
sec. 3, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 09-020, sec. 1, adopted 4/28/09; Ordinance 10-041, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/10; Ordinance 10-049, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/10; Ordinance 11-
021, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/11; Ordinance 12-074, sec. 9, adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 12-084, secs. 1–2, adopted 10/30/12; Ordinance 13-003, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/13;
Ordinance 13-004, sec. 7, adopted 1/15/13; Ordinance 13-012, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/13; Ordinance 17-071 adopted 10/24/17; Ordinance 18-062 adopted 10/23/18)
Sec. 28.03.024 District area and height regulations
(a) No lot, parcel, premises or tract of land shall be created and no building permit shall be issued for any request that does not meet the appropriate minimum lot area,
width, depth, yard and height regulations as set forth in the tables labeled “Area and Height Regulations.”
(b) Area and height regulations shall be as follows:
AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zone standards
Zoning District Minimum lot area Minimum lot area per unit Minimum Lot Width Front Rear Side Feet Feet Maximum Height 
A-R 43,560 43,560 200 200 25 25 25 25 25 35
RS 5,000 5,000 50 100 25 25 5* 15 10 35
RM-M 5,000 2,450 50 100 25 20 5* 15 10 35
RM-H 5,000 1,500 50 100 25 25 5* 15 10 45
RCR 5,000 1,500 50 100 25 25 5* 15 10 45
RCR-H 5,000 1,500 50 100 25 25 5* 15 10 45
NOTES:
* A 7.5-foot minimum yard shall be required for buildings with two or more stories.
† These numbers refer to exceptions enumerated in subsection 28.03.024(c).
2. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning Districts 10 Lot Area
Minimum
(square feet) 5†
Lot Width
Minimum (feet)
5†
Lot Depth
Minimum (feet)
5†
Yards, Minimum (feet) Height Maximum
(feet) 7†
Front Rear 14† 15† Side
Interior 4† Exterior
When abutting
property in
a residential district
3†
When abutting
property in a nonresidential
district
When backing
up to an abutting side
yard 16†
When backing up
to an abutting rear
yard
N-C Neighborhood-
Commercial
7,500 75 100 20 15 15 5 25 10 35
OP Office Park 10,000 100 100 25 25 10 10 25 10 35
NSC Neighborhood
Shopping Center
87,120
(2 acres)
200 200 20 15 25 5 20 10 none
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/376
GC-MD General
Commercial–
Multiple-Family
7,500 75 100 20 15 20 5 20 10 none
GC-MD-2 General
Commercial–
Multiple-Family
7,500 75 100 20 15 20 5 20 10 none
CBD Central Business
District
none none none none none 25 none none none none
C-M Commercial-
Manufacturing
10,000 100 100 25 25 25 5 25 10 none
† These numbers refer to exceptions enumerated in subsection 28.03.024(c).
3. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning Districts Lot Area
Minimum
(square feet)
5†
Lot Width
Minimum
(feet) 5†
Lot Depth
Minimum
(feet) 5†
Yards, Minimum (feet) 9, 12† Height Maximum
(feet) 7†
Abutting street ROW When abutting other property lines
When across street
from nonresidential
districts
When across street
from residential
districts
In a nonresidential
district 2, 4†
In a residential
district 3†
Light Industrial (LI)
10,000 100 100 25 40 5 25 none
Heavy Industrial
(H-I)
20,000 100 100 25 50 5 50 none
† These numbers refer to exceptions enumerated in subsection 28.03.024(c).
(c) Area and height exceptions.
(1) In residential districts one-story, unattached accessory buildings or structures less than twenty (20) feet in height may be located to within two and onehalf
(2-1/2) feet from an interior side yard or rear yard property line provided they are located in the rear yard or as close to the rear yard as existing utility
easements will permit; provided, however, that an accessory building or structure cannot cover more than sixty (60) percent of a rear yard.
(2) In an industrial district, no structural setback shall be required from a railroad right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet in width.
(3) A building or structure in any zoning district may exceed the district maximum height regulations with a specific use permit provided that there shall be
an additional one (1) foot of required yard for each two (2) feet of additional height. In NC, NSC, GC-MD, GC-MD-2, C-M, LI and HI Districts the minimum
interior side yard which abuts any property located in an A-R, RS, RM-M, RCR or RCR-H District shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet in
height for that portion of any structure or building in excess of forty-five (45) feet in height.
(4) Interior side yards shall not be required for abutting properties in the same zoning district if both properties are developed as a unit under a common
development plan.
(5) Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of adoption of this chapter and lots or parcels created as a result of condemnation or involuntary sale
by the owner to a government entity with the power of eminent domain, shall be exempt, unless otherwise indicated, from the minimum lot area, depth, and
width requirements provided they are developed in accordance with all minimum yard requirements. Multifamily uses shall not be exempt from the minimum
lot area requirements.
(6) When individual attached townhouses or condominiums are to be sold separately, there shall be no minimum lot area requirement; provided that the total
land area of the project, including the land on which the units are located and the land held in common ownership by the unit owners, is equal to the total
minimum land area required per dwelling unit or lot in the district in which the project is located.
(7) The height regulations of this chapter shall not apply to belfries, chimneys, church spires, conveyors, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
storage towers, flagpoles, monuments, ornamental towers or spires, cranes, construction equipment, smoke stacks, stage towers and scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ham radio and television antennas, and microwave relay, radio and television transmission towers.
(8) Minimum front yard setbacks for lots with predominant frontage on the curved radius of a cul-de-sac shall be fifteen (15) feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/376
(9) Buildings or structures for existing developments in industrial districts shall be exempt from the minimum yard requirements where the expansion,
enlargement or separate addition thereof is limited to land already owned by those businesses or committed to them under long-term leases (or extensions
thereof) at the time of the enactment of this chapter unless it abuts a residential zoning district.
(10) Permitted residential uses in the CBD, Central Business District, shall not be subject to the restrictions of a more restricted residential district.
(11) The zero-lot-line concept which involves locating a residential dwelling with a doorless and windowless wall actually on one interior side yard lot line
adjacent to a dwelling with a side yard that is the width of two (2) minimum side yards for the district in which located, shall be permitted when the appropriate
building lines, necessary structural restrictions, five-foot maintenance access easement, and a maximum three-foot roof overhang easement are shown on a
recorded plat which has been approved by the planning commission.
(12) Existing industrial uses in industrial zoning districts may, in addition to or instead of any other remedies in this chapter, apply for a specific use permit
in order to be exempt from the minimum yard requirements for the expansion, enlargement or separate addition of buildings or structures on adjacent land in
the same zoning district acquired by purchase or lease after the adoption of this chapter.
(13) Where an existing residential structure does not contain a garage or carport and where there is not adequate area for an accessible parking space behind
the front yard area, a carport having no side walls may be constructed in the front yard area.
(14) Minimum rear yards for lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter in multiple-family dwelling districts and commercial districts
shall be reduced to a minimum of ten (10) percent of the depth of the lot, but not less than a minimum of ten (10) feet.
(15) Minimum rear yards in all commercial districts except for C-M shall be reduced to ten (10) feet when the rear yard abuts a commercial district.
(16) Exterior side yards when backing up to an abutting side yard in NC, GC-MD, and GC-MD-2 Districts shall be reduced to ten (10) feet.
(17) In an RS District, the twenty-five-foot rear yard setback may be reduced to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet provided no accessory buildings of any type
shall be permitted to be located in the reduced rear yard, unless:
(A) The width of the rear of the main structure that is closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the rear property line (or lines in the case of a five-sided lot
which has two (2) rear lot lines) is less than fifty (50) percent of the width of the rear property line(s); and
(B) The accessory building is not located in the space behind the portion of the structure that is less than twenty-five (25) feet from the rear property
line.
An accessory building can be located as close as two and one-half (2-1/2) feet from the rear or interior side lot lines, or as near as existing utility easements
allow, if these two (2) conditions are present.
(18) All paved hard surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, driveways, pool decks and patios shall be a minimum of two (2) feet from any side or
rear property line.
(Ordinance 82-83, sec. 1, adopted 7/27/82; Ordinance 82-134, secs. 3, 10, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 83-30, sec. 1, adopted 3/29/83; Ordinance 83-115, sec. 1, adopted
9/27/83; Ordinance 84-11, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 87-33, sec. 5, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 5, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 05-034, sec. 2, adopted
3/29/05; 1978 Code, sec. 30-25; Ordinance 08-106, secs. 4, 5, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 12-021, sec. 1, adopted 4/24/12; Ordinance 12-031, sec. 9, adopted 6/26/12;
Ordinance 12-059, sec. 2, adopted 8/28/12)
ARTICLE 28.04 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 28.04.001 Specific use permits
(a) Purpose. This section provides the city council the opportunity to deny or to conditionally approve those uses for which specific use permits are required. These uses
generally have unusual nuisance characteristics or are of a public or semi-public character often essential or desirable for the general convenience and welfare of the
community. Because, however, of the nature of the use, the importance of the use's relationship to the comprehensive plan, or possible adverse impact on neighboring
properties of the use, review, evaluation, and exercise of planning judgment relative to the location and site plan of the proposed use are required. No rezoning request for
a district change shall be denied on the basis that the request would be favorably received if reapplication was made for a specific use permit.
(b) Permit required. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any use to be located in a zoning district which permits that use only as a
specific use unless a specific use permit has first been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Application procedure. An application for a specific use permit shall be filed with the planning department on a form prepared by that department. The application
shall be accompanied by a site plan which, along with the application, will become a part of the specific use permit, if approved. The accompanying site plan shall provide
the following information:
(1) Data describing all processes and activities involved with the proposed use;
(2) Boundaries of the area covered by the site plan;
(3) The location of each existing and proposed building and structure in the area covered by the site plan and the number of stories, height, roof line, gross
floor area and location of building entrances and exits;
(4) The location of existing drainageways, and significant natural features;
(5) Proposed landscaping and screening buffers;
(6) The location and dimensions of all curb cuts, public and private streets, parking and loading areas, pedestrian walks, lighting facilities, and outside trash
storage facilities;
(7) The location, height and type of each wall, fence, and all other types of screening;
(8) The location, height and size of all proposed signs.
(d) Public hearings. The notification and public hearing process for a specific use permit or revocations thereof is set forth in section 28.02.008 of this ordinance.
(e) Conditions for approval. A specific use permit shall be issued only if all of the following conditions have been found:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/376
(1) That the specific use will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or impair property
values within the immediate vicinity;
(2) That the establishment of the specific use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property;
(3) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided;
(4) The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments;
(5) That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration;
(6) That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties;
(7) That there are sufficient landscaping and screening to ensure harmony and compatibility with adjacent property; and
(8) That the proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
(f) Additional conditions. In authorizing a specific use permit, the city council may impose additional reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public interest and
welfare of the community.
(g) Time limit. Uses allowable under a specific use permit shall not be commenced and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all the conditions of the
specific use permit are completed in accordance with the specific use permit. Unless construction of those conditions are commenced and substantially underway within a
two-year period, the specific use permit shall become null and void. Extensions of time for good cause may be approved by the city council. A specific use permit that
was issued, whether by city council or exempted by section 28.04.005(d)(2) of this chapter shall become null and void, if the land use it was issued for is closed or vacated
for a period of two years or more or is changed to a substantially different use. In the RCR and RCR-H Districts, a change from one specific use permit to another shall
require city council approval. A substantially different use shall be defined as one where there is a change in the intensity of the use. A change in intensity shall include,
but not be limited to, external structural alteration or enlargement of the building, an increase in the required number of parking spaces, an increase in the hours of
operation or an increase in offensive noise, vibrations, sound, smoke or dust, odors, heat, glare, X-ray or electrical disturbance to radio or television.
(h) Revocation. A specific use permit may be revoked or modified, after notice and hearing, for either of the following reasons:
(1) The specific use permit was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or
(2) That one or more of the conditions imposed by the permit has not been met or has been violated.
(i) Amendments. The procedure for amendment of a specific use permit shall be the same as for a new application; provided, however, that the director of planning may
approve minor variations from the original permit which do not increase density, change traffic patterns, or result in any increase in external impact on adjacent properties
or neighborhoods.
(j) Processing fee. A processing fee, as set in section 28.02.008(e) of this chapter, shall be required for the processing of each specific use permit request.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 85-120, sec. 2, adopted 11/26/85; Ordinance 87-33, secs. 6, 8, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 6, adopted
2/3/98; 1978 Code, sec. 30-26; Ordinance 08-106, sec. 6, adopted 11/25/08)
Sec. 28.04.002 Off-street parking and loading regulations
(a) Off-street parking regulations. It is the intent of this section to assure that adequate off-street parking to accommodate personal vehicles of employees and/or
customers is provided with the construction, alteration, remodeling or change in the use of land.
(1) Any person establishing an off-street parking facility or applying for a building permit for construction, reconstruction, or alteration of the use of any
building, other than a single-family residence, shall submit to the building official three (3) copies of a plot plan designating the number, dimensions, and
location of off-street parking spaces and driveways that exist or are proposed.
(2) The building official shall not issue a building permit if it is determined that the plot plan does not conform to the off-street parking and driveway
standards adopted by resolution by the city council and on file in the office of the director of transportation. Any variation to these standards must be approved
by the director of transportation.
(3) Required off-street parking space shall be located on, or within four hundred (400) feet of the same lot, tract, parcel, or premises as the use being served
or other property of the same or less restrictive zoning classification that the owner of the premises being served has a continuing right to use for parking.
(4) Any existing building or use that is enlarged, structurally altered, or remodeled to the extent, in the judgment of the planning director and building
official, of increasing or changing the use by more than fifty (50) percent as it existed at the effective date of this chapter shall be accompanied by off-street
parking for the entire building or use in accordance with the off-street parking regulations set forth in this section. When the enlargement, structural alteration,
or remodeling is to the extent that the use is not increased or changed by more than fifty (50) percent, additional off-street parking shall only be required for the
increased or changed floor area or use.
(5) Existing parking spaces may not be used to satisfy additional off-street parking requirements of this chapter unless the existing spaces proposed for use
in meeting the requirements of this chapter exceed the number required for the building or use for which the existing spaces are associated. All parking
associated with a building or use from which the spaces are drawn must meet all requirements of this chapter.
(6) General requirements:
(A) The number of off-street parking spaces for each use shall be determined by reference to the following “parking group table.” Specific parking
groups are identified for each primary use or accessory residential use in section 28.03.023(b).
(B) For shopping centers, or other tracts where different property uses will share a joint parking area, the parking requirements shall be computed
based upon the overall development. Shopping centers containing not more than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area
shall have a minimum of six (6) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of net floor area. Shopping centers containing more than two hundred
thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor area shall have a minimum of five and one-half (5.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of net
floor area.
(C) For any use not listed, or where the listed regulations are not applicable, in the judgment of the director of transportation, the parking requirements
shall be determined by the director of transportation. Computations of required parking spaces by the director of transportation shall be final, subject only
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/376
to an appeal to the board of adjustment.
PARKING GROUP TABLE
Parking
Group
Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
1 One (1) space for each dwelling unit.
2 One and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
3 Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
4 Two (2) spaces for each trailer unit.
5 One (1) space for each trailer space.
6 Four (4) spaces for each five (5) employees on the largest shift or one (1)
space per 600 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. There
shall at least be a minimum of two (2) spaces.
7 Three (3) spaces for each five (5) employees on largest shift, or one (1)
space per 600 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
8 Four (4) spaces for each five (5) employees on largest shift, or one (1)
space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
9 One (1) space for each employee plus three (3) customer spaces.
10 One (1) space for each employee plus five (5) reservoir spaces for each stall
or bay.
11 One (1) space for each employee plus one (1) space for each barber chair.
12 One (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area and two (2)
spaces per pump island with a minimum of six (6) spaces. For gaming sites,
one (1) space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area if gaming exceeds
35% of the gross floor area.
13 One (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
14 One (1) space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
15 One (1) space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area.
16 One (1) space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
17 One (1) space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or one space for
each forty (40) square feet of auditorium, whichever is greater.
18 One (1) space for each four (4) seats in largest auditorium, or one (1) space
for each 800 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
19 One (1) space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area, minimum of five
(5) spaces.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/376
Parking
Group
Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
20 One (1) space for each 1,000 square feet of non-office floor area plus one
(1) space for each 300 square feet of office area.
21 One (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area (a minimum
of fifteen (15) spaces) plus a five-space reservoir.
22 One (1) space for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
23 One (1) space for each 2,000 square feet of lot area for customer parking.
24 One (1) space for each 5,000 square feet of lot area for customer parking.
25 One (1) space for each four (4) seats.
26 One (1) space for each four (4) seats or one (1) space for each fifty (50)
square feet of customer service area, whichever is greater.
27 One (1) space for each two (2) occupants.
28 One (1) space for each one and one-half (1-1/2) beds.
29 One (1) space for each three (3) beds.
30 One (1) space for each teacher and staff person.
31 One (1) space for each four (4) students.
32 Four (4) spaces for each alley.
33 Fifty (50) spaces for each nine (9) holes.
34 One (1) space for each driving tee.
35 Fifteen (15) spaces for each nine (9) holes.
36 Four (4) spaces for each court.
37 Two (2) spaces for each 100 square feet of water area.
38 One (1) space for each bay plus one (1) space for each pump island,
minimum of six (6) spaces.
39 One (1) space for each six (6) machines.
40 One (1) space for each employee.
41 To be determined by director of transportation.
42 One (1) space for each guest bedroom and one (1) space for the owner, not
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/376
to exceed seven (7) spaces.
(7) The design and dimensions of off-street parking areas shall be in accordance with the following table and the off-street parking and driveway standards:
Angle of
Parking
(Degrees)
Width of
Stall
Depth of
Stall 90°
to Aisle
Width of
Aisle
(One-Way)
Width of
Stall
Parallel
to Aisle
Width of
Stall
Parallel to
Aisle
Width for 2
Rows and
Aisle
(One-Way)
30 8.0 14.9 13.0 22.0 16.0 42.8
30 8.5 16.4 13.0 22.0 17.0 45.8
30 9.0 16.5 12.0 22.0 18.0 45.0
30 9.5 17.2 12.0 22.0 19.0 46.4
30 10.0 17.7 12.0 22.0 20.0 47.4
45 8.0 17.0 13.0 22.0 22.3 47.0
45 8.5 18.7 13.0 22.0 12.0 50.4
45 9.0 19.0 12.0 22.0 12.7 50.0
45 9.5 19.5 12.0 22.0 13.4 51.0
Angle of
Parking
(Degrees)
Width of
Stall
Depth of
Stall 90°
to Aisle
Width of
Aisle
(One-Way)
Width of
Stall
Parallel
to Aisle
Width of
Stall
Parallel to
Aisle
Width for 2
Rows and
Aisle
(One-Way)
45 10.0 19.8 12.0 22.0 14.1 51.6
60 8.0 17.8 17.0 24.0 9.2 52.5
60 8.5 19.8 17.0 24.0 9.8 56.6
60 9.0 20.0 16.0 24.0 10.4 56.0
60 9.5 20.3 16.0 24.0 11.0 56.6
60 10.0 20.6 16.0 24.0 11.5 57.2
90 8.0 16.0 25.0 25.0 8.0 57.0
90 8.5 18.0 25.0 25.0 8.5 61.0
90 9.0 18.0 24.0 24.0 9.0 60.0
90 9.5 18.0 24.0 24.0 9.5 60.0
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/376
90 10.0 18.0 24.0 24.0 10.0 60.0
Minimum stall widths shall be nine (9) feet, except for residential and all-day office parking which may utilize stalls eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet
in width, provided that minimum aisle widths are increased by one (1) foot. In addition, the dimensions of up to twenty (20) percent of the total
number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced to eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in depth to accommodate compact automobiles.
(8) Off-street parking spaces shall be clearly marked according to the off-street parking and driveway standards. Parking spaces abutting an adjoining
property line or street right-of-way shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so located that no part of a normally parked vehicle will extend
beyond the property line. When wheel guards are used, they shall be centered 2.5 feet from the property line for 90-degree parking, 2.3 feet for 60-degree
parking, and 2.0 feet for 45-degree and 30-degree parking.
(9) The director of transportation or his designee shall approve the layout, arrangement and design of off-street parking areas and the location of all ingress
and egress points on any public street or alley upon an affirmative finding that:
(A) The parking spaces provided are usable for the intended purpose;
(B) The internal circulation pattern is safe and efficient for motorists and pedestrians; and
(C) Ingress and egress will minimize interference with the orderly, safe and efficient movement of traffic on adjacent public streets.
(10) Buildings and land uses within the central business district shall be exempt from requirements to provide off-street parking; provided that when offstreet
parking is furnished, it shall conform to the off-street parking and driveway standards.
(11) (A) Access to buildings for individuals with disabilities shall be provided from rights-of-way and parking areas in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities as the same may be amended from time to time. Curb cuts shall
typically have a gradient of not more than one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet. Such access shall be cleared of all
obstructions related to construction activity prior to the opening of the building to the general public.
(B) A parking lot servicing each entrance pathway shall have the number of level parking spaces as set forth in the following table, identified by signs.
Such parking spaces and signs shall conform to the rules promulgated by the state purchasing and general services commission under subsection (c) of
section 7.05 of the state Purchasing and General Services Act (chapter 2151 Government Code) and be in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities, as the same may be amended from time to time, relating to the identification and
the dimensions of parking spaces for the disabled. Such parking spaces shall typically be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width. The traffic engineer
shall maintain a copy of the above-mentioned guidelines.
PARKING SPACES FOR DISABLED PERSONS
Total Spaces Required Number of Reserved Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2% of total
1001 and more 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
(C) Parking spaces for the physically disabled shall be located so that such persons may reasonably wheel or walk to reach entrance ramps, walkways
and elevators. All parking lot plans submitted for city review shall clearly designate the intended access routes for individuals with disabilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/376
(D) All existing parking lots shall be in compliance with this subsection on or before December 15, 1991. Existing parking lots with fifteen (15) or
fewer spaces are exempted from the requirements of the second and third paragraphs of this subsection [subsections (B) and (C)].
(12) Bonus for landscaping of off-street parking facilities. The minimum off-street parking requirements shall be reduced up to a maximum of ten (10)
percent of the requirement for those parking facilities designed to accommodate twenty (20) or more vehicles where a percentage of the total parking area has
been retained and developed as landscaped open space area. The percentage of the landscaped open space area in excess of the landscaped open space required
in section 28.04.006(c) [28.04.006(h)] shall determine the maximum percent reduction which will be permitted in the total number of off-street parking spaces.
(b) Off-street loading regulations. The intent of this section is to ensure that an adequate off-street loading area is provided with the construction, alteration, or change
of use of any business building or structure, or with any change in land use.
(1) The owner and the occupier of any property upon which a business is located shall provide loading and unloading areas of sufficient number and facility
to accommodate on such business premises all vehicles that will be reasonably expected to simultaneously deliver or receive materials or merchandise, and of
sufficient size to accommodate all types of vehicles that will be reasonably expected to engage in such loading or unloading activities.
(2) Any person desiring a building permit for the construction, alteration, or change of use of the land or any business building or structure shall submit a
plot plan to the building official designating the number, dimensions and locations of all loading areas and all proposed avenues of ingress and egress to the
property from adjacent public thoroughfares. The building official shall not issue such permit if it is determined that the proposed loading and unloading
facilities will present a direct or indirect hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(3) Buildings and land uses within the CBD, Central Business District, and the PD, Port Development District, shall be exempt from the off-street loading
requirements of this chapter unless, in the CBD, Central Business District, an owner or occupier or business property elects to provide off-street loading
facilities, in which event, such facilities shall be approved as provided in these regulations.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 81-79, secs. 1, 3, adopted 10/6/81; Ordinance 82-134, sec. 7, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 87-33, secs. 4, 11,
adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 91-67, sec. 1, adopted 8/27/91; Ordinance 93-69, sec. 2, adopted 11/23/93; 1978 Code, sec. 30-27; Ordinance 14-067, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/14)
Sec. 28.04.003 Sign regulations
(a) Permit requirements. No sign, unless herein excepted, shall be located, constructed, erected, altered, posted, attached, or painted until a building permit has been
approved by the chief building inspector in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the 2009 International Building Code.
(b) Signs in residential districts. Signs shall not be permitted in residential districts except as specifically authorized in this section.
(1) One detached owner identification sign shall be permitted for a multiple-family dwelling development, nonresidential or institutional building for each
abutting street, subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area;
(B) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height;
(C) The sign shall not have flashing lights, any type of intermittent illumination or revolve in any manner, except as allowed below:
(i) Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
(ii) The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
(iii) Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
(iv) As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(v) Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted in an historic district.
(vi) Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
(D) The sign shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line;
(E) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements of the building code.
(2) One attached owner identification sign for a multiple-family dwelling development or institutional building may be attached flat against the wall of a
building in the complex for each street abutting the development subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached;
(B) The sign shall not be lighted except by reflective floodlight type illumination;
(C) The sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
(3) One detached owner identification sign shall be permitted for a commercial use with a specific use permit in the RCR, Residential Conservation and
Revitalization District, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(A) The sign is included in the site plan approved in the specific use permit.
(B) The sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
(C) The sign does not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(D) The sign shall not have any flashing lights, intermittent illumination, or revolve or rotate in any manner, except as allowed below:
(i) Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted if approved as part of the specific use permit.
(ii) The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
(iii) Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/376
(iv) As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(v) Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted in an historic district.
(vi) Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
(E) The sign shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line or at the building setback line, whichever is less.
(F) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements in the building code.
(4) One (1) detached owner identification sign shall be permitted for a commercial use with a specific use permit in the RCR-H, Residential Conservation
and Revitalization District, subject to section 28.03.018(e)(8)(A) of this chapter.
(5) Two (2) attached owner identification signs shall be permitted for a commercial use with a specific use permit in the RCR-H, Residential Conservation
and Revitalization District, subject to section 28.03.018(e)(8)(B) of this chapter.
(c) Owner identification signs in commercial and industrial districts. Signs shall not be permitted in commercial or industrial districts except as specifically authorized
in this section.
(1) One detached owner identification sign, and one additional detached sign for each thoroughfare more than one that abuts the property, shall be permitted
in the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, and the OP, Office Park District, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(A) The sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
(B) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(C) The sign shall not have any flashing lights, any type of intermittent illumination or revolve in any manner, except as allowed below:
(i) Electronic reader board signs shall not be permitted, except as an attachment to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
(ii) The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
(iii) Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
(iv) As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(v) Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
(D) The sign shall not be located in any required yard.
(E) The sign shall meet the wind load requirements in the building code.
(2) One (1) attached owner identification wall sign, plus one (1) additional attached sign for each thoroughfare more than one (1) that abuts the property
shall be permitted in the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District, and OP, Office Park District, subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The sign shall be attached flat against the wall of the building;
(B) The sign shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building to which it is attached;
(C) The allowable sign area may be equal to one (1) square foot for each one (1) lineal foot of store frontage with the sign area not to exceed seventy
(70) square feet.
(3) Owner identification signs shall be permitted for establishments located in NSC, CSC, GC-MD, GC-MD-2, C-M, L-I, H-I Districts; provided that such
signs shall not be greater than fifty (50) feet in height. The maximum height is measured from the point established by a perpendicular line connecting the
crown of the roadway immediately abutting the property on which the sign is to be installed with the sign's nearest vertical support to the property line, and
provided further that the structural supports for such signs shall be set back not less than ten (10) feet from any property line or street right-of-way. No part of
any sign shall overlay the street right-of-way. Where a structure existing at the effective date of this chapter precludes locating a sign in compliance with the
setback regulations, the board of adjustment shall be authorized to grant a variance to the setback requirement. There shall be no restrictions or limitations on
on-premise owner identification signs in the CBD, Central Business District, or the PD, Port Development District. Owner identification signs shall be
permitted in PUD, Planned Unit Development District, with the location, height and number thereof being determined in accordance with the sign regulations
for the zoning district which permits the designated use of the property.
(4) Signs in PUD Districts.
(A) [Sign chart.]
Use Type (B) Maximum Height (C)
(in feet)
Maximum Area (C)
(in square feet)
Front Setback
(in feet)
Multiple-family 15 20 25
Prof./med. services 15 40 20
Wholesale/retail trade 40 50 10
Industrial 50 50 10
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/376
(B) The city council may approve a sign which exceeds the maximum area and height where the planning commission has determined that the sign is
compatible with abutting development.
(C) The maximum area for owner identification signs in a PUD district having mixed land uses will be determined by the regulations for each use type
as it appears in the chart in subsection (4)(A) above.
(5) Electronic reader board signs shall be permitted in the GC-MD, GC-MD-2, CBD, C-M, LI, HI and PD Districts subject to the following conditions:
(A) The electronic reader board is to be attached to or a part of a detached owner identification sign.
(B) The message copy may change no more than once every forty-five (45) seconds.
(C) Message copy shall not include any flashing, flowing, alternating or blinking lights or animation.
(D) As measured at the property line, the maximum light emanation from a sign shall be no greater than 0.2 footcandles.
(E) No more than sixty (60) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the maximum sign area, whichever is less, shall be dedicated to electrical changeable
copy.
(F) Electronic reader board signs that are part of a detached owner identification sign shall be allowed to have multiple colors.
(6) Prohibition. Portable signs which are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving lights shall be prohibited in all districts.
(d) Advertising signs. Advertising signs shall not be permitted except as noted:
(1) Permits. The city shall not issue permits for the construction of new advertising signs except under the following conditions:
(A) All outdoor advertising companies shall provide to the city a complete list of all signs it owns or maintains within the limits and the extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. This list shall include the location, size (area and height) and type of construction.
(B) To reconstruct or replace an existing conforming advertising sign at the same location. Any sign that is reconstructed or replaced at the same
location shall be the same size or smaller than the original sign.
(C) To replace and relocate an existing advertising sign at one location with an advertising sign at another location.
(i) Size of the replacement sign shall be one (1) square foot for one (1) square foot. Square footage may be cumulative as to each outdoor
advertising company.
(ii) Regardless of the size of the advertising sign to be replaced, the replaced advertising sign shall not exceed the height or area listed under
subsection (d)(1) of this section. Area calculations shall exclude cutout extensions and apron trim without copy. The cumulative area of all
extensions on any one sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the sign, excluding extension and apron trim without copy. Height
shall be measured from the crown of the adjacent roadway to which the sign is oriented; provided that the board of adjustment may grant a special
exception for a sign not to exceed ten (10) additional feet in height when, in its judgment, the sign will, at a lower height, block an existing sign or
structure from view or be so blocked from view. Sign spacing, height and area shall be as follows:
Sign Spacing Maximum Sign
Height
Maximum Sign Area
300 feet 20 feet 75 square feet
500 feet 25 feet 76 - 300 square feet
750 feet 30 feet* 301 - 672 square feet
*Advertising signs fronting on an interstate highway or a federal-aid primary highway may not exceed forty (40) feet in height.
(iii) Spacing. Sign spacing shall be as follows:
a. The spacing of all advertising signs within 660 feet of an interstate highway (IH-10), a federal-aid primary highway (Hwys. 69, 96, 287),
or a non-freeway federal-aid primary highway (Hwy. 90) shall be in accordance with the Texas Civil Statutes, article 4477-9a, as amended. As
of March 3, 1986, the state regulations required the following spacings: On interstate freeways (IH-10) and on federal-aid primary highways
(Hwys. 69, 96 and 287) the required spacing is one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet between advertising signs on the same side of the
freeway. On non-freeway federal-aid primary highways (Hwy. 90) the required spacing is 300 feet between advertising signs on the same side
of the freeway.
b. The following requirements shall be in effect for signs farther than 660 feet from a federal-aid primary highway or interstate highway. No
advertising sign shall be located nearer than the spacing listed under this section to any other advertising sign, property zoned single-family
residential, or property used as a public school, church, courthouse, city hall or public museum which fronts on the same street the sign fronts
on. Spacing shall be based on the maximum height or area of the sign being erected, whichever is greater.
(iv) Advertising signs shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way of the street, measured on a line perpendicular to
the property line of the property on which the sign is to be installed, and not less than ten (10) feet from interior side yard property lines.
(v) Shall be allowed a period not to exceed one (1) year from the time the original advertising sign is removed to the time that the replacement
advertising sign must be installed.
(vi) Replacement advertising signs shall only be permitted in those areas of the city that are zoned GC-MD, CM, LI and HI.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/376
(vii) No new advertising signs shall be constructed in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) with the exception of state and federally
controlled highways.
(viii) The total number of advertising signs within the city limits and ETJ of the city shall not exceed the total number existing at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived.
(ix) Advertising signs shall not be permitted on the following streets:
a. Dowlen Road Extension;
b. Walden Road from 1,370 feet west of the west right-of-way line of IH-10 west to the ETJ boundary;
c. Concord Road from Gulf Street to Hwy. 105;
d. Washington Blvd. from Langham Road to Major Drive;
e. Phelan Blvd. from Major Drive to Keith Road.
(D) Prohibition. An outdoor advertising sign shall not be placed within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of any property which is zoned
residential or used as a public park, public school, church, courthouse, city hall or public museum.
(2) Traffic control conflicts. No advertising sign shall resemble an official marker erected by a governmental agency, nor shall an advertising sign obstruct
from clear view any traffic signal or sign.
(3) Illumination. Except for digital billboards as provided herein, advertising signs may be illuminated only by indirect lighting subject to the following
conditions:
(A) Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights are prohibited, except for digital billboards, as defined in
this chapter. Signs giving public service information such as, but not limited to, time, date, temperature, weather or similar information shall be permitted.
(B) Lighting shall be shielded to prevent beams or rays from being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied residential area and
shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause or impair vision.
(C) Digital billboards that are illuminated shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(i) The image or message shall be static or fixed and lasting no less than ten (10) seconds. Each screen message is to contain a single
advertisement;
(ii) The image or message shall change to another image or message in a period of two seconds or less;
(iii) The image or message shall not be animated, flashing, scrolling or contain video imagery;
(iv) The image or message shall adjust its brightness as ambient light levels change so as not to be visually distracting; and
(v) The digital billboard shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign's image or message if a malfunction occurs.
(4) Motion. Advertising signs shall not revolve or rotate or otherwise move in any manner.
(5) Roof-mounted sign. Roof-mounted advertising signs are prohibited.
(6) Structure. Advertising signs shall be constructed in accordance with the building code and electrical code. Signs shall be engineered to withstand a wind
load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot.
(7) Maintenance.
(A) Advertising signs shall be maintained in good appearance and safe structural condition. The general area in the vicinity of any advertising sign
shall be kept free and clear of sign materials, weed, debris, trash and litter. Maintenance or replacement of sign copy or structural repairs shall be
conducted in a manner to protect adjacent properties from debris and litter. Signs shall be reposted regularly, and torn or ragged posters shall be repaired
or covered promptly.
(B) When a nonconforming advertising sign falls into disrepair or is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the cost
of reconstruction or repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the sign such nonconforming sign shall no longer be permitted. A
nonconforming sign may be changed or altered or upgraded only to the extent that when the change, alteration or upgrade is complete, it is made to
conform, in all aspects, to the sign regulations of the city.
(e) Exemptions. The following signs are exempted from the permit requirements of this section:
(1) Changing of permitted copy of an existing bulletin board, general advertising poster or paint panel(s), display encasement, marquee, flat sign, projecting
sign, detached sign, or roof sign, provided no increase occurs with respect to either the area of any such sign or the manner in which it is structurally supported.
(2) Signs on trucks, buses, or passenger vehicles which are used in the normal conduct of business.
(3) Nameplate and street address signs, less than three (3) square feet in size.
(4) Nonilluminated real estate signs, temporary in nature, not exceeding more than eight (8) square feet in area, advertising real estate for sale or lease or
announcing contemplated improvements of real estate; provided that only one such sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property.
(5) Construction signs, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area and not located in any required yard, denoting the owner, architect, financial institution,
general contractor, subcontractor, or any statement pertaining to the project; provided that there is only one sign for each street abutting the premises.
(6) Window signs hung on the inside of the window or painted on the window glass.
(7) Temporary decorative flags, excluding banners.
(8) Warning, security, and traffic directional signs, less than eight (8) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/376
(9) Elections signs temporary in nature, sixty (60) days maximum, less than eight (8) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height and not illuminated, when
placed within a residentially zoned area. Elections signs temporary in nature placed within any other zone. Election signs must be removed within ten (10) days
after the election.
(10) Signs in the PD, Port Development District, and the CBD, Central Business District.
(f) Prohibited signs. No sign shall be attached or applied to trees, utility poles or trash receptacles or located within any public right-of-way. Signs with flashing lights
or intermittent illumination shall be prohibited, except those signs that cannot be seen from the public right-of-way or as allowed under section 28.03.020(f)(3), section
28.03.020(f)(4), section 28.03.021(f)(4), section 28.03.021(f)(5), section 28.04.003(b)(1), section 28.04.003(b)(3), section 28.04.003(c)(1) and section 28.04.003(c)(5).
Signs shall not revolve or rotate. No sign shall resemble an official sign or marker erected by a governmental agency. No sign shall be placed on any property in such a
manner to obstruct the view from the left or right of a vehicle from other traffic on the public right-of-way when lawfully entering the roadway. The city transportation
manager shall have the right to order the removal of such signs by the property owner or by city crews, subject to a 10-day right of appeal by the owner to the board of
adjustment, prior to removal.
(g) Continuation and discontinuation of nonconforming signs. All nonconforming permanent signs, legally existing on the effective date of this chapter, may continue
to exist; provided that signs which are fifty (50) percent or more structurally deteriorated shall be either removed or altered so as to comply with this chapter. Signs which
are nonconforming because they have flashing lights or intermittent illumination shall be given thirty (30) days from the date of the adoption of this chapter to be brought
into compliance with this chapter.
(h) Bonding requirements. Signs shall not be located, constructed, erected, altered, attached, posted or painted, except by a bonded contractor whose primary business is
sign work. All electrical sign work shall be performed by a licensed master sign electrician or a master electrician.
(i) Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and safe structural condition.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-25, sec. 1, adopted 3/16/82; Ordinance 84-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/17/84; Ordinance 85-22, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/85;
Ordinance 86-30, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/25/86; Ordinance 87-33, sec. 7, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 91-22, sec. 1, adopted 3/5/91; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 4, adopted
8/11/92; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 7, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 99-53, sec. 1, adopted 7/27/99; Ordinance 00-58, sec. 2, adopted 7/11/00; Ordinance 04-056, sec. 1, adopted
7/27/04; Ordinance 05-034, sec. 2, adopted 3/29/05; 1978 Code, sec. 30-28; Ordinance 07-078, sec. 2, adopted 7/24/07; Ordinance 08-021, secs. 8, 9, adopted 3/18/08;
Ordinance 08-106, sec. 7, adopted 11/25/08; Ordinance 10-051, sec. 1, adopted 6/29/10; Ordinance 11-050, secs. 1–4, adopted 8/9/11; Ordinance 12-020, sec. 1, adopted
4/24/12; Ordinance 13-033, sec. 1, adopted 6/4/13)
State law reference–Municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 216.001 et seq.
Sec. 28.04.004 Planned unit development standards and requirements
(a) General plan. Prior to the issuance of a specific use permit or any building permit for property located in a PUD, Planned Unit Development District, a general land
use and density plan must be submitted to the planning commission. The plan shall include a schematic land use plan identifying proposed general uses, densities, major
open spaces, circulation and access features, and a statement indicating proposed phasing of development and the projected timing of each phase. The planning
commission shall forward the plan with its recommendation to the city council. The applicant shall pay a processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Advertisement
and public hearings shall be held by the planning commission and city council in accordance with the notification procedure set forth for a rezoning application.
(b) Size. A PUD, Planned Unit Development District, may be authorized only on sites containing five (5) or more acres of land. However, sites less than five (5) acres
will be considered on merit with a specific use permit.
(c) Cluster housing. If the proposed development contains cluster housing, the minimum standards and requirements set forth for cluster unit housing developments set
forth in section 28.04.008(b)(1) of this chapter shall apply.
(d) Height and peripheral yard requirements.
(1) Height. Structure and buildings located in a Planned Unit Development District shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, without specific authorization and
approval from the city council.
(2) Yards. All buildings and structures shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any peripheral property line or street right-of-way.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 8, adopted 2/3/98; 1978 Code, sec. 30-29)
Sec. 28.04.005 Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses of land
(a) Continuing existing nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses of land. Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building or structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter may be continued.
(b) Limitations on nonconforming uses. Lawful nonconforming uses shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) The use of land which is a lawful nonconforming use may be continued until such time as a structure is erected thereon, and thereafter the use of land
and buildings shall conform with all the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any building, structure or land which is occupied or used as a lawful nonconforming use which shall become vacant or unused for a continuous period of
one year shall not thereafter be occupied or used except for a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Provided, however,
that nonconforming field crops may be reestablished when the land has been unused for a period of time not exceeding three (3) years. For the purposes of this
paragraph “vacant” or “unused” shall mean the nonconforming use has been intentionally abandoned. The temporary suspension of a use shall not constitute
abandonment, provided the property is not used during the period of suspension for any other purpose.
(3) A nonconforming use may be changed only to a use permitted in a more restricted zoning district or to a conforming use.
(4) Whenever a lawful nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
(5) Expansion, enlargement or intensification of a lawful nonconforming use shall not be permitted unless such expansion, enlargement or intensification,
when considered independently of the lawful nonconforming use, is made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(6) A building or structure occupied or used by a lawful nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended or structurally altered unless the use occupying
or using such enlargement, extension or alteration, when considered independently of the lawful nonconforming use, is made to conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/376
(7) Repairs and maintenance work on a building or structure that is occupied or used by a lawful nonconforming use may be made, provided that no
structural alterations shall be made except as required by law.
(8) When a building or structure occupied or used by a nonconforming commercial use that became nonconforming since April 1, 1981, or when a
nonconforming industrial use is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or other calamity to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds sixty
(60) percent of the replacement cost of the structure, such nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted.
(c) Limitations on nonconforming buildings. The following limitations, restrictions and requirements shall apply to lawful nonconforming buildings and structures:
(1) A lawful nonconforming building or structure occupied or used by a nonconforming use shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless said
building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(2) A lawful nonconforming building or structure occupied or used by a permitted use, may be enlarged or added to, provided that the enlargement or
addition, when considered independently of the original building or structure, complies with the yard and height regulations and the off-street parking
requirements for the use of said building or structure.
(3) No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on the lot on which it is located unless every portion of
said building or structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(4) A lawful nonconforming building or structure that is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other calamity may be repaired and reconstructed,
provided there is no increase whatsoever in the degree or extent of the previously existing nonconformity.
(5) A conforming building shall not be changed to a use which would result in the building becoming nonconforming.
(d) Exemptions.
(1) The limitations on nonconforming uses in this section shall not apply to any residential use existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(2) The limitations and restrictions of this section shall not apply to conforming uses lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter when the
use has been changed in the district from a permitted use to a use permitted with a specific use permit, or when the use which was permitted by right prior to
any district change has, after a change in districts, been changed to a use which requires a specific use permit.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-19, sec. 1, adopted 3/9/82; Ordinance 82-134, secs. 4, 5, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 85-21, sec. 1, adopted
2/26/85; Ordinance 93-28, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/93; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 9, adopted 2/3/98; 1978 Code, sec. 30-30)
Sec. 28.04.006 Landscaping and screening requirements
(a) Purpose. The provisions of this section for the installation and maintenance of landscaping and screening are intended to protect the character and stability of
residential, commercial, institutional and industrial areas, to conserve the value of land and buildings of surrounding properties and neighborhoods, to enhance the
aesthetic and visual image of the community, to encourage the preservation of large trees which once removed can be replaced only after generations, and to assist with
clean air. In no case shall these provisions restrict ADA requirements.
(b) Landscape plan required. All building permit applications for new building construction shall be accompanied by two (2) blueline or blackline prints of the
landscape plan to be approved by development services before issuance of the building permit. The landscape plan shall contain sufficient detail to show the following:
(1) The date, scale, north arrow and names and address and phone numbers of each property owner and person preparing the plans.
(2) The footprint of all existing and proposed structures.
(3) Remaining and/or proposed site elements such as power poles, fences, walls, drainage swales, easements, sidewalks, parking lot layout, pedestrian
walkways, and other such elements.
(4) A schedule identifying name, size, number, and location of all landscape elements.
(5) Name, location and size of existing trees, and type and location of other vegetation proposed to remain for credit purposes.
(6) The size and location of the parking lot and the number of spaces, and how the owner proposes to address the interior landscaping requirement.
(7) Such other information as may be reasonably necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(8) Drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or greater.
(c) Irrigation required.
(1) All buildings greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet shall require an automatic irrigation system sufficient to provide complete coverage of
required screening landscaped areas.
(2) An irrigation system shall be installed and operational prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final building inspection.
(3) State law requires installation by licensed irrigators.
(4) Irrigation systems shall be maintained in good and operating condition.
(5) For buildings three thousand (3,000) square feet or less, hose bibs may be used for irrigation purposes.
(d) Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for new construction shall be issued or final approval of parking lot expansion made unless complying with
terms and conditions required herein.
(e) Definitions.
Berm. Landscaped earthen hill of three (3) feet height or greater.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/376
Berm
Caliper. The measure of the diameter of a tree at eighteen (18) inches above grade.
(1) Class A trees must be two (2) inches caliper or greater.
(2) Class B trees if multi-trunked, must have a minimum of three (3) trunks of one (1) inch caliper each.
Class A tree. A tree with a mature height of thirty (30) feet or more. See recommended list.
Class B tree. A tree with a mature height of less than thirty (30) feet. See recommended list.
Critical root zone. A circular region measured outward from the tree trunk to the drip line representing the area of roots that must be maintained or protected for the tree's
survival.
Drip line. A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.
Easement. The legal grant of right-of-use to an area of designated private property, utilized by public corporations (states, municipalities) and also made to companies
providing public services such as gas, electricity, and telephone.
Island. A curbed landscaped area in a parking lot that is surrounded on all sides by parking spaces.
Landscaped. Shall consist of any combination of turf/grass/ground cover, shrubs, and trees. It must be installed in a sound manner and in accordance with accepted
standards of the nursery industry.
Median. A curbed landscaped area in a parking lot that separates parking aisles.
Open space buffer planting strip. The area between single-family residential and any other zoned property. This strip is to include required trees.
Peninsula. A curbed landscaped area that protrudes into parking aisles and adjoins other non-parking open space.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/376
Planting strip. The area between the curb and sidewalk, two (2) curbs, a curb and fence, or a sidewalk and fence.
Public right-of-way. The entire strip of land lying between the property line and a street or thoroughfare, alley, crosswalk, or easement.
Shrub. A woody plant of low or medium height, usually multi-stemmed. See recommended list for three-foot-high hedge.
Vehicular use area. The total area of all the parking spaces and drives serving the parking area.
(f) Perimeter landscaping and screening.
(1) When a commercial or industrial use is established on a lot or premises located adjacent to any residential zoning district, or when any multiple-family
dwelling use is established on a lot or premises adjacent to any property located in a single-family residential zoning district, a ten-foot width of landscaping
open space buffer strip shall be installed and maintained by the owner, developer or operator of the commercial or industrial property between it and the
adjacent residentially zoned property.
(2) In an open space buffer planting strip required under the terms of this section, a minimum of one (1) class A tree or two (2) class B trees shall be planted
and maintained for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet or portion thereof of said open spacebuffer strip. The required trees may be planted anywhere within the
buffer strip with a minimum of ten (10) feet apart for class A trees and a minimum of five (5) feet apart for class B trees. Refer to definitions on tree size.
Open Space Buffer Planting Strip
(3) In addition, an eight-foot high opaque fence or wall shall be erected and maintained along the property line to provide visual screening. The fence or wall
shall be masonry or a wood diagonal, horizontal or vertical stockade type privacy fence, although the framing may be metal.
(4) In lieu of the fence, a thirty-foot-wide landscape planted buffer for the purpose of screening, may be provided along the property line.
(5) For a thirty-foot-wide landscape planted buffer, one (1) class A tree or two (2) class B trees shall be planted and maintained for each ten (10) lineal feet
of buffer. The required trees may be planted anywhere within the buffer strip with a minimum of twenty (20) feet apart for class A trees and a minimum of ten
(10) feet apart for class B trees. Refer to definitions on tree size.
Thirty-Foot-Wide Landscape Planted Buffer
(6) The provisions of this perimeter landscaping and screening shall not apply where districts are separated by a public street.
(7) When a specific use permit is required, the landscape buffering and fencing required by this section may be modified or eliminated as a condition of a
specific use permit.
(g) Dumpster and immobile trash containers. Any fixed or otherwise immobile trash container must be set back from the property line no less then twenty-five (25) feet
or be completely screened from view from any street via landscaping and solid, opaque fencing on a minimum of three (3) sides. No such container shall be allowed on
city right-of-way.
(h) Landscaping of off-street parking.
(1) Island, median and/or peninsula requirements.
(A) Any parking lot or portion thereof which is to contain twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall provide permanently landscaped areas consisting of
islands, peninsulas, or medians within the parking area. The required landscaped island, peninsula, or median shall be provided as follows:
(i) Sites having less than one hundred (100) parking spaces: One (1) landscaped island, peninsula, or median per twenty (20) parking spaces is
required.
(ii) Sites having more than one hundred (100) parking spaces: One (1) landscaped island, peninsula, or median per ten (10) parking spaces is
required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/376
(iii) The landscaped island or peninsula located within the parking spaces shall be no less than nine (9) feet wide or if a landscaped median shall
be no less than six (6) feet wide.
Landscaped Island or Peninsula
(iv) Each island or peninsula required herein shall at minimum contain one (1) class A tree or two (2) class B trees.
(v) Each median required herein shall at minimum contain one (1) class A tree or two (2) class B trees for each twenty-five (25) linear feet of
median.
(vi) All such landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular access to these areas by curbing or other protective devices. No automobile or
other type of vehicle shall be driven on any required landscaped space.
(2) Perimeter requirements.
(A) A landscaping edge or buffer shall be required along each side of a parking lot that faces towards a public right-of-way.
(B) The landscaping edge shall be no less than six (6) feet wide and may use up to three (3) feet of the public right-of-way, if unused and available at
the time of permitting.
Landscaping Edge
(C) The landscaping edge shall be for the parking lot's entire length.
(D) The landscaping edge shall contain no less than one (1) class A tree or two (2) class B trees for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet or fraction thereof
of the edge.
(E) The required trees may be located anywhere within the six (6) foot landscape edge with a minimum of ten (10) feet apart for class A trees and a
minimum of five (5) feet apart for class B trees. Refer to definitions on tree size.
Location of Trees
(F) If overhead lines are present along the perimeter landscape edge, no trees will be permitted in that perimeter landscape edge. In addition, no trees
shall be permitted within a thirty-foot distance from the outermost power line.
(G) A screen no less than three (3) feet height comprised of a wall, solid fence, berm, or plant material or combination of shall be provided along the
entire length of the landscaping edge or buffer, if any part of the landscaping edge is within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way. The screen does not have to
be straight with the street or parking edge.
Screen
(H) The three-foot-high screen shall not be on the right-of-way.
(I) The three-foot-high screen shall not be required across driveways.
(J) The three-foot-high screen shall not be within three (3) feet of a driveway or restrict a driver's line of sight of approaching vehicles as determined
by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/376
(K) The required three-foot-high screen, when planted, shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height. See list of suggested shrubs.
(L) A minimum width of three (3) feet is required for the bed containing the planted screen.
(M) The required three-foot-high screen, if planted shall be maintained at no less than three (3) feet high.
(3) An increase in the size of an existing parking lot by twenty-five (25) percent in the number of parking spaces or more shall require the entire parking lot,
in addition to the twenty-five (25) percent expansion, to be brought into compliance with this section.
(i) Landscaping bonus provisions.
(1) In order to receive credit for preserved trees, the owner must include as part of the landscape plan submittal, a tree preservation plan which must be
approved by development services.
(A) The tree preservation plan shall include the name, location, size and condition of each tree to be preserved, along with an indication of proposed
development features which may impact such trees, and any other pertinent information as required to evaluate existing and proposed conditions.
(B) The tree preservation plan shall include a detailed description of all methods to be used to ensure the survival of all trees scheduled for preservation
credit, including information that may be required to interpret the intent and methodology proposed.
(C) Any tree to be preserved for credit shall be protected from excavation and all construction by fencing off the area which constitutes the critical root
zone as defined herein.
(D) All building material, dirt, debris and equipment shall be kept outside the fenced area.
(E) All tree preservation methodology shall conform to the standards of the state department of agriculture and forestry, the state forest service and the
International Society of Arboriculture.
(F) If a preserved tree dies within five (5) years, it is the responsibility of the owner to replace that tree with the number of class A trees credited on a
matching basis within six (6) months.
(2) Credit may be received for preservation of existing trees as follows:
(A) For each existing tree between two (2) to four (4) inches in caliper, a tree credit of one (1) for one (1) is allowed.
(B) For each existing tree between five (5) and twelve (12) inches in caliper, a tree credit of two (2) for one (1) is allowed.
(C) For each existing tree over twelve (12) inches in caliper, a tree credit of three (3) for one (1) is allowed.
(3) The required minimum front building setback for development in GC-MD and GC-MD-2 Districts and for multifamily housing in RM-M and RM-H
Districts shall be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when a landscaped planting strip is provided across the first ten (10) feet of the property adjacent to the street
right-of-way.
(A) A turf area is to be located between the paved or curbed portion or sidewalk of the adjacent street right-of-way and the front property line.
(B) The landscape planting strip shall not be used for parking, but can be crossed with driveways providing direct ingress and egress to the
development that have been approved by the development services manager or his designee.
(C) This landscape planting strip shall by planted with one (1) class A or two (2) class B trees for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet or fraction thereof
along the property line. The required trees may be planted anywhere within the landscape planting strip with a minimum of ten (10) feet apart for class A
trees and a minimum of five (5) feet apart for class B trees.
(D) Three (3) feet of public right-of-way may be used with written permission from development services.
(j) Installation and maintenance.
(1) All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with accepted standards of the Texas Nurseryman's Manual.
(2) All plant material shall be true to name, variety, and size and shall conform to all applicable provisions of the American Standards for Nursery Stock,
latest edition.
(3) The owner and/or tenant shall be responsible for installing and maintaining all landscaping according to standard horticultural practices.
(4) All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition.
(5) No trees may be located within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant.
(6) No trees may be topped if the limbs are three (3) inches in diameter or greater.
(7) Required three-foot hedges shall be maintained at a minimum of three (3) feet in height.
(8) Dead, dying or damaged landscaping material shall be immediately replaced in conformance herein.
(9) Irrigation systems must be in good and operating condition.
(10) Failure to install required material or maintain landscaping within sixty (60) days of notification shall be subject to legal action pursuant to section
1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
(11) Any request for a modification to the terms of this ordinance must be submitted in writing and be responded to in writing by the development services
manager.
(k) Letter of credit.
(1) A letter of credit may be utilized when the landscaping improvements required by this section 28.04.006 have not been completed prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/376
(2) The applicant shall post cash or an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city in an amount equal to one hundred thirty (130) percent of the estimated
cost. This amount shall include the city's cost of administering the completion of the improvement in the event the subdivider defaults as provided herein. The
security shall be deposited with the city or in escrow with a bank at the option of the city. Such letter of credit shall comply with all statutory requirements and
shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. The period within which required
improvements must be completed shall be specified by the city manager or his designee and shall be incorporated in the letter of credit. In those cases where a
letter of credit has been posted and the required improvements have not been installed within the terms of the letter of credit, the government body may
thereupon declare the letter of credit in default and require that all of the improvements be installed.
(l) Screening of backflow prevention devices. Any backflow prevention device required by the plumbing code, article 24.02, division 4, be it a commercial or
residential use, shall be completely screened from the street via landscaping or a solid, opaque fence.
TREES FOR BEAUMONT
Class A tree: Mature height greater than thirty (30) feet.
Branches begin at six (6) feet.
Must be two (2) inches or greater in caliper when planted.
Common Name Latin Name
American Beech Fagus grandifloia
Arizona Ash Fraxinus velutina
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum
Canary Island Date Palm Phoenix canariensis
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifloia
Cherrybark Oak Quercus falcata var. pagodifolia
Chinese Elms Ulmus parvifolia
Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Hackberry Celtis laevigata
Live Oak Quercus virginiana
Sawtooth Oak Quercus
Loblolly Pine Pinus taeda
Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora
Nuttall Oak Quercus nuttallii
Pecan Carya illinoinensis
Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Red Maple Acer rubrum ‘Drummondii'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/376
Sabal Palms, Florida Fan Palm Sabal palmetto
Shumard Oak Quercus shumardii
Slash Pine Pinus elliottii
Southern Red Oak Quercus falcata
Spruce Pine Pinus glabra
Swamp Chestnut Oak, Cow, Basket Quercus michauxii
Sycamore Platanus occidentails
Washingtonia Palm Washingtonia robusta
Water Oak Quercus nigra
White Oak Quercus alba
Willow Oak Quercus phellos
Windmill Palm Tracycarpus fortunel
Winged Elm Ulmus alata
Class B tree: Less than thirty-foot mature height.
Eight (8) to ten (10) feet height when planted.
Common Name Latin Name
American Holly Ilex opaca
Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana
Chinese Fan Palm Livistona chinensis
Chinese Fringe Tree Chioanthus virginicus
Chinese Pistachio Pistacia chinesis
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica and hybrid
Flowering Pear Pyrus Calleryana ‘Bradford', ‘Aristocrat'
Savannah Holly Ilex attenuata ‘Savannah'
Golden Rain Tree Koelreuteria bipinnata
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/376
Japanese Evergreen Oak Quercus glauca
Loquat Eriobotrya japonica
Mexican Plum Prunus mexicana
Parsley Hawthorn Crataegus marshallii
Pindo Palm Butia capitata
Purple Leaf Plum Prunus cerasifera
River Birch Betula nigra
Sweet Bay Magnolia Magnolia virginiana
Texas Redbud Cercis canadensis ‘Texensis'
Tree Ligustrum Ligustrum lucidum
Tulip Magnolia Magnolia soulangiana
Vitex Vitex agnus-castus
Wax Ligustrum Tree Ligustrum japconicum
Yaupon Tree Ilex vomitoria
SHRUBS FOR SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Shrubs: Maintain three-foot height or greater.
Must be evergreen.
Common Name Latin Name
Banana Shrub, Magnolia Fuscata Michelia figo
Blue Vase Juniper Juniperus chinensis ‘Glauca'
Bottlebrush Callistemon rigidus
Burford Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii'
Camellia Sasanqua, upright Camellia sasanqua
Camellia Camellia japonica
Chinese Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/376
Cleyera Ternstoremia gymnanthera
Dwarf Burford Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii Nana'
Dwarf Japanese Holly Ilex crenata ‘Compacta'
Dwarf Wax Myrtle Myrica pusilla
Elaeagnus Elaeagnus pungens
English Boxwood Buxus sempervirens
Florida Jasmine Jasminum floridum
Fringe Flower Loropetalum chinense
Gardenia, Cape Jasmine Gardenia jasminoides
Common Name Latin Name
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora
Indian Azalea Rhododendron indica
Indian Hawthorn Raphiolepis indica
Japanese Viburnum Viburnum japonicum
Japanese Yew Podocarpus macrophyllus
Kumquat Fortunella japonica
Nandina Nandina domestica
Oleander Nerium oleander
Pineapple Guava Feijoa sellowiana
Pittosporum Pittosporum Tobira
Pyracantha Pyracantha coccinea
Red Tip Photinia Photinia glabra
Sweet Olive Osmanthus fragrans
Texas Sage Leucophyllum frutescens
Variegated Pittosporum Pittosporum tobira ‘Variegata'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/376
Variegated Privet Ligustrum sinense variegata
Viburnum suspensum Viburnum suspensum
Wax-leaf Ligustrum Ligustrum japonicum
Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 82-134, secs. 6, 12, adopted 12/14/82; Ordinance 87-33, sec. 9, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 91-66, sec. 2, adopted
8/27/91; Ordinance 92-62, sec. 5, adopted 8/11/92; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 10, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 00-96, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/00; Ordinance 05-022, sec. 1, adopted
3/8/05; Ordinance 05-034, sec. 2, adopted 3/29/05; 1978 Code, sec. 30-31; Ordinance 12-059, sec. 3, adopted 8/28/12)
Sec. 28.04.007 Performance standards
(a) Compliance required. Except as otherwise provided herein, no land, building or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any
dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold,
dampness, electrical or other substance, condition or dangerous element in such a manner or in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining
premises. Permitted uses as set forth in this chapter shall be undertaken and maintained only if they conform to the regulations of the section.
(b) Performance standard regulations. The following standards shall apply in the various zoning districts as indicated:
(1) Exterior noise. The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within the city:
(A) For noise emanating from a facility on property located within any residential zoning district, the allowable noise level shall be as follows:
Time Interval Allowable Exterior Noise
Level
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50 dB(a)
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 55 dB(a)
(B) For noise emanating from a facility on property located within any commercial zoning district, the allowable noise level shall be as follows:
Time Interval Allowable Exterior Noise
Level
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 65 dB(a)
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 70 dB(a)
(C) For noise emanating from a facility on property located within the Light Industrial Zoning District, the allowable noise level shall be 75 dB(A).
(D) For noise emanating from a facility on property located within the Heavy Industrial Zoning District, the allowable noise level shall be 85 dB(A).
(E) Noise emanating from property within any zoning district may exceed:
(i) The allowable noise level plus up to five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of no more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour; or
(ii) The allowable noise level plus six (6) to ten (10) dB(A) for a cumulative period of fifteen (15) minutes in any hour; or
(iii) The allowable noise level plus eleven (11) to fifteen (15) dB(A) for a cumulative period of five (5) minutes in any hour; or
(iv) The allowable noise level plus sixteen (16) dB(A) or more for a cumulative period of one minute in any hour.
(F) In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the allowable noise levels in subsections (B), (C), and (D) above, the allowable noise level for the
property in question shall be increased to equal the maximum ambient noise level.
(G) For the purpose of determining compliance with the noise standards in this section, the following noise sources shall not be included:
(i) Noises not directly under the control of the property owner, lessor, or operator of the premises.
(ii) Noises emanating from construction, grading, repair, remodeling or any maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(iii) Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves.
(iv) Transient noise of mobile sources, including automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/376
(v) Activities conducted on public parks, playgrounds and public or private schools.
(vi) Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a
permit or license issued by the appropriate jurisdiction relative to the staging of said events.
(vii) Air conditioning or refrigeration systems or associated equipment.
(H) For the purpose of determining compliance with the noise standards in this section, noise levels are to be measured at any residential property line
within any permanent residential zoning district.
(I) For the purpose of determining compliance with the foregoing subsections (C) through (F), and with regard to noise emanating from property
already zoned industrial at the time this chapter is enacted, noise levels are to be measured at residential property lines within residential zoning districts
as such residential zoning district lines exist at the time this chapter is enacted.
(2) Vibration. No vibration from any use within any zoning district shall be permitted which is perceptible without instruments at any residential property
line within any permanent residential zoning district. For the purpose of determining compliance with this standard, and with regard to vibration generated
from any property already zoned industrial at the time this chapter is enacted, vibration is to be measured at residential property lines within residential zoning
districts as such residential zoning district lines exist at the time this chapter is enacted.
(3) Glare. Primary and secondary glare (both direct and reflective glare) having a source on private property shall not be permitted to produce visual
discomfort for viewers on other property in any residential zoning district or on adjacent street rights-of-way. Direct glare which produces visual discomfort is
to be corrected or avoided by reducing the intensity of the light source and/or the uses of directional lighting or shading devices. Welding, new construction
and repairs of facilities shall be exempt from these regulations. Provided, however, that no requirements will be imposed in derogation of federal or state safety
and health regulations.
(4) Particulate air contaminants. No emissions, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, or other forms of air pollution shall be permitted in violation of the rules and
regulations of the state commission on environmental quality and the Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) Exceptions from performance standards. The owner or operator of any building, structure, operation or use which violates any performance standard may file an
application for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein the applicant shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said provisions and the reasons why immediate
compliance cannot be achieved. The board of adjustment may grant exceptions with respect to time of compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as it
may deem reasonable to achieve maximum feasible compliance with the provisions of this section of the chapter. In its determinations, the board of adjustment shall
consider the following:
(1) The magnitude of the nuisance caused by the violation;
(2) The uses of property within the area of impingement by the violation;
(3) The time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work;
(4) The economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment;
(5) The general public interest, welfare and safety;
(d) Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to industrial uses, or expansions thereof upon adjacent property, which exist within the city on the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; 1978 Code, sec. 30-32)
Sec. 28.04.008 Special conditions
(a) General. The following sections describe the special conditions under which certain uses are permitted in a zoning district when reference is made to one or more of
said sections in the chapter. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any permitted use with “special conditions” until all of the required
conditions have been met.
(b) Special conditions by use.
(1) Cluster housing developments. Cluster housing developments shall meet each of the following conditions:
(A) Area. The site shall contain two (2) or more acres of land.
(B) Density. The minimum average net land area per dwelling unit shall be governed by section 28.03.024(b), but shall not include public and private
streets in the development.
(C) Yards. A minimum twenty-five-foot yard or open space area shall be required from all public street rights-of-way and from the boundary of the
development. A minimum yard of ten (10) feet shall be established between all unattached dwellings.
(D) Lot area and yards. Individual lots are exempt from the minimum lot area and yard regulations otherwise imposed in this chapter.
(E) Common open space. There shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of usable common open space per dwelling unit in the
development. Common open space must be usable for recreational activities and must be assembled in contiguous areas of not less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
(F) Final plat. A recorded final plat covering all the area of a cluster housing development shall be required before a building permit shall be issued.
(G) Development phases. A description of planned development phases shall be included in the application for, and made a part of the approval of, the
final plat for cluster housing development. Each scheduled phase of development shall include a reasonable proportion of required common open space.
(H) Co-owners' association and assessments. A co-owners' association or other legal entity shall be created to provide for the retention and perpetual
maintenance of all common open space, private utilities and private streets and approved by the city attorney. There shall be a declaration creating an
association of co-owners, whether called by that name or any other, the membership of which shall be composed of all owners of lots or other units
within the perimeter of the development. Voting within the association may be weighted in any manner, except that provision shall be made that upon the
conveyance of all lots or other units by the applicant of the permit, each owner of each lot or other unit shall have an equal vote. The word “owner” shall
mean the record owner, whether one or more persons or other unit which is a part of the development, including sellers under contract for deed, but
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/376
excluding those having such interest as a security for the performance of an obligation. There shall be a declaration that each owner of a lot or other unit
shall, by acceptance of a deed therefor, whether expressly stated in such deed or not, be deemed to covenant and agree to pay to the association the
following minimum assessments and maintenance fees.
(i) Private street maintenance. An assessment for ordinary maintenance and also a special assessment for capital improvements and extraordinary
maintenance and repair of all private streets within the development. The word “street” as used in this subsection shall mean all paved or unpaved
roads open to all owners of the development, so designated on the plat of the development, as distinguished from private driveways leading into one
or more lots or other units.
(ii) Utility, water and sewer assessments. A monthly assessment for each owner's pro rata share of the monthly utilities which may be metered or
sold to the development as a unit; provided, however, that in the event one or more utilities are not provided to all owners within the development,
the declaration may provide for a pro rata assessment as between those owners actually serviced by the utility, only. In addition to the monthly
assessment hereinabove provided, there shall be declared provisions for special assessments for ordinary maintenance and repair, as well as a
special assessment for extraordinary maintenance and repair, as well as capital improvements for, all sewage collection systems and water lines
shared in common by, and servicing in common, all owners within the development, as distinguished from lines which serve only one or more
units. Declarant may choose to dedicate water and sewer easements for water and sewer collection systems shared in common by all owners of the
development that are within the perimeter of the development to the public, and, providing such dedication is accepted by the city, no assessment
for the maintenance of water and sewer collection systems shared in common by the owners of said development shall be required.
(iii) Maintenance of common open space. The applicant shall also submit a scheme, subject to the approval of the city council, for assuring
continued retention and perpetual maintenance of common green areas for as long a time as the development exists. The approved documents
embodying restrictive covenants, deed restrictions or other methods of giving such assurance shall be filed for record in the county clerk's office at
such times as the commission or council directs.
(2) Adult entertainment uses. The following special conditions and regulations shall apply for adult entertainment uses without regard to whether the adult
entertainment use is a primary or accessory use. Adult entertainment uses are those which exclude minors by virtue of age under the state Penal Code unless
such minor is accompanied by a consenting parent, guardian, or spouse and shall include but not be limited to, adult motion picture theaters, massage parlors,
nude modeling studios, nude photography studios, adult bookstores, or eating and drinking establishments which have sexually oriented entertainment such as
go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or other similar entertainers.
(A) An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any dwelling.
(B) An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within three hundred (300) feet of any other adult entertainment use, bar, pool hall,
or liquor store.
(C) An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a church, child care facility,
school, hospital, public building, or public park.
(D) The method of measuring the distance between an adult entertainment use and another adult entertainment use or any other use shall be from
nearest property line to nearest property line of said uses.
(E) Eating places (SIC 5812) and drinking places (SIC 5813) that have adult entertainment and videotape rental (SIC 7841) that rents adult videotapes
shall not be allowed in the RCR, NC, NSC, GC-MD and GC-MD-2 Districts.
(3) Swimming pool. Exception for private recreation facilities under subsection (8) below.
(A) If located in any residential zoning district, the pool shall be intended and used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the
property on which it is located and their guests.
(B) A pool may be located anywhere on a premises except in the required front yard, provided that the pool shall not be located closer than five (5) feet
to any property line of the property on which located.
(C) The swimming pool shall be enclosed by a wall or fence six (6) feet in height with locking gates.
(4) Mobile home. A mobile home shall be permitted only in a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision or as a single-family use for security
caretaker housing on property and facilities used as a governmental or public school district use through a specific use permit.
(5) Garage apartments. Garage apartments that are occupied by members of the family of the occupant of the principal dwelling and that meet all yard, open
space, and off-street parking requirements that are permitted.
(6) Servant's or caretaker's quarters. Accessory dwellings are permitted only if located in the rear of a principal building on the same lot and only if
conforming with all the yard, open space, and off-street parking requirements.
(7) Accessory buildings. An accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the principal building or erected detached from the principal building
and it may be connected therewith by a breezeway or similar structure. An accessory building attached to the main building shall be made structurally a part
and have a common wall with the principle building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building.
When a property owner owns two adjacent lots and wishes to erect an accessory building on the lot that does not contain the main building, the accessory
building must straddle the adjoining lot line. Any utility service to an accessory building shall not be serviced from the main building. No separate utility meter
will be allowed on an accessory building.
(8) Private recreation facility. Private recreation facilities in residential districts shall for multifamily developments, subdivisions, or homeowners'
associations be restricted to use by the occupants of the residence and their guests, or by members of a club or homeowners' association and their guests, and
shall be limited to such uses as swimming pools, open game fields, basketball, shuffleboard, racquet ball, croquet, and tennis courts, and meeting or locker
rooms. Private recreation facilities shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any street right-of-way or within ten (10) feet of any abutting property
line. Activity areas shall be fenced and screened from abutting properties. Dispensing of food and beverages shall be permitted on the premises only for the
benefit of users of the recreation facility and not for the general public. Off-street parking shall be required on the basis of each four thousand (4,000) square
feet of area devoted to recreational use with a minimum of four (4) spaces and a maximum of twenty (20) spaces.
(9) Auto repair garage. Automobile repairing, painting, upholstering and body and fender work shall be performed only under the following conditions:
(A) All body and fender repairing shall be done within a completely enclosed building or room with stationary windows that may be opened only at
intervals necessary for ingress and egress;
(B) No spray painting may be done except in a building or room specially designed for that purpose;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/376
(C) All other auto repairing, etc., shall be conducted within a building enclosed on at least three (3) sides.
(10) Temporary batching facility. Before a specific use permit may be granted for a temporary batching facility, the city council shall find that such batching
plant, yard, or building is both incidental to and necessary for construction within two (2) miles of the plant. A specific use permit may be granted for a period
of not more than one hundred and eighty (180) days, and approval shall not be granted for the same location for more than four (4) specific use permits during
any thirty-month period. Within thirty (30) days following the termination of any batching plant, the permittee shall cause the site to be returned to its original
condition.
(11) Restaurant. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permissible only as an adjunct, minor and incidental use to the primary use which is the sale and
service of food unless the restaurant is located in a district which permits drinking places as a use of right.
(12) Offices. Office development in the OP, Office Park District, shall be subject to the following additional supplemental conditions:
(A) A minimum ten-foot landscaped open space buffer strip shall be provided along any property line which abuts a residential zoning district.
(B) A minimum twenty-five-foot landscaped open space area shall be provided in the required front yard and also in the side yard if the property is a
corner lot.
(C) No parking spaces shall be located in the minimum front yard or side yard if the property is a corner lot, and driveways shall provide direct access
to any parking areas.
(D) All lighting shall be so situated as not to reflect light on any residential property.
(E) Building site coverage consisting of all buildings and structures and all paved surfaces shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the total lot area.
(F) Storefront, show window, or display window effects shall not be permitted and there shall be no display from windows or doors and no storage of
merchandise in the building or on the premises except in quantities customarily found in a professional or business office.
(13) Renting equipment. Special use permits are not required for the rental of equipment in a zoning district that permits the sale of the equipment as a right.
(14) Accessory parking. Accessory parking of vehicles with more than two (2) axles or that have a rated carrying capacity in excess of two (2) tons, other
than recreational vehicles, shall not be allowed in residential zoning districts.
(15) Storage limitations. In a GC-MD District a towing service shall only be permitted to store not more than ten (10) vehicles on the lot or premise on
which it is located as a use of right. Storage of more than ten (10) vehicles shall be permitted only with a specific use permit.
(16) Heliports and helistops. Heliports and helistops, as defined in section 28.01.004(b), are subject to the requirements of article 14.02, division 2 of the
Code of Ordinances.
(17) Veterinary services. Veterinary services and clinics in RCR, NC, NSC, GC-MD, GC-MD-2 and CBD Districts shall be limited to the care of household
pets and shall not provide overnight kennel services, except on a medical emergency basis. Overnight kennels and veterinary services not limited to household
pets may be allowed in GC-MD, GC-MD-2 and CBD Districts with a specific use permit. Veterinary services for animal specialties (SIC 0742) may be
permitted as an accessory use to existing kennels (SIC 0752) with a specific use permit.
(18) Permitted land uses. The land uses listed under SIC Group Number 20 through 26, 30 through 32, 34, 35, 37 and 44 shall be permitted within the GCMD,
CBD and C-M Zoning Districts if: (i) granted a specific use permit and (ii) comply with the following conditions:
(A) All business-related activities, including storage of materials and equipment, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure.
(B) All lighting shall be situated so as not to cast or reflect light on any residential property.
(C) A traffic circulation plan showing all parking, drives, loading/unloading areas, and curb cuts and truck routes shall be submitted to the city
engineer for his approval. The city engineer may, as a condition of approval of the traffic circulation plan, restrict the size of trucks parked on the site or
involved in deliveries and pickup. The city engineer may also designate or restrict truck routes.
(D) The maximum gross floor area for any lot or premise shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(E) Signs shall comply with the sign requirements for the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District.
(F) Industrial performance standards, as specified in section 28.04.006 [28.04.007], will be applicable.
(G) Special condition 18 shall not apply to temporary batching plants (SIC 295 and SIC 3273) and permanent batching plants (SIC 353).
(19) Residential care uses. Compliance with the following conditions is required:
(A) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy, written documentation must be submitted to
the building official outlining the type, size, location, characteristics and proposed activities of the facility. The names, addresses and phone numbers of
the operators, general operation information, a site plan and a list of the licenses and grants the facility will operate under must also be submitted.
(B) The owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed facility's property lines must receive a written notice of compliance with the
ordinance [this chapter] no less than ten (10) days prior to the issuance of the building permit and/or the certificate of occupancy. The notice will contain
a copy of the written documentation submitted to the building official as required in special condition (19)(A). A processing fee of one hundred twentyfive
dollars ($125.00) shall be paid to the city.
(C) A facility must be licensed, certified, or accredited by an agency of the county, state or federal government prior to providing services and the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Approval of a specific use permit by city council may be used in lieu of a license.
(D) A facility must provide twenty-four-hour on-site supervision of its residents or clients.
(E) A facility must comply with the following densities:
Zoning District Minimum Square Feet of Lot Area Per Resident
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/376
RMM 800
RMH 500
RCR 500
GC-MD 500
GC-MD-2 500
CBD No minimum as determined by specific use
permit
PUD
(F) A sign measuring not less than ledger (eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches) in size will be posted in the public right-of-way adjacent to the
proposed facility's location not less than ten (10) days prior to the issuance of a building permit. The sign will state the type of land use and the name,
address and phone number of the agent or agency responsible for the proposed facility.
(20) Storage of plastic and rubber material. The storage of plastic and rubber material within the city limits shall meet the following conditions:
(A) The warehouse shall be limited to a one-story structure with a height limit of forty-five (45) feet.
(B) The warehouse shall be located on a lot of no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
(C) The building setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any and all lot lines or as listed on the area and height regulations tables,
section 28.03.024(b) 2. and 3., whichever is greater.
(D) The regulations of the fire code shall be complied with.
(21) Garage sales are a permitted use in all the residential zoning districts provided the following conditions are complied with:
(A) A garage sale shall not be for more than three (3) continuous days;
(B) No more than two (2) garage sales per calendar year per premises shall be allowed;
(C) Hours of operation shall be limited from sunrise to sunset;
(D) No merchandise shall be displayed or placed on the public right-of-way; and
(E) Only one unlit sign, no larger than six (6) square feet, and set off of the public right-of-way shall be allowed.
(F) Garage sales conducted out of a dwelling unit are exempt from the parking requirements.
(22) Bed and breakfast facility.
(A) General purpose and description. The establishment of bed and breakfast facilities has been found to not only provide an alternative type of
lodging for visitors to Beaumont, but the income for such facility provides incentives from [for] maintaining Beaumont's older homes. This subsection is
enacted on the basis of the public policy that supports the city as a tourist destination of persons interested in the architectural and historic significance of
the city's older residential structures. This subsection focuses on the need to provide an incentive for owners of Beaumont's older homes to continue
occupancy and maintenance of historic structures.
(B) Definition. An owner-occupied private home built prior to 1950 and located within an historic district or awarded an HC-L designation and/or of
historic significance which offers lodging for paying guests, which serves food to only those guests and which allows for limited social functions as
regulated in this article [this subsection].
(C) Special regulations for bed and breakfast facilities.
(i) Structure. The bed and breakfast facility shall be operated within the principal structure and not in any accessory structure. The owner shall
live in the main structure. The structure to be used as a bed and breakfast facility shall have been constructed prior to 1950 and be located in an
historical district or awarded an HC-L designation and/or of historic significance.
(ii) Specific use permit required.
a. A specific use permit granted by city council is required for the establishment of a bed and breakfast facility, the granting of which is
provided for in the city Code of Ordinances (section 28.02.008).
b. An application for a specific use permit shall be filed with the director of planning, who shall prepare a report for review by the planning
commission and city council.
c. Issuance of a specific use permit by the city council, after recommendation by the planning commission, is conditioned on whether the
proposed bed and breakfast facility will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjacent uses,
residents and buildings or structures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/376
d. The specific use permit for a bed and breakfast facility shall expire once the applicant ceases to occupy the premises. Any subsequent
occupant must apply for and be granted a new specific use permit prior to the continuation of use of the premises as a bed and breakfast
facility.
(iii) Size. A bed and breakfast facility shall not be less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in floor area.
(iv) Number of guest rooms. A maximum number of five (5) guest rooms is allowed.
(v) Management. The facility shall be owner occupied.
(vi) Length of stay. Maximum length of stay is limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days in any thirty-day period of time. The resident owner
shall keep a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests.
(vii) Signage. Signs shall be permitted upon approval of a building permit by the chief building inspector and in accordance with the city Code of
Ordinances (section 28.04.003). In those zoning districts that prohibit signs, a nameplate, not to exceed two (2) square feet in size and consisting of
the name of the establishment only, shall be permitted. The nameplate shall be nonilluminated and shall be attached either to the structure or to the
fence surrounding the property. The nameplate shall be compatible with the style and detailing of the house.
(viii) Parking. One (1) off-street parking space per guest room and for the owner is required. The maximum number of permitted spaces shall not
exceed seven (7). The front yard shall not be used for off-street parking. All off-street parking must be screened from the street and from adjacent
lots containing residential uses. Screening from the street and adjacent lots containing residential uses must comply with the standards established
in the city Code of Ordinances (section 28.04.006).
(ix) Additions and alterations. No exterior additions or alterations shall be made for the express purpose of maintaining or adding to a bed and
breakfast facility, other than those required to meet health, safety and sanitation requirements. Minimal outward modification of the structure or
grounds may be made if such changes are deemed compatible with the character of the area or neighborhood. Such alterations and additions must
meet all zoning standards and building code requirements and must be approved by the historic landmark commission (when such property is
located in a historic district, awarded an HC-L designation and/or of historic significance).
(x) Other uses.
a. The sale and/or display of merchandise or other commodities is prohibited.
b. Weddings, receptions, luncheons, cocktail parties, or any other such function for which the owner receives payment for the use of the
facility, and which is not a function for the personal use of the owner, their friends or relatives, may be allowed if sufficient off-street or
satellite parking is provided and documented. The number of functions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) events per year nor more than two
(2) events per month. The planning division is to be notified of the functions taking place. Notification shall be filed with the planning
division on a quarterly basis, indicating the type of function, the date, and the number of guests. The city council may restrict the number of
social events based upon neighborhood compatibility, lack of parking facilities, traffic generation and/or traffic capacity of surrounding
streets.
(xi) Health, fire and building considerations. All bed and breakfast facilities shall meet all applicable local and state regulations.
(23) In GC-MD, SIC Group Number 15, 16, and 17 are permitted by right if there is no fabrication or outside storage or repair.
(24) Cellular telephone transmission towers shall be prohibited within two hundred (200) feet of a residentially zoned property. The method of measuring
the distance between the cellular telephone transmission tower and the residential zoning district shall be from the nearest lease or property line of the cellular
telephone transmission tower facility to the nearest residential district boundary.
(25) Temporary portable storage containers may be located as a temporary structure on property within the city for a period of no more than thirty (30) days.
No more than two temporary portable storage containers may be located on a specific piece of property within the city at any one time. Such temporary
container shall not be located on a specific property more than two (2) times in any given thirty (30) calendar day period. Such temporary container shall be
located no closer than five (5) feet to the property line unless placed on an existing impervious driveway. No container shall be placed on public right-of-way.
Such container shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, eight (8) feet in width or twenty (20) feet in length. No advertising other than the name of the company,
its phone number and its website shall appear on the container. It shall be the obligation of the owner or user of such temporary container to secure it in a
manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the temporary container. In the event of high winds or other inclement
weather conditions in which such structure may become a physical danger to persons or property, the appropriate code enforcement officers may require the
immediate removal of such temporary container. In the event of fire, hurricane or natural disaster causing substantial damage to the dwelling structure, the
property owner may apply to the planning manager for permission to extend the time that a portable on demand storage container may be located as a
temporary structure on the property. Extensions shall be for periods of thirty (30) days with no more than two (2) grants of extensions allowed.
(26) On undeveloped property in a GC-MD District, the parking of commercial vehicles with more than two axles or that have a rated carrying capacity in
excess of two tons shall require the granting of a specific use permit.
(27) Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings.
Any industrial housing shall:
(A) Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value of each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified appraisal for the county. Value shall be defined as the taxable
value of the industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing;
(B) Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the majority of the single-family dwellings located
within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
(C) Comply with building setbacks, subdivision ordinance and other site requirements applicable to single-family and duplex dwellings; and
(D) Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation as defined by the city adopted building codes. Permanent foundation shall mean one of the following:
(i) Pier and beam foundation as designed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state.
(ii) A combination pier and footing as designed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state.
(iii) A monolithic poured-in-place slab as designed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/376
(28) Living in recreational vehicles shall not be permitted except in designated recreational vehicle parks.
(29) For the purpose of this ordinance, bottle clubs, which shall be defined as social meeting places where patrons are served drinks from their own bottles
of alcoholic beverages shall be classified under SIC Group 5813, Drinking Places.
This definition shall not include eating places that serve individuals from the individual's own bottle or private stock.
(30) Eighteen (18) wheeler trailers shall not be used as storage units except in the LI and HI districts.
(31) Mobile food units shall not be stored in A-R, RS, RM-M, RM-H, RCR, and RCR-H districts.
(Ordinance 81-17, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/81; Ordinance 81-58, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/81; Ordinance 82-109, secs. 2, 3, adopted 9/14/82; Ordinance 86-89, sec. 3, adopted
8/2/86; Ordinance 87-33, sec. 2, adopted 4/28/87; Ordinance 87-60, sec. 2, adopted 7/28/87; Ordinance 87-74, sec. 3, adopted 9/22/87; Ordinance 87-79, sec. 1, adopted
10/13/87; Ordinance 87-84, sec. 1, adopted 10/27/87; Ordinance 89-10, sec. 1, adopted 2/28/89; Ordinance 89-14, sec. 2, adopted 3/7/89; Ordinance 89-21, sec. 2, adopted
4/25/89; Ordinance 92-63, sec. 3, adopted 8/25/92; Ordinance 93-69, sec. 3, adopted 11/23/93; Ordinance 98-7, sec. 11, adopted 2/3/98; Ordinance 02-029, sec. 2, adopted
4/23/02; Ordinance 02-058, sec. 1, adopted 8/27/02; Ordinance 05-010, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/05; Ordinance 05-034, sec. 2, adopted 3/39/05; 1978 Code, sec. 30-33;
Ordinance 07-096, sec. 3, adopted 9/25/07; Ordinance 07-124, sec. 1, adopted 12/4/07; Ordinance 08-066, sec. 3, adopted 8/26/08; Ordinance 08-097, sec. 2, adopted
11/4/08; Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance 12-031, sec. 10, adopted 6/26/12; Ordinance 12-074, secs. 10-11, adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 13-003, secs. 4–5, adopted
1/15/13; Ordinance 13-033, sec. 2, adopted 6/4/13)