CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BEEVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: January 10, 2017 
Effective: January 10, 2017 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
David Carabajal 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Fulghum 
Mayor Pro tem 
____________ 
Randy G. Forbes, Ward 1 
Benny Rey Puente, Ward 2 
David Carabajal, Ward 3 
John Fulghum, Ward 4 
Bebe Adamez, Ward 5 
City Council Members 
____________ 
Jack Hamlett 
City Manager 
____________ 
Frank W. Warner 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Gabriela Hernandez 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Beeville, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to City Officers and Employees for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beeville, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beeville, Texas. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beeville, Texas. 2016. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF BEEVILLE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2316 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BEEVILLE, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEEVILLE, TEXAS THAT: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances, Beeville, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 56, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 12, 2016, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount permitted or required by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 12, 2016, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective on the 10th day of January, 2017. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council this 10th day of January, 2017. 
/s/   
      David Carabajal, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Gabriela Hernandez, City Secretary   APPROVED AS TO FORM 
/s/   
      Frank W. Warner, City Attorney     
1st Reading: December 13, 2016 
2nd Reading: January 10, 2017 
Action 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 10th day of January, 2017. 
/s/   
      Gabriela Hernandez, City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Ord. No. 2298  6-14-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2299  6-28-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2300  7-26-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2301  7-26-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2302  8-22-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2303  8-23-2016 Include 1 Ord. No. 2304  8-23-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2305  9-13-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2306  9-13-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2307  9-13-2016 Include 1 Ord. No. 2309  9-27-2016 Include 1 Ord. No. 2310  9-27-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2311 11-15-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2312 11-15-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2313 11-21-2016 Include 1 Ord. No. 2314 11-21-2016 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2316  1-10-2017 Include 1 Ord. No. 2317  1-10-2017 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2318  1-10-2017 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2319  1-10-2017 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2320  1-24-2017 Omit 1 Ord. No. 2321  2-14-2017 Include 2 Ord. No. 2322  2-14-2017 Include 2 Ord. No. 2323  2-28-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2324  5-16-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2325  6-13-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2326  6-27-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2327  7-31-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2328  9-18-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2329  9-18-2017 Omit 2 Ord. No. 2330  9-26-2017 Include 2 Ord. No. 2331 12-12-2017 Include 2 Ord. No. 2333 10-10-2017 Include 2  
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The City of Beeville, Texas, was first incorporated as a town in 1890 and reincorporated in 1908. It is the county seat of Bee County, Texas. The town became a city with the adoption of its charter by the electorate on October 5, 1951. That charter is set out herein in its original form, except that a uniform system of numbering, capitalization and punctuation has been employed and material has been added in brackets for clarity or to correct obvious errors. Amendments to the charter after its original adoption are indicated by a historical notation enclosed in parentheses following the affected section; the absence of such a notation indicates the section derives unchanged from the original charter. 
State Law reference- Home rule type of municipality, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 5.004; adoption or amendment of home rule charter, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq.; general powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; form of government in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 26.021. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1-1. - Corporate name. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Beeville, in Bee County, Texas, at the boundaries and limits of the city are herein established, shall be a body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name and style of the "City of Beeville, Texas," with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
Sec. 1-2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state, and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be [is] not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Form of government in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021. 
Sec. 1-3. - The boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city are hereby established as follows: 
    Located and situated in the County of Bee, Texas, and being described by meters [metes] and bounds as follows: 
Beginning at a stake set in the former John W. Cook's pasture for the southeast corner of the limits defined herein; 
Thence N 27° W at 3,960 feet a stake whence the center of Block No. 38 of the original Town of Beeville bears S 63° W a distance of 4,930.55 feet and continuing N 27° W at a distance of 9,960 feet from the place of beginning a stake set in a field belonging to A.C. Jones for the northeast corner of these limits; 
Thence S 63° W 8,922 feet to a stake for the northwest corner; 
Thence S 27° E 7,610 feet to Youst Street for the southwest corner; 
Thence N 63° E along Youst Street to the point of intersection of Youst Street and the western boundary of Christabelle Addition as platted and recorded in Vol. 1, at page 11, of the map records of Bee County, Texas; 
Thence 14° 16' W along the western boundary of Christabelle Addition to the southwest corner of the addition; 
Thence N 63° 29' E along the southern boundary of Christabelle Addition to the intersection of western boundary of the S. A. and A. P. Railway Co. right-of-way; 
Thence S 26° 25' E with the boundary a distance of 1,012.6 feet to a stake; 
Thence N 63° E 5515.1 feet to the place of beginning; 
And in addition to the area within the enclosure described above, the boundaries shall include the area along the eastern limits known as Halls' Acres Addition as platted and recorded in Vol. 2, at page 5 of the map records of Bee County, Texas, and having metes and bounds as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection of the southern boundary of Lorene Street and the western boundary of Cook Street which point is also the northeast corner of Block 23, Wilson's Addition to the city; 
Thence N 62° 47' E 420 feet along the southern boundary of Lorene Street; 
Thence N 62° 53' E 668 feet along the southern boundary of Lorene Street to the point of intersection with the eastern boundary of Clay Street; 
Thence S 26° 31' E 940.1 feet along the eastern boundary of Clay Street to the point of intersection with the northern boundary of U. S. Highway 59; 
Thence S 63° W 1,088 feet to a point in the western boundary of Cook Street; 
Thence N 26° 31' W 938 feet to the point of beginning. 
Editor's note- The current city boundaries, as changed by annexations, are currently as shown in the revised plat of 2016 on file in the office of the city secretary. 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-4. - Extension of boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods hereinafter designated: 
(1)  V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. Where such additional territory adjoins the corporate limits of the city and contains three or more inhabitants qualified to vote for members of the state legislature, such adjacent territory may be annexed to the city in the manner and in conformity with the procedure set forth in V.C.T.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
(2)  Extension of limits by election. The city council shall have the power to order an election or elections for the purpose of annexing territory lying adjacent to the city. Such order shall include the field notes of the area sought to be annexed. The city council shall give notice of the date and place of balloting at such election by publication of the order in the official newspaper for at least 20 days prior to the date on which such election is ordered. The inhabitants of the city and the territory to be annexed, who are qualified to vote for members of the state legislature shall be qualified to vote at such election. The city council shall, at its next meeting, canvass the returns of such election and if a majority of the votes cast at such election favor such annexation, the council shall declare the territory annexed to the city, and the boundary limits of the city shall thereafter be extended and fixed so as to include such territory; and when any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the city and all property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens of the city, and they shall be bound by the lawful acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
(3)  Annexation of unoccupied lands by petition of owners. The owner or owners of any land which is without residents, contiguous and adjacent to the city may, by petition in writing to the governing body, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The governing body shall thereafter, and not less than five and not more than 30 days after the filing of such petition, hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petition as the governing body may see fit. If the governing body grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance receive and annex such territory as a part of the city. 
(4)  Annexation by amendment to charter. The boundary limits of the city may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed thereto by amendment to the charter of the city. 
(5)  Annexation by any other method provided by law. Additional territory may also be annexed to the city in any manner and in any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided by law. Same shall be in addition to the methods hereinabove provided. 
(6)  Annexed territory to become part of the city. Upon completion of any one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the city, and the land and its inhabitants and future inhabitants shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the city and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
Sec. 1-5. - Platting of property. 
    Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the city, or within any area over which the city may have jurisdiction under state law, who may divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the city, shall comply with the provisions of V.C.T.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq., and all amendments thereto, and the article 974a and amendments thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965) 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 

Sec. 2-1. - General. 
    The city, as such body politic and corporate, shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and state law, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control any property now owned by it or which it hereafter may acquire, and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities; may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance and sale of bonds or notes of the city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations, and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the city, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its inhabitants, and to protect the peace, lives, health and property of the inhabitants; and may provide suitable penalties for the violation of any ordinance enacted by the city; and except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this charter, the city may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
State Law reference- General powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - General powers adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers in this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and state law, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. The city shall have and exercise all the powers enumerated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq. and amendments thereto and hereafter enacted. 
Sec. 2-3. - Eminent domain. 
    The city shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter or by the constitution and state law. The city may exercise the power and eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this charter. 
State Law reference- Municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001. 
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 3-1. - Number, selection and term. 
(a)  The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of five members and shall be known as the "City Council of the City of Beeville, Texas." The city councilmen elected on the first Tuesday of April, 1973, shall each serve for a term of one year only. The members of the city council shall be the only elective officers of the city, and three of their number shall be councilmen, one shall be mayor pro tempore and the fifth shall be the mayor of the city. The mayor and the mayor pro tempore shall be elected by the city council by majority vote. 
(b)  The city is hereby divided into five separate and distinct wards, Numbers 1 through 5, being geographically described as follows: 
(1)  Ward No. 1. All that certain area in the city bounded on the north by the south boundary of Ward No. 2, hereinafter described, in the north boundary of West Corpus Christi Street; bounded on the east by the west boundary of Madison Street; and bounded on the west by the west boundary of Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(2)  Ward No. 2. All that certain area in the city bounded on the north by that portion of the south boundary of Ward No. 3, hereinafter described, along West Fannin, North Avenue B and West Clare Streets to the west boundary of North Madison Street; thence south along the west boundary of North Madison Street to the north boundary of West Corpus Christi Street; thence west along the north boundary of West Corpus Christi Street to the extension of the west boundary of Alta Vista Boulevard in the north boundary; and thence south along the west boundary of Alta Vista Boulevard to the city limits line. 
(3)  Ward No. 3. All that certain area in the city north of a line beginning at the west city limits line on the north boundary of West Fannin Street and extending along the northern boundary of West Fannin Street to the west boundary of North Avenue B; thence diagonally across the intersection to its southeast corner; thence south along the east side of Avenue B to the northeast corner of the intersection of North Avenue B and West Clare Street; thence in an easterly direction along the north boundary of West Clare Street to the northwest corner of the intersection of West Clare Street and North Madison Street; thence in a northerly direction along the west boundary of Madison Street to the north boundary of Hutchinson Street; thence easterly along the north boundary of Hutchinson Street to the west boundary of Archer Street; thence diagonally across the intersection of the streets to the southeast corner of such intersection; thence south along the east boundary of Archer Street to the north boundary of East Fannin Street; thence along the north boundary of East Fannin Street to the east boundary of Fowler Street; thence south along the east boundary of Fowler Street to the north boundary of Clare Street; thence east along the north boundary of East Clare Street to the east city limits. 
(4)  Ward No. 4. All that certain area of the city bounded on the north by the south boundary of the Ward No. 3, along East Hutchinson, North Archer, East Fannin, North Fowler and East Clare Streets; bounded on the west by the east boundary of North Madison Street; and bounded on the south on a line beginning in the north boundary of West Corpus Christi Street at the west boundary of North Madison Street; thence east along the north boundary of West and East Corpus Christi Street to the east boundary of Archer Street; thence north to the north boundary of East Bowie Street; thence east along the north boundary of East Bowie Street to the east boundary of Laurel Street; thence south along the east boundary of Laurel Street to the north boundary of East Rosewood Street; and thence east along the north boundary of Rosewood Street to the east city limits line. 
(5)  Ward No. 5. All that certain area in the city bounded on the north by the south boundary of the Ward No. 4, along West and East Corpus Christi, North Archer, East Bowie, Laurel and East Rosewood Streets; bounded on the west by the east boundary of the Ward No. 1. 
(c)  Any future council after April, 1974, shall redistrict the city should such action become necessary to comply with the laws of the United States of America and this state, relating to redistricting so as to adhere to the rule commonly known as "one man, one vote." The council shall provide one voting place in each ward so that the electors may conveniently exercise their voting franchise. No changes in the boundaries of any ward shall be made within six months next preceding the regular election in the city. 
(d)  On the first Tuesday in April, 1974, there shall be a regular city election held in each ward for the election of one councilman to represent each ward. Each candidate for election must have been a bona fide resident of the city for at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election. A candidate need not be a resident of the ward he or she seeks to represent. The city council presiding as a consequence of the election held on the first Tuesday of April, 1974, shall, at its first meeting determine by lot, two councilmen who shall each serve for a two year term and three councilmen who shall each serve for a three year term from and after the election on the first Tuesday of April, 1974. Each new council shall elect its own mayor and mayor pro tempore. All elections are to be held in a manner as prescribed in Article IV of this charter. The representative of a ward shall hold office until his successor has been elected and duly qualified. 
(e)  Following the election in April, 1974, there shall be no regular election until the first Tuesday in April, 1976, at which time two councilmen are to be elected for a two year term and then at the regular city election to be held on the first Tuesday of April, 1977, three councilmen shall be elected to serve for a two year term and thereafter annually during the even numbered years two councilmen shall be elected to serve for two year terms and thereafter during the odd numbered years three councilmen shall be elected to serve for two year terms. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Editor's note- The city wards have been amended and are currently as shown in the revised plat of 2016 on file in the office of the city secretary. 
State Law reference- Uniform election dates, V.T.C.A., Elections Code § 41.001. 
Sec. 3-2. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Each member of the city council shall be a resident of the city, and shall be a qualified voter of this state, and shall have been a bona fide resident of the city for at least 12 months prior to the date of election and shall not be indebted to the city. Any resident of a territory annexed under the provisions of this charter shall be eligible to the office if he or she meets the qualifications other than those requiring residence for the 12 months period. 
(b)  No person who is delinquent in the payment of city ad valorem taxes, or on any city assessment, or under the terms of any contract with the city or who is delinquent in the payment of an account for services rendered by the city shall be qualified to serve as a member of the city council. The term "delinquent" in the payment of an account for services rendered by the city means failure or refusal to pay such account to the city on or before 120 days from the billing date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Requirements for candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.001 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3. - Compensation. 
    As compensation for their service, the mayor of the city shall receive $60.00 per meeting, the mayor pro tempore shall receive $40.00 per meeting and each other councilman shall receive $35.00 per meeting; provided, however, no member of the city council shall receive more than 12 times such respective sum in one year. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 880, § 1, 4-2-1968) 
Sec. 3-4. - Presiding officer, mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the council, but he shall have no veto power. When the office of mayor becomes vacant for whatever cause, the council at its first regular meeting, before or during which all members shall have been duly qualified, shall elect one of its members mayor. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 1, 4-2-1968) 
State Law reference- Filling vacancy in office of mayor in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.047. 
Sec. 3-5. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    When the office of mayor pro tempore becomes vacant for whatever cause, the council at its first regular meeting, before or during which all members shall have been duly qualified shall elect one of its members mayor pro tempore. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 1, 4-2-1968) 
Sec. 3-6. - Vacancies. 
    When a member of the city council dies, resigns, becomes incapacitated, is removed from office or moves his residence out of the city limits, then a vacancy in the office formerly held by him shall be deemed to exist and such vacancy shall be filled at the next regular city election, if such an election is to be held within a 60-day period from the date such vacancy occurred. If there is no regular city election is to be held in the ward in which that vacancy occurred, nevertheless, such an election shall take place in such ward for the purpose of filling such vacancy. If there is no regular city election is to be held within 60 days from the date such vacancy occurred, then there shall be a special election held in the ward wherein such vacancy occurred, and such special election shall be conducted not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date such vacancy occurred. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Filling vacancy in office of mayor in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.047. 
Sec. 3-7. - Powers of council. 
    All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(l)  Appoint and remove the city manager. 
(2)  Establish other administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
(3)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(4)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(6)  Provide for a planning commission, a zoning commission, a zoning board of adjustment, and other boards and commissions deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such commissions and boards. The planning and zoning commissions may be combined. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
(7)  Adopt plats. 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(9)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(11)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
(12)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and to prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits, and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction. 
(13)  Fix the salaries and compensation of the nonelective city officers and employees. 
(14)  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system; and to provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
(15)  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. 
(16)  Provide for the placing of parking meters and the regulation and use thereof. 
(17)  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, parks and highways of the city and the power to lay out, improve, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places, all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of the streets and sidewalks, and to vacate and close private ways as permitted by general law. 
(18)  Establish, maintain and operate an airport or airports, within or without the city limits, and landing fields, radio beams, beacons and other apparatuses, buildings, equipment and appurtenances necessary and convenient therefor, and to make suitable charges for their use. 
(19)  Contract with one or more insurance companies for insuring city employees or any class or classes of employees under a policy or policies of group insurance covering one or more risks and may pay all or any portion of the premiums on such policy or policies from the city's funds. Public funds shall not be expended in payment of premiums applicable to that portion of the policy or policies insuring the dependants of such employees. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965) 
Sec. 3-8. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates; provided, however, that the appointment of department heads shall be subject to the approval of the council. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Violation of this section may cause the offending party to be subject to recall procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 3-9. - City secretary. 
    The council shall appoint a city secretary and his deputy or deputies. The city manager shall have the privilege of recommending one or more persons for these positions. The council in making such appointment shall give consideration to the recommendations of the city manager but shall not be bound thereby and shall have the absolute right to appoint whomsoever the council shall deem advisable to these positions. The city secretary or his deputy shall give notices of council meetings, keep the minutes of its proceedings authenticated by his signature and recorded in full in a book kept and indexed for that purpose and he shall maintain as a permanent record all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him and those elsewhere provided for in this charter. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 3-10. - Municipal court. 
(a)  There shall be created, established and maintained a court for the trial and disposition of misdemeanor offenses to be designated "Municipal Court of the City of Beeville, Texas." Such court shall have jurisdiction, power and duties as now or hereinafter provided for by the constitution and state law for a municipal or recorder's court. 
(b)  The judge of the court shall be appointed by the city council, be a qualified voter, shall have been a resident of the city for at least 12 months prior to his appointment, hold his office at the pleasure of the city council and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. When the judge is absent, disabled or unable to perform his duties for whatever cause or his office becomes vacant by reason of death, removal or resignation, the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall be the judge of the court, or the city council may appoint a special judge of the court who shall serve until the judge of the court returns to his duties, or a successor is appointed and qualifies. The city council shall appoint a municipal court clerk and his deputy or deputies. Such clerk and deputy shall administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the court's seal and do and perform all acts and duties permitted, necessary and required by clerks of courts of this state in issuing processes and conducting the business of the court. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001. 
Sec. 3-11. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing in the city, who shall be its city attorney. The city attorney shall have been a resident of the city for at least 12 months prior to this appointment. He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be provided by the city council and shall hold his office at the will of the city council and until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counselor for the city, its officers and departments. The city council shall, when it deems necessary appoint one or more assistant city attorneys having the same qualifications as the city attorney, their compensation to be fixed by the city council. The city attorney and his assistants shall represent the city in all litigation, but at the council's discretion may or may not participate in litigation for the collection of delinquent taxes. Special attorneys may be employed by the city council under contract for the collection of delinquent taxes and for any other purpose, at such fees, for such length of time and under such conditions as the council may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Prosecutions in municipal court of record to be conducted by city attorney, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.007801. 
Sec. 3-12. - Meetings of the council. 
    The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meeting and may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its citizens. All meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall, except that the council may designate another place for such meetings after publishing due notice thereof in one issue of the official newspaper for the city; the publication shall not be less than ten days prior to such change in the meeting place. The mayor, any two members of the city council or the city manager may call special meetings of the city council at any time upon at least 12 hours' written notice to each member, served personally or left at the usual place of business or residence of such member, or such meeting may be held at any time without written notice, provided all members of the council are present; provided, however, all meetings of the city council shall be held in compliance with Article 6252 V.A.T.S. as heretofore and hereafter amended by the legislature. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Editor's note- The state statutory reference in this section is no longer valid. State open meetings law is now addressed in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
Sec. 3-13. - Council to be judge of election of its members. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members, and the council shall, on the next regular meeting day of the council, after each regular and special election, canvass the returns and declare the results of such election. 
Sec. 3-14. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members. Robert's Rules of Order for Procedure shall be followed for city council meetings except when such rules are in conflict with the city charter, in which case the city charter shall prevail. Three members of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of a majority shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance or resolution. All meetings of the city council shall be public except when otherwise provided by state statute and minutes of all proceedings will be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall be a part of the city's permanent records. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions are to be taken by the ayes and nays and entered upon the minutes and every ordinance and resolution upon its final passage shall be recorded in a permanent book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 3-15. - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein, provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten days from the date of its passage; subject to the provisions of article V of this charter. The city secretary shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance to be published once in the official newspaper of the city within ten days after the passage of the ordinance. He shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided by article XI of this charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the city council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
State Law reference- Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out certain municipal powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001; procedure for adopting zoning regulations and district boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006. 
Sec. 3-16. - Administrative departments. 
    The city council may abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be in the best interest of the city and may divide the administration of any such department as it may deem advisable, create new departments and may discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion except as to the office of city manager, municipal court judge, city attorney, city secretary and municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 3-17. - Payment of claims. 
    No warrant for the payment of any claim shall be issued by the city, unless such claim shall be evidenced by an invoice or itemized account, and approved by the city council, and all warrants shall be signed by the city manager and city secretary. 
Sec. 3-18. - Official bonds of city manager and city secretary. 
    The city manager and the city secretary shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council, payable to the city of Beeville and conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of such respective officers and for the faithful accounting for all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such respective officers; and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business under the laws of this state, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by the city; and such bonds must be acceptable to the city council. 
Sec. 3-19. - Official bond for other officers and employees. 
    The council of the city shall have the right to require fidelity bonds from other appointive officers and employees of the city, in such amounts as the council may from time to time fix by ordinance or resolution; and conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office and accounting for all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such officers and employees; and all such bonds shall be signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business under the laws of this state, and the premiums accruing thereon shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 3-20. - Investigation by council. 
    The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $200.00. 
Sec. 3-21. - Audit and examination of the city books and accounts. 
    The council may cause a continuous audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city. An annual audit shall be made at the close of each fiscal year. It shall include a recapitulation of all audits made during the course of the fiscal year. Audit reports shall be filed with the council and shall be available for publication or public inspection. Only qualified public accountants who have no financial or personal interest in the fiscal affairs of the city, and who do not maintain or keep any of the city's accounts or records shall be employed by the city council to audit the books and accounts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965) 
ARTICLE IV. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Elections. 
    The regular election for the choice of members of the city council shall be held in each ward on the first Tuesday in April commencing on the first Tuesday in April, 1974, except that no such election shall be held in the year 1975 and commencing in 1976 and thereafter in subsequent years the election shall be staggered as hereinabove prescribed for. The city council may by resolution order a special election, fix the time for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Uniform election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001. 
Sec. 4-2. - Regulation of elections. 
    The council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the state law, or the United States, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this charter, or with any regulations made by the council or the state law, or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 2, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Conduct of elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 61.001 et seq. 
Sec. 4-3. - How to get name on ballot. 
    Any person qualified under Article III, Section 1, as amended, of this charter shall have the right to file an application to have his name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any elective office and such application, in writing, signed by such candidate and filed with the city secretary or a deputy city secretary not less than 30 days prior to the date of the election, shall entitle such applicant to a place on the official ballot. In addition to the above application, each candidate shall file loyalty affidavits as prescribed by the election state law. Candidates shall file for places by ward. The names of candidates will be listed numerically by ward. Candidates from each ward will draw for positions by lot on the ballot for that ward. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 3, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Candidates for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.001 et seq. 
Sec. 4-4. - Council ballots. 
    The full names of all candidates for the office of councilman as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations. If two candidates with the same surnames, or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion of identity, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot. All official ballots shall be printed at least 20 days prior to the date of any regular or special election, and absentee voting shall be governed by the general election laws of this state. Ballots will list candidates by the numerical number of the wards. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 4, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 52.001 et seq. 
Sec. 4-5. - Election of councilmen by plurality. 
    At any regular or special municipal election the candidate for the office of councilman from a ward who shall have received the greatest number of votes cast in the election in such ward shall be declared elected. In the event of a tie vote, the city council shall cause to be held a run-off election within 30 days of the date of the regular or special election, such run-off election to be between the tied candidates in such ward. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 5, 4-10-1973) 
State Law reference- Counting votes generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 65.001 et seq. 
Sec. 4-6. - Laws governing city elections. 
    All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by the state law, and by the laws of the United States, governing general and municipal elections. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 6, 4-10-1973) 
ARTICLE V. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 5-1. - Power of initiative. 
    The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to at least 25 percent of the number of votes at the last regular municipal election. 
Sec. 5-2. - Power of referendum. 
    The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council, or submitted by the council to a vote of the electors, except ordinances providing for the submission of a proposed bond issue and ordinances providing for levying of taxes, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative petition and passed by the council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within 20 days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition, signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to at least 25 per centum of the number of votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election, may be filed with the city secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. 
Sec. 5-3. - Form of petitions; committee of petitioners. 
    Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
Sec. 5-4. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
    All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument. Within 20 days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The city secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. After completing his examination of the petition, the city secretary shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient, he shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings. 
Sec. 5-5. - Amendment of petitions. 
    An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city secretary shall, within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition, and if the petition be still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Sec. 5-6. - Effect of certification of referendum petition. 
    When a referendum petition, or amended petition, as defined in section 5 above of this charter, has been certified as sufficient by the city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 5-7. - Consideration by council. 
    Whenever council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than 60 days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the council by the city secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
Sec. 5-8. - Submission to electors. 
    If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, or if the council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date that the council takes its final vote thereon. If no regular election is to be held within such period, the council shall provide for a special election. 
Sec. 5-9. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
    Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the city attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. If a paper ballot is used, it shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "For the ordinance" and "Against the ordinance." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the elector shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance. 
Sec. 5-10. - Results of election. 
    If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
Sec. 5-11. - Recall, general. 
    Any member of the city council may be removed from office by recall. 
Sec. 5-12. - Recall procedure. 
    Any elector of the city may make and file with the city secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of any member or members of the council whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The city secretary shall thereupon deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The city secretary shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the city secretary shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the city council, and shall be numbered, dated and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the councilman whose removal is sought. The city secretary shall enter in a record to be kept in his office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to the person. 
Sec. 5-13. - Recall petitions. 
    The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city secretary within 30 days after the filing of the affidavit required by section 12 of this article, and it must be signed by qualified electors of the ward from which the candidate whose removal is sought was elected, such signatures to be equal in number to 16 percent of the total number of votes cast in the ward at the last regular municipal election; provided, however, that the petition shall contain the signatures of at least 200 qualified electors of the ward, and shall conform to the provisions of section 3 of this Article V. No petition paper shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the city secretary as required in section 12 herein. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1106, art. IV, § 13, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 5-14. - Recall election. 
    The city secretary shall at once examine the recall petition and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the charter, he shall within five days submit it to the city council with his certificate to that effect and notify the councilman sought to be recalled of such action. If the councilman whose removal is sought does not resign within five days after such notice the city council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election in the ward from which the councilman being suggested for recall was elected. Any such election shall be held not less than 30 nor more than 60 days after the petition has been presented to the city council at the same time as any municipal election held within such period; but if no such municipal election is to be held within such period, the city council shall call a special election to be held within the time stated above. 
(Ord. No. 1106, art IV, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 5-15. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
(2)  Immediately below each such question, there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name of person)" 
"Against the recall of (name of person)" 
Sec. 5-16. - Results of recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the councilman named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the councilman named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as in other vacancies. 
Sec. 5-17. - Limitations on recalls. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against a councilman within six months after he takes office nor in respect to a councilman subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after such election. 
Sec. 5-18. - District judge may order election. 
    Should the city council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this article, when all the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this article of the charter, then it shall be the duty of the district judge of Bee County, Texas, upon proper application being made therefor, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect the provisions of this article of the charter. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 6-1. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city. No member of the city council shall, during the time for which he is elected or one year thereafter, be chosen as city manager. 
Sec. 6-2. - Term and salary. 
    The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
Sec. 6-3. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    [The city manager shall have the power and duty to:] 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the welfare of the city, remove any officer or employee of the city except as to those officers appointed by the council and except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with this charter. 
Sec. 6-4. - Heads of departments. 
    Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual; the manager may head one or more departments. 
ARTICLE VII. - THE BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of home rule municipality to control and manage its finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022. 

Sec. 7-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of April and shall end on the last day of March of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
Editor's note- The current fiscal year of the city is October 1 through September 30. 
State Law reference- Authority of home rule municipality to prescribe its fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022. 
Sec. 7-2. - Preparation, submission and content of budget. 
    The city manager, at least 60 days prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided herein. For such purpose, he shall obtain from the head of each office, department or agency estimates of revenue and expenditure of that office, department or agency detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditure, and such other supporting data as he may request. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. It shall contain the following: 
(1)  A budget explanatory message. 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures for all funds. 
(3)  An analysis of property valuations. 
(4)  An analysis of tax rate. 
(5)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least ten years or for the number of years for which records are available. 
(6)  General fund resources in detail. 
(7)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity. 
(8)  Summary of proposed expenditures by character and object. 
(9)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support summaries, numbers 7 and 8 above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay. 
(10)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
(11)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
(12)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds. 
(13)  A special funds section. 
(14)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(15)  The tax levying ordinance. 
(16)  A capital improvement program for the budget year and proposed method of financing. 
(17)  A plan for capital improvement covering the next five years and proposed method of financing. 
(18)  A summary of the condition of machinery, equipment and buildings. 
(19)  A suggested legislative program and the highlights of the proposed administrative program. 
Sec. 7-3. - Budget a public record. 
    The budget and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary open to public inspection by anyone. The city manager shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons and civic organizations. 
Sec. 7-4. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
    At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published a notice of the place and time, such date for public hearing to be not less than seven days after date of publication. 
Sec. 7-5. - Public hearing on budget. 
    At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates or any item thereof. 
Sec. 7-6. - Adoption; effective date; failure to adopt. 
    The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the whole council, and it shall be finally adopted not later than the first day of the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget, as submitted, is not acceptable to the city council, then the city council shall order to be made such change or changes, as they deem advisable, and, after such change or changes have been made, shall adopt the budget on or before the date above specified, and same shall be in effect for the budget year. 
Sec. 7-7. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed as operating expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several departments and purposes therein named. 
Sec. 7-8. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city, in the corresponding tax year. 
Sec. 7-9. - Anticipated revenues and expenses compared with other years. 
    In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue and proposed expenditures there shall be placed the actual amount of such item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 7-10. - Contingent appropriation. 
    Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three per centum of the total general fund expenditure, to be used in the case of unforeseen items of expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him after approval by the city council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriations, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BORROWING FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of home rule municipality to control and manage its finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022. 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this charter, "capital project" or "project" means: 
(a)  Any physical public betterment or improvement and any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto; 
(b)  The acquisition of property of a permanent nature; 
(c)  The purchase of equipment for any public betterment or improvement when first erected or acquired. 
Sec. 8-2. - Power to incur indebtedness by issuing bonds and notes. 
    The city may incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds, and notes in anticipation of bonds pending issuance of previously approved bonds, pursuant to this charter, to finance any capital project which it may lawfully construct or acquire, or for any legitimate public purpose. 
Sec. 8-3. - Bond ordinance; vote required. 
    The city shall authorize the issuance of bonds by a "Bond Ordinance" passed by the affirmative votes of the majority of all members of its council. Revenue bonds may be issued by the council under the authority of articles 1111-1118, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, and all other applicable provisions of law. The issuance of tax bonds must be approved by a majority of the qualified voters who are property taxpayers voting at an election called for that purpose; provided, however, that approval of qualified voters shall not be necessary for the refunding of outstanding bonds. 
Editor's note- The state statutory cite in this section is no longer valid. Various types of municipal revenue bonds are covered in multiple sections of state statutes. 
Sec. 8-4. - Form and content of bond ordinance. 
(a)  The bond ordinance shall provide for proper notice, the calling of the election, the propositions to be submitted and for the issuance of the bonds. The ordinance or ordinances shall specify: 
(1)  The purpose for which the bonds are to be issued, and where possible, the probable period of usefulness; 
(2)  The amount thereof; 
(3)  The maximum rate of interest, in the ordinance calling the election, and rate or rates of interest, in the ordinance issuing the bonds; 
(4)  The levy of taxes sufficient to pay interest and sinking fund or retirement of principal; 
(5)  That the bonds to be issued shall mature serially within a given number of years. 
(b)  The bond ordinance and the manner of conducting the election shall in all respects conform to this charter and the general laws of this state. 
Sec. 8-5. - Title of bond ordinance; citation. 
    The title of a bond ordinance shall state the amount appropriated for an indicated project and the amount of bonds authorized to finance the appropriation. Bond ordinances shall be cited in bonds and notes by title and date of final passage. 
Sec. 8-6. - Form and content when two or more projects are combined. 
    A bond ordinance may combine two or more related projects, in which event it shall for each project, establish a separate appropriation and state separately the estimated maximum costs and amounts of down payments, but shall authorize a single issue of bonds to finance the aggregate of the appropriations thereby made. The title of such bond ordinance may state the aggregate of the appropriations, instead of the respective amounts. 
Sec. 8-7. - Public sale. 
    All bonds issued under this charter shall be sold at public sale upon sealed proposals after at least ten days notice published at least once in a publication carrying municipal bond notices and devoted primarily to financial news, and at least ten days notice published at least once in the official newspaper of the city. 
Sec. 8-8. - Call date. 
    The council shall consider the advisability of inserting a call date on all bonds issued in accordance with provisions of this charter. 
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 9-1. - Director of finance; powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; cause to be kept books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance, require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient; 
(2)  Submit to the council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(3)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(4)  Supervise the activities of the city secretary, who shall serve as ex officio city treasurer and shall have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, or, if no such resolution be adopted, by the city manager, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(5)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(6)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city government; 
(7)  Approve all proposed expenditures, but unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made; 
(8)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city government; 
(9)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; 
(10)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office. 
Sec. 9-2. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures, within the same department. At the request of the city manager, the council may order the transfer of any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department to another department. 
(Ord. No. 734, art. IX, § 2, 5-1-1965) 
Sec. 9-3. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
Sec. 9-4. - Fees shall be paid to city government. 
    All fees for city services received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city government and shall be deposited to the appropriate fund at such time as required by the city manager. 
Sec. 9-5. - Sale of city property; procedure. 
(a)  Before the city makes any sale or contract for the sale of any property belonging to the city, either in the form of land, real estate or other properties, having an estimated value of $1,000.00 or less, opportunity shall be given for open competition under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. 
(b)  In the sale of property valued at more than $1,000.00, the property shall be advertised for sale and request bids in the official newspaper of the city, and the contract of sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed, provided the city council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. These same procedures shall be used whenever the city acts as transfer agent. 
Sec. 9-6. - Purchase procedure. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.002, the city has elected to have V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 252, Purchasing and Contracting Authority of Municipalities, supersede the former provisions of this Charter section. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 5-1-1965; Ord. No. 1928, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 9-7. - Emergency purchases of materials and services. 
    When, in the opinion of the mayor, the city manager and if appropriate a department head, an emergency exists, the nature of which makes it impracticable to follow ordinary purchase procedures as set out in this charter, emergency purchases of materials and services may be made by the city manager upon the written certification of the mayor, the city manager and such department head, filed promptly with the city secretary. Purchases made under the provisions of this section shall not exceed $2,000.00 for any one such emergency. The form of notice hereunder shall read: 
    "We, the undersigned, mayor, city manager and department head, hereby certify that an emergency has occurred making it impracticable to follow ordinary purchase procedures as set out in the city charter, and it is urgent the city purchase materials and/or services of the value of not more than $2,000.00, the nature of same being generally as follows: 
(General Description) ____________ 
_____
Mayor _____
City Manager _____
Department head  
    When such an emergency occurs and the cost of the materials and services are known to be, or, are estimated by the city manager to exceed $2,000.00, the mayor shall forthwith call a special meeting of the city council to be held at the earliest date and time for the purpose of taking appropriate action under such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
Sec. 9-8. - Contracts for city improvements. 
    Any city improvement costing more than $2,000.00 shall be executed by contract except where such improvement is authorized by the council to be executed directly by a city department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All such contracts for more than $2,000.00 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder bidding in conformity with detailed plans and specifications approved by the city council after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed, provided the city council shall have the power to reject any or all bids. Except in case of emergency, alterations in any contract not to exceed 50 percent of the total contract may be made when authorized by the council. 
Sec. 9-9. - Accounting control of purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the city manager certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriated balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
Sec. 9-10. - Disbursement of funds. 
    All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be signed by the city secretary or his deputy, and countersigned by the city manager. 
Sec. 9-11. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
    In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year 20 ____________ " (stating the budget year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued. 
Sec. 9-12. - Sale of notes, report of sale. 
    All notes issued pursuant to this article shall be advertised for sale and sold at the best price and interest rate offered, but, in any event, such note or notes shall not be sold for less than par and accrued interest. Such sale or sales shall be made by the city manager, after authorization by the city council. 
ARTICLE X. - TAX ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- The Bee County tax assessor is appointed by an annual resolution to fulfill the duties described in this article. 

Sec. 10-1. - Division of assessment. 
    There shall be established a division of taxation, the head of which shall be the city assessor and collector of taxes. The assessor-collector shall give a surety bond for the faithful performance of his duties including compliance with all controlling provisions of the state law bearing upon the functions of his office in a sum which shall be fixed by the city council, and with a reputable bonding company. 
Sec. 10-2. - Duties of assessor-collector. 
    The tax assessor and collector shall supervise and be responsible for the assessment of all property within the corporate limits of the city for taxation, make all special assessments for the city government, prepare tax maps and give such notice of taxes and special assessments as may be required by law; and collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenue of the city or for whose collection the city is responsible. 
Sec. 10-3. - Property subject to tax; method of assessment. 
    All real and personal property within the city not expressly exempted by law shall be subject to annual taxation. Each person owning property within the limits of the city, shall between the first day of January and the thirtieth day of April of each year, hand to the city assessor-collector a full and complete sworn inventory of the property possessed or controlled by him, her or them, within the limits on the first day of January of the current year. In all cases of failure to obtain a statement of real and personal property from any cause, the assessor-collector shall ascertain the amount and value of such property and assess the same at a value not to exceed the rendered value of the previous year; and such assessment shall be as valid and binding as if such property had been rendered by the owner thereof. 
Sec. 10-4. - Board of equalization-Appointment; qualifications. 
    The city council shall each year prior to the first day of June appoint three residents who shall be qualified voters and real property owners as the board of equalization. Such board shall choose from its membership a chairman. The city tax assessor-collector shall be ex officio secretary of the board. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Members of the board while serving shall receive such compensation as may be provided for them by the city council. 
Sec. 10-5. - Same-Public hearings; notice to owner. 
    At the same meeting that the council appoints the board of equalization, it shall by ordinance fix the time of the first meeting of the board which shall be on the first day of June or as soon thereafter as practicable. After such first meeting, the board may reconvene and adjourn from time to time, and as long thereafter as may be necessary it shall hear and determine the complaint of any persons in relation to the assessment roll. Whenever the board shall find it their duty to raise the value of any property appearing on the records of the assessor-collector, it shall, after having examined such records and corrected all errors appearing therein, recess for a period of not less than ten nor more than 15 days, and shall cause the secretary of the board to give written notice to the owner of such property or to the person rendering same, of the time which the board will reconvene, and that such owner or person rendering the property may at that time appear and show cause why the value of the property should not be raised. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed, and postage paid, in the city post office. 
Sec. 10-6. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of such board to examine and, if necessary, revise the assessments as returned by the city assessor-collector, to the end that all property within the city shall be assessed as fairly and as uniformly as possible. The board of equalization shall also have the power to: 
(1)  Review on complaint of property owners assessments for the purpose of taxation of both real and personal property within the city made by the city assessor-collector; 
(2)  Administer oaths; 
(3)  Take testimony; 
(4)  Hold hearings; 
(5)  Adopt regulations regarding the procedure of assessment review; 
(6)  Compel the production of all books, documents and other papers pertinent to the investigation of the taxable values of any person having or owning property within the corporate limits of the city subject to taxation. 
Sec. 10-7. - Same-Records; approval of rolls. 
    The board shall be required to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings, which shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon completion of its work, the board shall certify its approval of the assessment rolls, which shall be returned to the city council, which shall thereupon approve the rolls as returned to it and thereupon adopt the same as the assessment rolls to be used for the collection of taxes for the current year. 
Sec. 10-8. - Taxes; when due and payable. 
    All taxes due the city shall be payable at the office of the city assessor-collector and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than October first. Taxes shall be paid before February first, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the city council may provide by ordinance. The city council may by ordinance provide that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the city may be paid in installments. 
Sec. 10-9. - Seizure and sale of personal property. 
    The assessor-collector of taxes shall, by virtue of his tax rolls, have power and authority to seize and levy upon all personal property and sell the same to satisfy all taxes, together with all penalty, interest and costs due on the personal property by the delinquent to the city. When he seizes personal property for such purposes, he shall keep the same at the expense of the owner until the sale is made, and shall give notice of the time and place of sale of same by posting a written notice at the city hall door and one at another public place within the city at least ten days before the date of sale. He shall sell the same to the highest bidder for cash for all taxes, interest, cost and expense of caring for the property, and shall make an entry in the book of sales of the amount realized. All such sales shall be made at the front door of the city hall. A sale of personal property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an absolute title and the owner shall have no right to redeem the same. 
Sec. 10-10. - Tax liens. 
    The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge and encumbrance on the property in favor of the city, for the amount of the taxes due on such property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose the lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. 
Sec. 10-11. - Tax remissions; discounts and compromises. 
    The city council or any other official of the city shall never extend the time for the payment of taxes or remit, discount or compromise any tax legally due the city, nor waive the penalty and interest that may be due thereon to any persons, firms or corporations owing taxes to the city for such year or years; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the compromise of any tax suit. 
ARTICLE XI. - FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 11-1. - Powers of the city. 
    In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, maintain and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas or anything else that may be needed or used by the public (see powers made part of this charter in article II, section 1), the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and state law. 
Sec. 11-2. - Franchises; power of council. 
    The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the city, and for such purpose is granted full power. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until 30 days after the first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until 30 days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for four consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the city, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance. 
Sec. 11-3. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
    No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the city under this charter in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise. 
Sec. 11-4. - Right of regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(2)  To require adequate extensions of plans and services, and the maintenance of the plants and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(4)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility; provided that, if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for the utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor or successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph and at any time to examine and audit the account and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
(5)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(6)  To any time require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the state law. 
Sec. 11-5. - Consent of property owners. 
    The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but, nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
Sec. 11-6. - Extensions. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 4. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Sec. 11-7. - Other conditions. 
    All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the city and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the city to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
Sec. 11-8. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any city or governmental department. The council shall cause a semiannual report to be made by a qualified public accountant and shall publish such report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section or such data as the council shall deem expedient. 
Sec. 11-9. - Regulations of rates and services. 
    The city council shall have full power to regulate by ordinance the rates and charges for utility and other services furnished by the city and by public and private companies operating in the city. Notice of any proposed increase in utility rates and service costs shall be given the residents of the city by publishing notice thereof one time in the city's official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of a public hearing which shall be held on such proposal. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the name of the proponent and the type of utility or service for which the rate increase is sought. The proponent shall pay the full cost of such notice and a correct stenographic transcript of the hearing, which the council may in its discretion require be made. A copy of such transcript shall be filed with the city secretary and made available to any citizen upon receipt and reasonable deposit to insure its safe return under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. No notice need be given nor public hearing had where the rate change is solely one of rate reduction. 
(Ord. No. 734, art. XI, § 9, 5-1-1965) 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12-1. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen, any representative of a citizens' organization or any representative of the press at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
Sec. 12-2. - Personal interest. 
    No member of the council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract or in the sale to the city or to a contractor supplying the city, of any land or rights of interests in any land, material, supplies or service, when the contract, land, material or service amounts to more than $250.00 for any calendar month. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the council. 
State Law reference- Ethics, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 571.001 et seq. 
Sec. 12-3. - Private development. 
    The city council shall never authorize the expenditure of public funds for the development of a privately owned subdivision. In this section a subdivision shall be deemed to be privately owned when the owner or owners, whether individual, partnership, corporation or other body, shall have filed a plat as required by this charter, and shall have undertaken the sale of lots or parcels from the platted area. The prohibition herein shall not apply to extension of utilities or services to any incorporated area, for the purpose of serving existing houses, housing facilities or commercial buildings. 
Sec. 12-4. - Notice of claim against city for damages. 
    Before the city shall be liable for damages for personal injuries of any kind or for damages by reason of the death of any person, or for injuries to or destruction of property, the person, or the owner of the property injured or destroyed, or someone in his behalf, or in case the injuries result in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death, shall give the city secretary notice in writing of such injury or destruction duly verified, within 90 days after the same has been sustained, stating in such written notice when, where and how the injury or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent thereof, the amount of damage sustained, the amount for which claimant will settle, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, and the actual residence of such claimant for six months, immediately preceding the occurrence of such injuries or destruction, and the names and addresses of the witnesses upon whom he relies to establish his claim, and a failure to so notify the city secretary within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 734, art. XII, § 3A, 5-1-1965) 
State Law reference- Governmental liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.001 et seq. 
Sec. 12-5. - Drilling operations. 
    The council shall by ordinance provide regulations for the drilling, spacing, completion and operation of oil, gas and commercial and/or industrial water wells within the territorial limits of the city; but such regulations shall not prohibit the drilling or operation of domestic water wells, but shall insure that the fresh water supply will not be contaminated. 
Sec. 12-6. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary: 
    "I ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of ____________ , of the city, this state, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States and of the State of Texas and the charter and ordinances of this city; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm), that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money, or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding of a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment. So help me, God." 
Sec. 12-7. - Nepotism. 
    No person related within the second degree by affinity, or within the third degree by consanguinity to the mayor or any other member of the council, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service of the city. 
Sec. 12-8. - Public library. 
    The city council shall have the authority to establish and maintain a free public library within the city and to cooperate with any person under such terms as the city council may prescribe for the establishment of such free public library. For budget purposes, the library shall be considered as a department of the city and the appropriations therefor shall comply with all the budgetary requirements as outlined in this charter and as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 12-9. - Zoning ordinances. 
    For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city, the council may by ordinance regulate the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the uses of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes. Such ordinances may provide that the zoning board of adjustment may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions and safeguards set forth in the ordinance, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent. Such ordinances may provide that the zoning board of adjustment may authorize variances from the strict application of the regulations in such situations and subject to such limitations as may be set forth in ordinance. All of the powers granted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. together with existing amendments and all amendments as hereinafter may be made relating to zoning in cities, are hereby adopted and made a part of this charter. 
Sec. 12-10. - Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution of cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; not shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
Sec. 12-11. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings, same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law, and the city shall be just as liable as if security on bond had been duly executed. 
Sec. 12-12. - Effect of this charter on existing law. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the city government of Beeville and not in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this charter takes effect; and all rights of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the city. 
Sec. 12-13. - Interim municipal government. 
    From and after the date of the adoption of this charter and until the completion of the first city election under this charter and the qualification of the mayor and councilmen therein elected, the present qualified and acting mayor and the two commissioners shall constitute the city council of the city. Such city council shall possess all of the powers provided by this charter, except the employment of a city manager, which employment shall not take place until after the five member council is filled as provided by this charter. 
Sec. 12-14. - Amending the charter. 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the electors of the city by a charter commission in the manner provided by law for framing and submitting a new charter. Amendments may also be proposed and submitted by ordinance passed by a majority vote of the full membership of the council, or by a petition signed by not less than ten per centum of the qualified voters of the city. When a charter amendment petition shall have been filed with the council in conformity with the provisions of this charter as to petitions for initiated ordinances, the council shall forthwith provide by ordinance for submitting such proposed amendment to a vote of the electors. Any ordinance for submitting a charter amendment to the electors shall provide that such amendment be submitted at the next regular municipal election if one shall occur not less than 60 nor more than 120 days after the passage of the ordinance; otherwise it shall provide for the submission of the amendment at a special election to be called and held within the time aforesaid. Not less than 30 days prior to such election, the city secretary shall mail a copy of the proposed amendment or amendments to each qualified voter in the city as appears from the latest rolls of the tax collector. If a proposed amendment be approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, it shall become a part of the charter at the time fixed therein. Each amendment shall be confined to one subject; and when more than one amendment shall be submitted at the same time, they shall be so submitted as to enable the electors to vote on each amendment separately. 
State Law reference- Adoption and amendment of municipal charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001. 
Sec. 12-15. - Separability clause. 
    If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Sec. 12-16. - Submission of charter to electors. 
(a)  The charter commission in preparing this charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the charter commission directs that the charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at an election to be held for that purpose on the fifth day of October, A.D. 1951. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, it shall become the charter of the city, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the city secretary shall file an official copy of the charter with the records of the city. The secretary shall furnish the mayor a copy of the charter, which copy of the charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by his signature and the seal of the city, shall be forwarded by the mayor to the secretary of state and shall show the approval of such charter by majority vote of the qualified voters voting at such elections. 
(b)  In not less than 30 days prior to such election, the city council shall cause the city secretary to mail a copy of this charter and any proposed amendments thereto to each qualified voter of the city as appears from the tax collector's roll for the year ending January thirty-first preceding the election. 
(Ord. No. 880, § II, 4-2-1968) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 734 5-1-1965 1 1-5 - 3-1-3-3 - 3-6, 3-7 - 3-9-3-11 - 3-21 - 5-13 - 9-6 art. IX, § 2 9-2 art. XI, § 9 11-9 art. XII, § 3A 12-4 Ord. No. 880 4-2-1968 1 3-3-3-5 II 12-16 Ord. No. 1106 4-10-1973 1 3-1, 3-2 - 3-6 - 3-8-3-12 - 3-14 - 3-16 - 9-7 art. IV, § 1 4-1 art. IV, § 1 5-14 art. IV, § 2 4-2 art. IV, § 3 4-3 art. IV, § 4 4-4 art. IV, § 5 4-5 art. IV, § 6 4-6 art. IV, § 13 5-13 Ord. No. 1928 10-10-2000 - 9-6  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal codes of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.; enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.; municipal health and safety ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012 et seq.; effect of codification of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.005; printed code of ordinances as evidence, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.006. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Beeville, Texas," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the short title, "Beeville City Code." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The terms "the city" or "this city" means the City of Beeville in the County of Bee, Texas. 
    City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The terms "city manager," "city secretary," "chief of police" and other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of this city. Reference to an officer or employee by title shall include his duly authorized assistants or representatives. 
    Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
    Construction generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Council; city council. Whenever the term "council" or "this council" or "the council" or "city council" is used, it means the city council of the City of Beeville. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" means the County of Bee, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise, and unless specifically authorized by city ordinance, city Charter, state law or federal law. 
    Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means the official consolidated list compiled and adopted by the city that lists city fees and service charges as determined from time to time by the city council. The fee schedule is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.004. 
    Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
State Law reference- Common and technical usage of words, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.011. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(b). 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(8). 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, fiduciaries, representatives and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory, whereas the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016(1), (2). 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14). 
    State. The terms "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" shall have its commonly accepted meaning, and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    V.T.C.A., Admin. Code. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A., Admin. Code" refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
    V.T.C.A., [subject] Code. The term "V.T.C.A., [subject] Code" identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of V.T.C.A., Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 5429b-1, predecessor to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 323.007. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18). 
(Code 1973, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of penal provisions. 
    The provisions of titles 1, 2 and 3 of the state penal code (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.01 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 6.01 et seq.; and V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.01 et seq.) shall apply in the interpretation of all penal provisions of this Code to the extent that the penal code mandates that they shall apply. 
State Law reference- Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state penal code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; municipal authority to regulate discharge of firearms in municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b). 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, notes and internal references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024; construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-6. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
    A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city secretary may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city secretary for examination by all persons. 
Sec. 1-7. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city secretary, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-8. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Beeville, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Beeville, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007. 
Sec. 1-12. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations and any ordinance establishing salaries of city officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(13)  Any ordinance adopting the sales and use tax; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing taxicab passenger rates; 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or amending zoning or land use regulations or rezoning property; 
(16)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(17)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city; 
(18)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(19)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(20)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(21)  Any administrative ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance of the city, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, rule, regulation or order, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by state law or, if no penalty is provided by state law, then $500.00, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation or who shall commit an act relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation prohibited, declared to be unlawful or made and declared to be a misdemeanor in this Code or any other ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(c)  Any condition designated as a nuisance under any provision of this Code or any other ordinance is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(1)  Any person that shall create, maintain or allow a nuisance upon property owned or under the control of such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  Any person who shall create, maintain or allow a nuisance relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation upon property owned or under the control of such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Any person who may be convicted in municipal court of the city or who may be committed to jail in default of the payment of the fine and costs adjudged against a person may be ordered to community service work under the supervision of the chief of police, or some person appointed by him; and such person convicted and ordered to community service, or in default of payment, shall be allowed credit against the community service time ordered, or against the fine and cost adjudged in the amount established for each day's work. 
(f)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day or fractional part thereof that any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The imposing of such penalty shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal and abatement by the city of any prohibited condition. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Open government generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; public information generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; political activities by certain public entities and individuals, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 556.001; ethics, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 571.001 et seq.; public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal government generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 5.001 et seq.; removal of members of governing body of general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.021 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City government origin; city type. 
    The city currently operates under its most recent home rule charter, as set forth in this Code. The city utilizes the council-manager form of government as permitted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021, and as provided in its Charter. 
Sec. 2-2. - City boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city are as prescribed by the various enactments on file in the office of the city secretary, and as graphically displayed on a map of the city located in such office. 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.021 et seq.; general provisions affecting governing bodies of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-23. - Composition; election; terms; etc. 
    The composition of the city council and the number and terms of its members and other provisions defining the obligations, powers and duties of the council and its members shall be as set forth in the city's Charter. 
Secs. 2-24-2-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Meetings of municipal government bodies, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038; open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; authority of governing body to compel attendance of council members, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038. 

Sec. 2-50. - Meetings; notice. 
    Meetings shall be held as provided in section 3-12 of the city Charter. 
State Law reference- Meetings of municipal government bodies, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038; notice of public meeting required, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.041; Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; minutes or tape recording of open meeting required indicating vote taken and decision reached, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.021. 
Secs. 2-51-2-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-74. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business and may compel the attendance of its members. At the first meeting of the council following the annual municipal election, the council shall adopt their rules of procedure. 
State Law reference- Authority of governing body to determine rules of procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038. 
Secs. 2-75-2-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-92. - Appointment of committees and chairs by the mayor and city council. 
    All committees and committee chairs, and officers of the city council shall be recommended by the mayor and approved by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Furthermore, the mayor and council shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Secs. 2-93-2-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal officers in city manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.051; authority to prescribe duties of and to require bond and security from appointed officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 23.052; removal of municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.077. 

Sec. 2-113. - Personnel manual adopted. 
    The city adopts by reference the Beeville, Texas, Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual, as amended from time to time, as though fully set forth in this chapter. A copy of the manual is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Sec. 2-114. - City manager. 
    The city council has appointed a city manager for the city, as contemplated by its Charter, who shall be the administrative head of the city under the direction of the city council. 
Sec. 2-115. - Other officers. 
    In addition to the provisions of this chapter regarding specific officers, the city shall elect and appoint officers as provided in the city's Charter and pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.041 et seq. 
Secs. 2-116-2-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-144. - Departmental organization. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be divided into such departments as may be established from time to time by the mayor and council. The city manager, with advice and consent of the council, shall appoint a director or head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. The city manager may serve as head of one or more departments. 
Sec. 2-145. - Department heads generally. 
    Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of their respective departments to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
Sec. 2-146. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
    Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
Secs. 2-147-2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND SIMILAR BODIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Joint airport zoning board. 
    Subject to adoption of like provisions duly adopted by the county, the city has created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Beeville-Bee County Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in state law. The board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the city council and two members to be appointed by the county. The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and the fifth member shall serve as board chairman. 
(Code 1973, § 3-7; Ord. No. 814, §§ I, II, 8-23-1966; Ord. No. 1283, § 2, 2-14-1978) 
Secs. 2-177-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-206. - Created, membership. 
(a)  There is created and established for the city a city planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of seven members, appointed by the city council, who shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  The members of said commission shall draw lots to establish staggered terms. To implement such staggering of terms, from this date forward, three members shall serve for three years, two members shall serve for two years and two members shall serve for one year. At the termination of each tenure, the successor appointed to fill each vacancy shall be appointed for a term of three years. All vacancies shall be filled by city council appointment. 
(c)  The seven appointed members of the commission will, at their next scheduled meeting, be sworn in by the city secretary or designated representative. Reorganization of said commission will be required whereby members will select a chairman and vice-chairman. 
(d)  All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Ord. No. 329, § 1, 6-11-1953; Ord. No. 405, § I, 4-15-1957; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-12-1973; Ord. No. 1893, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-1999) 
Sec. 2-207. - Relation to building and standards commission. 
    All members of the planning commission shall also serve as members of the city buildings and standards commission, and city staff will provide administrative support to the commission. 
(Res. No. 2015-11, 5-12-2015; Res. No. 2015-12, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 2-208. - Organization. 
    The city planning commission shall, subject to the approval of the city council, make such rules and regulations and adopt such bylaws for its own government and designate such times and places for holding meetings as it deems proper. Its chairman shall be elected from the members of the commission and by the members of the commission. Six members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The city manager shall be the ex officio permanent secretary of the commission, but shall not be considered a member of the commission, shall not have a vote and shall not be counted in the quorum. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Ord. No. 329, § 3, 6-11-1953) 
Sec. 2-209. - Powers and duties. 
    The city planning commission shall have power and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Determine upon and make recommendations to the city council of a city plan; 
(2)  Make studies and project plans for the improvement of the city with a view to its future development and extension; 
(3)  Act with other municipal and governmental agencies in formulating and executing common plans of development; 
(4)  Select and recommend routes for streets and boulevards, and particularly to investigate and recommend the opening, widening or abandoning of streets, or the changing thereof to conform with a system of boulevards, parks and parkways; 
(5)  Consider and report upon the layout or platting of new subdivisions of the city or of territory adjacent to or near the city; 
(6)  Locate and recommend plans for a civic center; 
(7)  Recommend plans for improving and beautifying the parkways and streams and to cooperate with the city council in its devising and selection of public parks, parkways, playgrounds and other places for public recreation; 
(8)  Suggest plans for zoning the city; and 
(9)  Generally, give consideration to, and file recommendations with the city council for the development and advancement of the city's physical layout and appearance. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3; Ord. No. 329, § 2, 6-11-1953) 
Secs. 2-210-2-226. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-227. - Created, membership. 
    The city has created the airport advisory board, to be composed of five members appointed by the city council. All members shall be resident citizens of the county. The city council shall consider recommendations of the county for two members to the board both for the board's initial formation and thereafter as terms of the county's designated representatives expire. The initial board shall draw lots at their first meeting so that two members will serve an initial term of one year, and three members will serve an initial term of two years in order to establish staggered terms for the board members. Thereafter, all members will serve two-year terms. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1; Ord. No. 924, § I, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 2008, § 1, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-228. - Organization. 
    The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city, and the board shall conduct its meeting in accordance with the state law, including the state open meetings act. The advisory board shall appoint a secretary, who may, but need not be, a member of the board. It may be the preference of the board that the city secretary is appointed the board secretary. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. The airport manager or fixed base operator (FBO), if the position is filled, otherwise the city manager shall assist the advisory board by providing information necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1973, § 3-4; Ord. No. 924, § II, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 2008, § 2, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-229. - Compensation, expenses. 
    All members of the airport advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2; Ord. No. 924, § V, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 2008, § 6, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-230. - Duties. 
    The airport advisory board shall from time to time make such general studies of air transportation needs of the city and county, and it shall submit no less than annually a report and recommendations to the city council in respect to construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and operation of the airport. The board shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement and advancement of the airport as an air transportation center. 
(Code 1973, § 3-5; Ord. No. 924, § III, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 2008, § 3, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-231. - Removal. 
    The city council may remove members appointed to the advisory board when the member no longer satisfies membership provisions as stated herein; has failed to attend three consecutive advisory board meetings; or, in the council's opinion, is no longer contributing to the advisory board's overall purpose. The city council shall appoint an individual to fill the remaining term of the vacant position, or, if the vacant position served as a representative for the county, then a recommended appointment shall be requested from the commissioner's court before proceeding to fill the vacant position. 
(Ord. No. 2008, § 5, 5-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-232. - Conflict of interests. 
    No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air, or in any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or render any service for compensation specifically authorized by agreement with the city upon the premises of the airport shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board; however, persons who utilize the airport facilities to facilitate the conduct of their business, or who utilize those facilities within the scope of their employment, shall be eligible for membership. If the city contracts with a FBO, then the city shall appoint the FBO as an ex officio member to the advisory board. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3; Ord. No. 924, § IV, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 2008, § 4, 5-13-2003) 
Secs. 2-233-2-258. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finances relating to home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.021 et seq.; municipal budgets generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq.; audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq.; municipal depositories, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-259. - Fee for birth and death certificates. 
    The city clerk shall charge for issuance of birth and death certificates in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. All such fees collected for such services shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-5; Ord. No. 542, 7-26-1960; Ord. No. 1133, §§ I, II) 
Sec. 2-260. - Credit card payments; service charge for dishonored payments. 
    The city shall permit payment by credit card of fees, fines, court costs and other charges due the city and shall charge and collect a processing fee in the amount of five percent of the fee, fine, court costs and other charges being paid by credit card. The city shall charge a fee as provided in the city fee schedule as a service charge if for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds were drawn. This service charge is in addition to the original fee, fine, court cost, or other charge and is for the collection of that original amount. 
(Ord. No. 2063, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 2-261. - Adoption of identity theft prevention program. 
    The city has developed and adopts by reference as though fully set forth in this division an identity theft prevention program for the purpose of complying with 16 CFR 681.2 and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of the adopted program is also to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
Sec. 2-262. - Fee schedule. 
    The city has adopted a fee schedule setting forth city fees, charges and rates authorized throughout this Code. A copy of the fee schedule, as amended from time to time by the city council, is available in the office of the city secretary. The fee schedule is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth in full in this section. 
Sec. 2-263. - Dishonored check fees. 
    A fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged for any check or electronic funds draft accepted by the city in payment of any fee, tax or other charge that is dishonored by the holder for insufficient funds or other cause. 
Sec. 2-264. - State law controls purchasing and contracting authority. 
    V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252 provides regulations and procedure regarding the purchasing and contracting authority of state municipalities that applies to the city only to the extent that the statutory provisions do not conflict with the city's Charter. V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.002 allows the city to override its Charter, thereby making V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252 applicable despite contrary charter provisions. The city elects, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.002, that in the event of conflict between V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252 and the city's Charter, the statutory provisions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1928, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 2-265-2-291. - Reserved. 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal and county authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which public is permitted or invited wherein coin/slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as its principal business purpose, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, audio cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity, seminude or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Building inspector means the building and code compliance officer of the city. 
    City police chief means the city police chief of the city or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means the bare appearance of a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast, regardless of whether uncovered or covered with translucent or transparent material. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Principal business or primary business means: 
(1)  35 percent or more of the gross floor area is devoted to the sale, display or inventory of items which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  35 percent or more of the gross receipts are derived from the sale or rental of items described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
    Residential use means any single-family, multifamily or mobile home dwelling, regardless of whether attached or detached and regardless of whether tenant or owner occupied. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing or other matter covers no more than the genitals, public region or areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, is one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Signage means those sign definitions as contained in chapter 42. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists after December 1, 2000. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § I, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of this section are promulgated pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 243 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.), as they apply to sexually oriented businesses. It is also the intent of the city council that all other provisions of this article are promulgated pursuant to the city charter and state law. The provisions of this article are not intended to regulate businesses within the city that are exempt pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.004. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § II, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-3. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § III, 12-12-2000) 
Secs. 4-4-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-25. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee under this article shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department and building inspection department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative from the above departments at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § IV, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-26. - Penalties; defenses. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 4-90, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 4-58 or 4-90 is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 4-58 or 4-90 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a propriety school licensed by the state; or 
(2)  By a public or private accredited college or university which maintains and operates educational programs. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 4-58 or 4-90 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XII, 12-12-2000) 
Secs. 4-27-4-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-58. - License. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license under this article must be made on a form provided by the building inspector. The application must be accompanied by a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a scale of no less than one inch equals ten feet or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 4-94 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of that section. 
(c)  The applicant for a license under this article must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the building inspection department. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 4-59 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XIV, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-59. - Issuance. 
(a)  The building inspector shall approve the issuance of a license under this article to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the building inspection department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 4-25, 4-27, 4-90, 4-92, 4-93, 4-94 and 4-95. 
(9)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Promotion of prostitution; 
3.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
4.  Compelling prostitution; 
5.  Obscenity; 
6.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
7.  Sexual performance by a child; 
8.  Possession or promotion of child pornography; 
9.  Public lewdness; 
10.  Indecent exposure; 
11.  Indecency with a child; 
12.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; 
13.  Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child or harboring a runaway child; 
14.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
c.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant for a sexually oriented business license or the applicant's spouse. 
d.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XV, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-60. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XVII, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-61. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his sexually oriented business license to another nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application for such license. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XXII, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-62. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license issued under this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 4-58. Application for renewal of such license must be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected and the renewal application will be treated as a new application. 
(b)  When the building inspector denies renewal of a license under this article, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the building inspector finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XVIII, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-63. - Suspension. 
    The building inspector shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 4-25, 4-27, 4-90, 4-92, 4-93, 4-94 and 4-95; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XIX, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-64. - Revocation. 
(a)  The building inspector shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension under section 4-62 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The building inspector shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the building inspector during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 4-59 for which the time period required has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 4-59 for which a conviction has been obtained and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in the Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel-motel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the sexually oriented business license. 
(d)  When the building inspector revokes a sexually oriented business license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the building inspector finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required has elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XX, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-65. - Appeals. 
    If the building inspector denies the issuance of a sexually oriented business license, suspends or revokes a sexually oriented business license, he shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the building inspector to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the building inspector in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XXI, 12-12-2000) 
Secs. 4-66-4-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREMISES AND OPERATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-89. - Signage. 
(a)  All signs must comply with the provisions of chapter 42, and, additionally, any sexually oriented business sign must be no larger than 100 square feet. 
(b)  Any sign that is visible from the exterior of the structure will not have a pictorial display of a seminude or nude person or of any other person considered in a state of nudity. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XVI, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-90. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school or a registered daycare center; 
(3)  A boundary of any district zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, MH, and B-1; 
(4)  Any public area used or owned by a governmental or educational entity; or 
(5)  The property line of a lot having any residential use as defined in section 4-1. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § V, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-91. - Exemptions from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the building inspector denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 4-90, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an appeal from the locational restrictions of section 4-90. 
(b)  If the written request for an appeal from the locational restrictions of section 4-90 is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the city secretary shall set a date for appeal to the city council within 60 days from the written request is received. The appeal will be placed on the city council's agenda and the city secretary shall notify both the applicant and the building inspector of the meeting date. 
(c)  The city council may, at its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 4-90 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; or 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(d)  The city council shall grant or deny the exemption applied for under this section by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council can be appealed to the district court. 
(e)  If the city council grants the exemption applied for under this section, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the council action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 4-90 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(f)  If the city council denies the exemption applied for under this section, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of city council action. 
(g)  The grant of an exemption under this section does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other than the locational restrictions of section 4-90. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § VI, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-92. - Employment of persons under the age of 18 years. 
    A person commits an offense if he employs a person under the age of 18 years in any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § VIII, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-93. - Additional regulations; adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have sexually oriented business license, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person, and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "rent" or "sub-rent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § IX, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-94. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises a film, videocassette or other video reproduction, which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit shall be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram, in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale (of no less than one inch equals ten feet) or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The building inspector may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the building inspector or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owner and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station whenever a patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed and straight view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § X, 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 4-95. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in any business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, videocassette or film, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or passion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy. 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(3)  Less than completely opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(5)  A person also commits an offense if he displays or allows to be displayed any video or game, or any live, mechanical or electronically displayed entertainment depicting or exhibiting subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, in any business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays any instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for uses in connection with specified sexual activities. 
(c)  In this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public; and 
(3)  The game or entertainment is accessible or visible to persons under the age of 17 years. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § XI, 12-12-2000) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverage permit and license fees authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36; location restrictions for sale of beer and wine authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local option provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.71 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PREMISES AND OPERATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-16. - State and city licenses required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or establishment to sell alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for consumption by the general public unless they have first obtained the state alcoholic beverage commission licenses for retail on-premises sale of said alcoholic beverages and the city occupational licenses for all licenses issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § III, 9-26-1989) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; treatment of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; animal health, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 801.001 et seq.; cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09; livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 141.001 et seq.; registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031; protection of birds, nests, and eggs, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 64.002 et seq.; vaccination of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021; restraint of dogs and cats; impoundment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.042 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any vertebrate animal other than human beings. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the city who is qualified to perform the duties required by this chapter or state law regarding animal control. 
    Animal control shelter means any shelter operated by a humane society, or a municipal agency, for the purpose of impounding animals under authority of this chapter or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia. 
    Animal nuisance means the public nuisance created by an animal within the city limits that affect the quality of life of persons of normal nervous sensibilities, including, but not limited to, one or more of the following acts of any animal: 
(1)  Molests or chases pedestrians or passing vehicles, including bicycles; 
(2)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a human or other animal of any kind; 
(3)  Is repeatedly at large, specifically three or more times within a 12 month period; 
(4)  Destruction of public or private property belonging to any person other than the owner; 
(5)  Allowing the animals to urinate or defecate on any public or private property other than that of the owner unless such waste is removed and properly disposed by the custodian of the animal; 
(6)  Excessive noise produced by barking, whining, digging, or any other noise activity; 
(7)  Any foul or noxious odor produced by the offending animal. 
    At large means not physically restrained to the premises of the owner or not under the direct control of the owner, handler, or trainer. The term "direct control" means securely confined by leash, chain, or other device not more than six feet in length held by a person or affixed to the owner's premises in a manner capable of controlling the animal. 
    Cat means any domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Cat kennel means any place in which more than three feline animals over three months of age are confined. This definition excludes animal hospitals. 
    Dog means any domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Dog kennel means any building, structure or enclosure, wherein more than three canine animals over the age of three months of age are confined except animal hospitals. 
    Domestic animals means all species of animals commonly accepted as being domesticated. This definition specifically includes household pets such as dogs and cats. 
    Harboring means sheltering, feeding, or caring for an animal. 
    Household means those who dwell in the same residence and compose a family. 
    Hybrid animal means any offspring of two animals of different species. 
    Owner means any person or legal entity owning an animal or who harbors, cares for, feeds or who allows an animal to remain about the owner's premises for period of a ten days. This includes any third person who visits the owner's premises when the owner is not present while the dog is inside the premises. 
    Provocation means any purposeful act that causes an animal to bite, scratch or otherwise attack in protection of self, owner, or owner's property. 
    Public nuisance means the violation of the restrictions and rules regarding the ownership, harboring or caring for animals set forth in this chapter subject to penalties as provided in this chapter and to nuisance abatement pursuant to state law. 
    Restraint or restrained means any physical means of controlling an animal, to include, but not limited to, cage, fence, leash, or chain; or automobile, in the cab or tied. 
    Street line means the nearest edge of any sidewalk, or if there is none, then the nearest edge of any curb, or if there is none, then the nearest edge of the improved portion of the public right-of-way. 
    Vicious/dangerous animal means: 
(1)  Any animal with the propensity, tendency, or disposition to make unprovoked attacks on humans or domestic animals; 
(2)  Any animal that has attacked or attempted to attack humans or domestic animals except when the person or animal being attacked is unlawfully on the premises of the owner. 
    Wild animal means an undomesticated animal with the propensity, tendency, or disposition for unprovoked attacks on humans or domestic animals. 
    Working day means any day of the week, excluding weekends and city observed holidays. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Ord. No. 1135, § 1, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § I, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § I, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § I(A), 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § I(A), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § I(A), 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-2-8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-23. - Violation deemed public nuisance. 
    Violations of this article shall constitute public nuisances. 
Sec. 8-24. - Keeping diseased animals prohibited; exception. 
    No person except a licensed veterinarian shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is afflicted with any painful disease believed by him to be incurable, without written permission to do so from an animal control officer of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(F); Ord. No. 1135, § 6(J), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI(F), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI(F), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(F), 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(F), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(F), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-25. - Keeping wild animals prohibited; exception. 
(a)  Certain animals prohibited. It is prohibited and a public nuisance for any person or business to keep or maintain in the city any wild or vicious animal or reptile of any nature whatsoever, including hybrid animals. 
(b)  Carnivals or circuses. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the temporary display of wild or vicious animals or reptiles in carnivals, zoos, museums, exhibitions, or circuses provided that: 
(1)  Prior city council approval has been obtained for such a display; 
(2)  The display has been inspected by the animal control officer; 
(3)  The animals or reptiles are so restricted so as to pose no threat to the public safety; and 
(4)  The animals are well cared for, free from disease and kept in sanitary conditions. 
(c)  Exception for transportation of animals through city. The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to persons transporting wild or vicious animals through the city providing that the transporter has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public and does not park the transporting vehicle within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 4-5; Ord. No. 1135, § 5, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § V, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § V, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § V, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § V, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § V, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-26. - Keeping of monkeys and certain livestock prohibited. 
    It is prohibited and a public nuisance for any person to keep or maintain at his residence within the city any of the following animals: 
(1)  Horse, colt, jack or mule; 
(2)  Goats or sheep; 
(3)  Cattle including ox, steer, bull, cow or calf; 
(4)  Pigs or hogs; 
(5)  Monkeys. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4(A); Ord. No. 1135, § 4, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § IV, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(E), (F), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § IV, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § IV(A), 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § IV(A), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § IV(A), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-27. - Keeping of rabbits and fowl restricted. 
(a)  Maximum number allowed. It is prohibited and a nuisance for any person to keep or maintain at his residence in the city a cumulative total exceeding ten chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, doves, pigeons, squabs, roosters, similar fowl, or rabbits. An adult rooster of crowing age may be substituted for one of the ten fowl allowed under this section. 
(b)  Running at large; enclosure setback requirements. It is prohibited and a nuisance for any person to allow fowl or rabbits to run or fly at large or to go upon the premises of any other person, or upon a public way in the city. The animals shall be kept in a confined area situated no closer than 30 feet to the nearest street line or 20 feet to the nearest property line. 
(c)  Exception for animals raised for food purposes. This section does not prohibit the display or sale of any rabbit or fowl by any dealer, hatchery, or store engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for food purposes whenever such dealer, hatchery, or store has proper facilities for the display and care of such animals or fowl and is in compliance with city zoning regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4(B)-(D); Ord. No. 1135, § 4, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § IV, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(F), (G), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § IV, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § IV(B)-(D), 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § IV(B)-(D), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § IV(B)-(D), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-28. - Trapping prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Chemicals/traps prohibited. The use of cyanic pallet traps or any other kind of trap containing a substance noxious to man is prohibited within the city limits unless deemed necessary by the state department of health for the control of communicable disease. 
(b)  Inhumane traps prohibited. Except by order of the animal control officer, no person shall set up or allow to be set up on his property within the city limits any kind of trap that tears, cuts or in any way mutilates the prey, except traps used to catch common rodents, i.e., rats, mice, gophers, and ground squirrels. Traps prohibited by this section may be used on the order of the animal control officer for the control of communicable diseases. 
(c)  Tin traps prohibited. The use of tin traps is not to be allowed in the city limits unless ordered by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(L)-(N); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(L)-(N), 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(L)-(N), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(L)-(N), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-29. - Animals prohibited in commercial food preparation areas; exception. 
    No person shall allow an animal into an area where food is prepared for commercial purposes with the exception of dogs aiding the seeing or hearing impaired. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(D); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(D), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(D), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(D), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-30. - Disposal of animal carcasses. 
    No person shall cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or it for a period of more than 24 hours. Violation of this section is deemed a public nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(A); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(A), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(A), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(A), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-31. - Manure accumulations. 
(a)  Every person owning or occupying premises where manure from any pigeon, fowl, rabbit or other animal accumulates shall provide for the removal of such manure daily. 
(b)  Boxes, bins or receptacles of a design and construction acceptable to the animal control officer shall be provided by the owner or occupant of such premises, and such boxes, bins or receptacles shall be used only for the purpose of containing the accumulation of manure. In no instance shall manure be placed in such boxes or receptacles in such manner as to prevent the tight closing of the lid. The boxes, bins or receptacles shall be constructed of brick, stone, concrete, metal or wood lined with metal or other sound material, and shall prevent access to the contents thereof by flies. The contents of the boxes, bins or receptacles shall be removed once a week. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to manure that is spread as fertilizer over or around cultivated plants, vines, vegetables, lawns, bushes or trees, or manure kept by any nursery for commercial fertilizer purposes, unless such manure creates a nuisance either from fly breeding or excessive obnoxious odors. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(B); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(B), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(B), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(B), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-32. - Cleaning of animal and manure enclosures required on order of animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer may order the cleaning and disinfection of any stable, barn, corral, stall, pen, coop, building or place in which any fowl, bird or other animal is kept, and any box, bin or receptacle used for the accumulation of manure. Such order shall be complied with in the time specified by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(C); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(C), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(C), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(C), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-33. - Boarding kennels prohibited; exception. 
    No boarding kennel shall be allowed within the city except exempted animal hospitals. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(B)-(D), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(P)(2), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(P)(2), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(P)(2), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-34. - Dogs causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
    The city adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.002 through 822.006. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(Q); Ord. No. 1135, § 2, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(H), (Q), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(H), (Q), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(H), (Q), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-35. - Destruction of wild, old, crippled, injured or diseased animals. 
    It is the duty of animal control officers to order the destruction of any animal lawfully taken into custody that is, in the opinion of the animal control officer, by reason of old age, unfit for use, or which is infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurably crippled condition, or which is adjudged by a report of a licensed veterinarian to be afflicted with any painful, incurable disease. A reasonable attempt shall be made to notify the owner, if known, prior to taking action; however, the humane destruction of a sick or injured animal may necessitate immediate action. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(P); Ord. No. 1135, § 2, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(P), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(P), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(P), 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-36-8-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 8-55. - Dogs at large prohibited; impound. 
(a)  No person owning, harboring, or caring for a dog shall allow the animal to be off the premises of its owner unless securely confined by a strong leash not to exceed six feet in length continuously held by a person capable of controlling the dog or confined to an automobile. 
(b)  It is the duty of the animal control officer and of any police officer of the city to take up all dogs found in violation of this section. When such dog is taken up by a police officer, it shall be delivered by him to the animal control officer. All such dogs shall be impounded in the city's animal control shelter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(D), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(D), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(D), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-56. - Maximum number of dogs and cats per household. 
    No person shall own or harbor more than four dogs or four cats or a combination of dogs and cats exceeding eight animals in any one location in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(B)-(D), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(P)(1), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(P)(1), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(P)(1), 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-57-8-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8-78. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  Every person owning or harboring a dog or cat in the city shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated for rabies with an approved rabies vaccine immediately upon procurement if the animal is over four months old and has not been vaccinated within a period of one year prior to procurement or as soon as possible after the dog or cat has attained the age of three months; provided, however, that such vaccination has been accomplished by the time it attains the age of four months. 
(b)  Every person owning or harboring in the city a dog or cat which has been vaccinated with an approved vaccine shall cause the dog or cat to be vaccinated again within a period not to exceed one year or three years, depending on the type of vaccination given to the animal. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(F), (G), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(F), (G), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(F), (G), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-79. - Tags. 
(a)  Required. At the time a dog or cat is vaccinated, a vaccination tag shall be stamped with the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. It is the pet owner's responsibility to keep in his possession the certificate issued to him at the time of the animal's vaccination and to produce the certificate if requested by the animal control officer or police officer. 
(b)  Must be shown on demand. No person shall fail or refuse to show the animal control officer or any police officer the rabies vaccination tag for any duly vaccinated dog or cat kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his immediate control. The vaccination tag shall be attached to a neck collar and be worn by the animal at all times. If a tag is lost it shall be the responsibility of the owner to replace the tag as soon as possible in order to return to compliance with this section. 
(c)  Removal prohibited. No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog or cat any collar, harness or other device to which is attached a vaccination tag for the current year, or to remove such tag therefrom. 
(d)  Counterfeiting prohibited. No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags in this chapter provided for, or shall use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(A), (B), (I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(A), (B), (I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(A), (B), (I), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-80. - Certificates. 
    Every person owning or harboring in the city any dog or cat required by this article to be vaccinated shall, at all times while such dog or cat is thus kept, harbored or had, have in his possession a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state or any other state or nation to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify that such dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with provisions of this chapter. At the time a dog or cat is vaccinated, a vaccination tag shall be stamped with the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(H), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(H), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(H), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-81. - Report and confinement of dogs or cats suspected of rabies infection. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of a dog or cat known to have or suspected of having rabies or has shown symptoms of rabies to fail, refuse or neglect to allow the city's police department or animal control officer, to make an inspection or examination that the animal has or does not have rabies. 
(b)  Officers or persons capturing dogs or cats suspected of having rabies shall separately confine such dog or cat, shall report the capture to a licensed veterinarian, and shall submit the animal to the examination of a veterinarian. It shall be the duty of the veterinarian to ascertain whether the dog or cat is infected with rabies. 
(c)  Such dog or cat shall not be killed, but shall be kept in confinement until further observation of such dog or cat claimed by its owner is not necessary for the determination of the presence or the absence of rabies. 
(d)  Stray or unclaimed animals quarantined under this section shall be processed as allowed by state health regulations incurring the least expense upon the residents of the city. 
(e)  Violation of the observation quarantine of a biting animal required by this section shall be grounds for seizure and confinement of the animal at a licensed veterinary facility. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(J), (K), (L)(3), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(J), (K), (L)(3), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(J), (K), (L)(3), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-82. - Quarantine or destruction of other animals suspected of rabies infection. 
    If an animal is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, such animal shall, upon order of the animal control officer either be quarantined by a licensed veterinarian for the appropriate period of time or humanely euthanized. If human exposure to such an animal has occurred, the head of such animal shall be removed and submitted to the state department of health lab for rabies diagnosis. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(L)(2), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(L)(2), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(L)(2), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-83. - Report and quarantine of animals who have bitten or scratched persons. 
(a)  If any animal within the corporate limits of the city shall bite or scratch any person or so injure any person so as to cause a skin abrasion, and such facts are known to the owner of such animal, such owner shall immediately give his name and address together with the animal's license tag number to the person bitten or injured; provided, however that the person so bitten or injured is over 18 years of age. If the person bitten or injured is under the age of 18 years, then such required information shall be given to a parent or guardian. In addition thereto, the owner of such animal shall immediately thereafter, and in no event later than 24 hours thereafter, notify the police department or animal control officer giving his name, animal's vaccination tag number, the name of the victim, and any other information that the police department or animal control officer may require. 
(b)  The city's police department or animal control officer shall be notified of any person bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies. 
(c)  If it is shown that any dog, cat, or other animal without proof of current rabies vaccination has bitten any person, no person owning or harboring the animal, upon order of the animal control officer or any police officer, shall fail, refuse, neglect to take or cause to be promptly taken, such animal to a veterinarian to be held in quarantine for a period of ten days. Such animal may not be released from quarantine without the authorization of the veterinarian in charge. The total cost of the confinement for a ten-day period shall be borne by the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § IV, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081, §§ III(M), (K), (L)(1), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, §§ III(M), (K), (L)(1), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, §§ III(M), (K), (L)(1), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-84. - Wild animals not subject to quarantine; destruction authorized. 
    No wild animals will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely euthanized in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a state department of health lab for rabies diagnosis. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(L)(4), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(L)(4), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(L)(4), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-85. - Costs of confinement. 
    The total cost of the confinement period for animals that have bitten or scratched persons shall be borne by the owner of the animal unless the bite or scratch was caused by a provocation. The person responsible for the provocation or, if a minor, his parents or guardian, shall bear the expense of any quarantine, provided that the animal or its owner was not in violation of any provision of this article at the time of the attack. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(L)(5), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(L)(5), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(L)(5), 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-86-8-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-114. - Animal control department and officers. 
(a)  Positions and department established. The positions of the chief animal control officer and deputy animal control officers and an animal control department have been established by the city. 
(b)  Department function; duties of officers. The animal control department shall function as a department of the city subject to guidelines and procedures adopted by the city council for its operations. Animal control officers shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Compensation. The chief animal control officer and deputy animal control officer shall receive such compensation as shall be established by the city's annual fiscal budget. 
(d)  Police power of officers. The animal control officers shall be vested with the necessary police powers for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, and it shall be their duty to issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this article. They shall enforce all of the laws of the city, county, and state relating to the care, treatment and impounding of animals and to the prevention of cruelty to animals. This exercise of the police powers is under the direct supervision of the city police chief or designated representative. 
(e)  Authority to collect fees. The animal control officer shall be vested with the powers to collect fees established in this chapter, in the amounts provided in the city fee schedule. 
(f)  Interference with duty. No person shall release or attempt to release any animal mentioned herein from the possession of any animal control officer nor interfere with the chief animal control officer, or his deputies, in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(A)-(F); Ord. No. 1135, § 2, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(A)-(G), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(A)-(G), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(A)-(G), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-115. - Delegation of authority. 
    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon, the animal control officer and other public officers, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officers or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2081, § VI, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI, 9-8-2012; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(I), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-116. - Animal control shelter. 
    The city shall provide a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated which are subject to be impounded, which shall be known and designated as the animal control shelter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(I); Ord. No. 1135, § II(J), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II(I), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(I), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(I), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-117. - Accounting for sums collected. 
    The animal control officer shall pay over to the finance director all sums collected by him pursuant to the terms of this chapter promptly as directed. All sums received by the city pursuant to the terms of this article shall be deposited into the city's general fund. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(O); Ord. No. 1135, § 2(O), (P), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II(N), (O), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II(N), (O), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(N), (O), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(N), (O), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(N), (O), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-118. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall be found guilty of violating this article may be assessed a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each day the violation occurs may be deemed a separate offense. Repeat offenses may be punished by no less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2081, § VI, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI, 9-8-2012; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(H), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(H), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(H), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-119. - Fees and penalties constitute debt to city; civil suit for collection. 
(a)  The amount of any fee or penalty imposed by this chapter shall be defined a debt to the city and any person keeping any animal without having complied with the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the fees or penalties imposed and required by this article to be paid for the privilege of keeping such animal. 
(b)  It is the duty of the animal control officer to cause a civil complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, and the city police chief shall cause an action to be brought against any person failing to pay a fee or penalty required by the provisions of this article for the recovery of the same. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(E); Ord. No. 1135, § VI(I), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI(E), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI(E), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(E), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(E), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(E), 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-120-8-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-180. - Duty and authority to impound. 
    It is the duty of the animal control officer or any peace officer to take up, impound, or safely keep any animal found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  Nuisance animals. Animal control officers or other law enforcement officers shall have the power to impound animals which create an animal nuisance for the purpose of abating the nuisance as follows: 
a.  On public property in all cases. 
b.  On private property, if: 
1.  The consent of the property owner or resident is obtained; 
2.  The officer reasonably believes there is immediate or imminent danger or peril to the public if the animal in question is not impounded; 
3.  Authorized by appropriate courts of law; 
4.  If property is vacant of buildings and residents to serve as a custodian for the animal; or 
5.  The animal is in violation of rabies vaccination and marking requirements. 
(2)  Unrestrained animals. Animal control officers or other law enforcement officer shall have the power to impound unrestrained animals for the purpose of abating the nuisance as follows: 
a.  On public property in all cases. 
b.  On private property with the consent of the property owner or resident. 
c.  On private property when in pursuit of an animal which he believes is subject to impoundment under the provisions of this chapter. 
d.  When authorized by an appropriate court of law. 
e.  On private property, if property is vacant of buildings and residents to serve as a custodian for the animal. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(J); Ord. No. 1135, § 2(H), (K), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II(H), (J), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II(H), (J), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II, 9-8-2012; Ord. No. 2081, § II(J), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(J), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(J), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-181. - Care of impounded animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to provide impounded animals with adequate food, water, and shelter for the period of their impoundment. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2(K); Ord. No. 1135, § 2(L), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § II(K), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § II(K), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § II(K), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § II(K), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § II(K), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-182. - Redemption and other disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Livestock. After giving five days' notice in the newspaper, the animal control officer may sell at public stockyards any impounded livestock. At any time prior to sale, the owner or his agent may redeem the animal by paying an impounding fee and a per day boarding fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, together with all advertising and other costs, if any incurred by the city. All money received by virtue of sale of such animals under this section shall be delivered to the city finance director for deposit to the city's general fund. Livestock not sold or redeemed pursuant to this subsection may be disposed of by the animal control officer or police chief in whatever manner is in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  Other animals. Redemption of animals other than livestock shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The animal owner may redeem an impounded dog or cat within three working days of impoundment. If not redeemed in that period, the animal shall be held for an additional two working days for possible sale to the public or transfer to a pet adoption program. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall make every attempt within reason to notify the owner of an animal immediately after impounding at his last known residence, either by mail, telephone, or personal contact. 
(3)  The owner of an impounded animal may reclaim the animal at any time prior to final disposition of the animal in advance of payment of all impound and boarding fees, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, and any applicable veterinary fees. 
(4)  If the animal is required to be vaccinated for rabies, proof of rabies vaccination shall also be required. If an animal is impounded and is not current for rabies vaccination, the animal control officer may take the animal to a licensed veterinarian for rabies vaccination prior to release to its owner. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-2(L), 4-4(F); Ord. No. 1135, §§ 2(L), 4(Q), 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, §§ II(L), IV(P), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I(A), (F), (G), 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, §§ II(L), IV(P), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § IV, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 2081, §§ II(L), III(O), IV(E), (F), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, §§ II(L), III(O), IV(E), (F), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, §§ II(L), III(O), IV(E), (F), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-183. - Owner subject to penalties for chapter violation. 
    The owner of any animal impounded remains subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter regardless of whether the animal is reclaimed. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(K); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(K), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(K), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(K), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-184. - Unauthorized released of impounded animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to release by any method, without proper authorization, any animal impounded by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6(J); Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § VI, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1998, § VI, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § VI(I), (J), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § VI(I), (J), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § VI(I), (J), 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-185. - Pet adoption programs. 
    The city encourages and supports development of pet adoption programs by organizations within the community, and will cooperatively work with such organizations to encourage responsible pet adoption. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 9-11-1973; Ord. No. 1621, § III(J), 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 1946, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 1998, § III(O), 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2081, § III(O), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-A, § III(O), 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2081-B, § III(O), 9-11-2012) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For provisions regarding vehicle storage facilities, see section 52-241. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Building and technical codes adopted. 
(a)  The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  2015 International Building Code. 
(2)  2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(3)  2015 International Plumbing Code. 
(4)  2015 International Mechanical Code. 
(5)  2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(6)  2015 International Existing Building Code. 
(7)  2015 International Property Maintenance Code. 
(8)  2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
(9)  2014 National Electrical Code. 
(10)  2014 Life Safety Code, 101. 
(b)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in any building or technical code adopted by reference in this chapter, it shall be held to mean this city. Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in any building or technical code adopted by reference in this chapter, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. 
(c)  The building official or his designated representative is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including the adopted codes. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-21, 5-22; Ord. No. 886, §§ I, VI, 3-12-1968; Ord. No. 2025, § 1, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 2181, 1-11-2011) 
Editor's note- See section 20-50 for fire code adopted by the city. 
Sec. 10-2. - Permit fees. 
(a)  No permit as required by the building code adopted in section 10-1 shall be issued until a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule has been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, is paid. 
(b)  In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder; provided, no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided, no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued. 
(c)  The term "estimated cost," as used in this section, means the reasonable value of all services, labor, materials and use of scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided, the cost of excavation or grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely for embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure, is not deemed a part of such estimated cost. 
(Code 1973, § 5-23; Ord. No. 886, § VII, 3-12-1968) 
Sec. 10-3. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Office created; appointment and removal; acting officer. The office of building inspector is hereby created, and the executive inspector in charge shall be known as the building inspector. The building inspector shall be appointed by the city manager. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause. During temporary absence or disability of the building inspector, the appointing authority shall designate an acting building inspector. 
(b)  Duties generally. The building inspector shall devote his whole time to the duties of his office. He shall receive applications required by the building code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of the building code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(c)  Inspections. Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building inspector or his duly appointed assistant. The building inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by a provision of the building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The building inspector shall keep comprehensive records of applications, permits issued, certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered and notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector without his written consent. 
(e)  Periodic reports. The building inspector shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. 
(f)  Cooperation with other officials. The building inspector may request and shall receive insofar as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. 
(g)  Right of entry. The building inspector in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-1-5-4; Ord. No. 886, §§ II-V, 3-12-1968) 
Secs. 10-4-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDITIONAL ELECTRICAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-25. - General. 
    Due to the extreme climatic conditions prevailing in and about the city, certain special rules covering electrical wiring and equipment installations are set forth herein, and certain exceptions are taken to the rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code to raise the safety level of electrical installations and prevent the rapid deterioration of electrical materials and equipment from severe atmospheric and underground corrosive action. 
(Code 1973, § 5-99; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 1, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-26. - Branch circuits. 
(a)  In residences with more than 500 square feet of floor space, receptacles will be required as outlined in the National Electrical Code. 
(b)  In determining outlets per circuit, the National Electrical Code shall be complied with, except that no circuits shall be permitted with more than seven outlets in residential wiring. In commercial wiring, not more than four receptacles shall be permitted on one circuit or six incandescent fixtures. Fixed lighting on a circuit shall be determined according to the load. Receptacles, incandescent fixtures and fixed lighting on individual circuits as herein regulated shall not exceed 80 percent of the circuit load. No wire less than No. 12 shall be used, except on low voltage circuits and No. 14 wire may be used on switch legs up to five amps. If aluminum wire is used it must be one size larger than copper. A separate circuit is to be used for each of the following: Attic fan, dishwasher, automatic washing machine, clothes dryer and room air conditioning units. In the working area of the kitchen there shall be one duplex receptacle only, on each circuit. 
(c)  All service and branch circuit overcurrent protective devices rated at 30 amperes or less, are to be equipped with nontamperable overcurrent protective devices which are definite and cannot be changed from one rating to another. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bridge, tamper with, or change from its original installation, except upon the approval of the chief electrical inspector, and then only after proper permit for alteration has been issued, any fuse of the plug, cartridge type or link type, installed in panel boards, main switches or switchboards, or to alter or change circuit breakers so that the original calibration will be affected, or to tie down or secure any circuit breaker so that it will not function properly. 
(e)  The minimum size service switch shall not be less than 60 amperes for buildings having more than two circuits. Buildings with less than three circuits may use a 30 ampere disconnect. Residences over 500 square feet shall have 100 amperes service or larger. All disconnects or service switches shall be of the weatherproof type. 
(f)  All mobile homes shall have a main service of not less than 100 amperes. 
(Code 1973, § 5-101; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 3, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-27. - Extension cords. 
    Extension cords shall be no longer than eight feet except those used for portable tools and trouble lights. 
(Code 1973, § 5-102; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 4, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-28. - Electric fences prohibited. 
    The installation and use of any type of electric fence is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-103; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 5, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-29. - Motor and starters. 
(a)  All motors of more than five horsepower rating shall be three-phase. 
(b)  All motors with a rated capacity of ten horsepower or more shall be equipped for reduced voltage starting and shall have low voltage release attachment, the details of the controlling equipment to be approved by the electrical inspector before such motors are connected. 
(Code 1973, § 5-104; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 6, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-30. - Utility company rules. 
    Rules and regulations of the central power and light company regarding service and meter installations for the kind and character of service to be rendered as passed and approved by the city council from time to time, in accordance with franchise provisions, are hereby referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof. 
(Code 1973, § 5-105; Ord. No. 1118, art. IX, § 7, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-31-10-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-49. - General. 
    The administration and enforcement of this article is hereby assigned to and shall be the responsibility of the city electrical inspector under the supervision of the building official. 
(Code 1973, § 5-38; Ord. No. 1118, art. III, § 1, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-50. - Duties of electrical inspector. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the following duties: 
(1)  He shall enforce the provisions of this chapter; he shall delegate any powers of inspection to his subordinates which he deems advisable; 
(2)  He shall collect, or have collected, all fees as provided herein and transmit the same to the proper city officials; 
(3)  He shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation, extension, or alteration of electrical work as provided in this chapter; 
(4)  He shall make inspections of all work as provided in this chapter; 
(5)  He shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinspections made, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-39; Ord. No. 1118, art. III, § 2, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-51. - Authority of the electrical inspector. 
(a)  Whenever an electrical inspector shall call upon the police department for aid and assistance in making an arrest or stopping work, it shall be the duty of the police department to act immediately in giving the required assistance. 
(b)  Electrical inspectors shall have the right, with the property owner's consent, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of their official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection, or test of electrical wiring, devices and equipment. 
(c)  Each electrical inspector shall have the power to inspect and reinspect electrical wiring, devices, and equipment, to prevent the connection of same from a source of electrical energy where such electrical wiring, devices, equipment and electrical energy source have not been approved, to issue notices or affix them to structures, and to condemn electrical wiring, and shall have such other powers as are provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-40; Ord. No. 1118, art. III, § 3, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-52. - Service of notice. 
    When any order or notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to any person who cannot be found after reasonable search, then such order or notice may be served by posting it in a conspicuous place upon the premises occupied by him, or upon the premises where the defects are alleged to exist. Such posting of the order or notice shall be considered equivalent to personal service of such order or notice. An order or notice sent by mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, and directed to the address of the electrical contractor, owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises shall be equivalent to personal service of such order or notice. 
(Code 1973, § 5-41; Ord. No. 1118, art. III, § 4, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-53. - Suspension or revocation of rights. 
    The building official shall have the power to suspend or revoke the annual certificate of registration issued by the city of any electrician who is found guilty of: 
(1)  Practice of any fraud or deceit in obtaining such annual certificate of registration. 
(2)  Taking out electrical permits in the name of some person authorized by law to do electrical work and thereafter permitting a person without a proper certificate to do the work. 
(3)  Any gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct in the performance of electrical work within the jurisdiction of the city under this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-53; Ord. No. 1118, art. IV, § 11, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-54. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any applicant that is refused a certificate of registration, or whose certificate of registration may have been revoked, may appeal to the board of appeals from examinations for a review of his case. If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals he shall have the right of final appeal to the city council whose judgment as to all matters involved shall be final. 
(b)  Every electrical contractor must submit to the city electrical department an address or telephone number where the electrical department may leave messages for the electrical contractor. 
(Code 1973, § 5-54; Ord. No. 1118, art. IV, § 12, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-55-10-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - QUALIFICATIONS AND REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 10-82. - Registration required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any wiring, fixture, or equipment used for the conducting of electricity for which a permit is required by this chapter, nor shall any person in any manner undertake to execute such work unless such person is licensed by the state department of licensing and registration as an electrical contractor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a registered electrician of any class set forth in this chapter or to use the words "electrical contractor," or words of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner whatsoever, unless the person is properly registered within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-56; Ord. No. 1118, art. V, § 1, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-83. - Fees for examination or registration. 
(a)  The fees covering the examination for a certificate of registration to qualified electricians of all classes shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule and payable to the city at the office of the electrical inspector. The examination fee shall accompany the application for registration. 
(b)  The registration fee shall be paid to the electrical inspector before the issuance of a certificate of registration and only after the person has been approved by the examining board dealing with the registrant's classification. 
(c)  Annual renewal of a certificate of registration shall be accomplished by issuance of a certified receipt signed by the electrical inspector issued upon payment each year extending the validity of correspondingly numbered certificates for that year only. The holder of the certificate shall affix and display each yearly receipt upon the face of his certificate in the designated space. He shall remove and destroy any previously issued receipt. 
(d)  Annual renewal of a registration card shall be required as herein. 
(e)  Fees for this section shall be as provided by the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 5-66; Ord. No. 1118, art. V, § 11, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-84. - Insurance for electrical contractor and electricians. 
    All electrical contractors and electricians certified under this chapter shall be required to furnish and to keep in force each year during the life of his certificate of registration a certificate of insurance as required by the applicable state department of licensing and regulations. The insurance policy shall be conditioned that the holder thereof will indemnify and hold the city harmless against all cost, expenses, damages, and injuries sustained by the city by reason of the carelessness or neglect of the person in operating under this chapter. All such insurance policies shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, § 5-67; Ord. No. 1118, art. V, § 12, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-85. - Display or evidence of registration. 
    Every holder of a registration card shall carry his registration card on his person at all times while doing electrical work and shall produce and exhibit it when requested by any electrical inspector or proper official of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-74; Ord. No. 1118, art. V, § 19, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-86. - Revocation. 
    Conviction under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of any certificate which the person may have or hold under the provisions of this chapter, and examination for reissue of such certificate shall be at the discretion of the examining board of qualified electricians, but in no event shall be delayed longer than a period of one year. 
(Code 1973, § 5-107; Ord. No. 1118, art. X, § 2, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-87-10-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Sec. 10-116. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to permit any person to install, any electrical wiring, fixture, or equipment or to make any alteration, addition, change, or repair within the scope of this chapter, without first having procured a permit therefor issued by the electrical inspector, except as provided herein. There shall be one permit for each building for which rough work for electrical conductors, or electrical equipment is installed. Accessory buildings, tourist cottages, or group houses shall not be considered separate buildings when the work is to be installed as one complete project, and at one time, except where separate switches or meter loops are installed thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 5-75; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 1, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-117. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Before proceeding with the installation, alteration of, or the addition to any electrical wiring or equipment within or on any building, structure, or premises, publicly or privately owned, within the city limits, the electrical contractor in charge of such proposed work shall first file with the electrical inspector an application requesting permit and pay fees to the city in accordance with the city fee schedule, to secure a permit to carry on such work. 
(b)  Permit applications covering the installation of motors on any job shall specify each motor individually and no grouping of motors per machine, or other such grouping of horsepower, shall be permitted, except package machines may be wired as one group. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees for inspection of all electrical work and appliances shall be made and collected upon and in accordance with the amounts provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 5-76; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 2, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-118. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the electrical inspector for that purpose. With such application there shall be filed a diagram or plan showing clearly the character and kind of wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work to be done. The plan or diagram shall show the manner in which the electrical installation is to be made, or the character of any repairs to any existing electrical installation. The application shall include the street and house number, name of owner, kind of building and a list of electrical fixtures and appliances to be installed. 
(b)  The diagram or plans and application shall be referred to the electrical inspector, who shall have the authority to issue or refuse to issue a permit. No electrical permit on new construction shall be granted prior to the granting of a building permit. Issuance of an electrical permit in error shall not waive compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-77; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 3, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-119. - Permits for part jobs. 
    When one electrical contractor completes the rough work, in whole or in part, on any electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment, and a second electrical contractor is called upon to complete the work, in whole or in part, then, in that event, a separate permit is required, for which minimum fees shall be paid for the work to be done. Each electrical contractor shall be held responsible only for the work installed by him. Before the second electrical contractor is issued a permit for the completion of an electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment job, the electrical inspector shall first notify the electrical contractor holding the original or first permit, if he can be found, that the second permit is to be issued. The issuance of the second permit shall cancel the first permit and no refund of fees shall be made. 
(Code 1973, § 5-78; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 4, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-120. - To whom permits issued. 
    Permits shall be issued to electrical contractors qualified to secure permits as set forth in this chapter, or to their duly authorized agent. Qualified electrical contractors shall certify their duly authorized agent to the electrical inspector in the form of an affidavit stating that the electrical contractor assumes all and full responsibility for any permit taken out or applied for by the agent. This certification shall be kept in the electrical inspector's file after it has been approved by the city attorney. Permits for the construction or erection and connecting of gaseous tubing or electric signs may be issued to qualified electrical sign contractors. 
(Code 1973, § 5-79; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 5, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-121. - Time limitation of permits. 
    If electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work authorized under a permit is not started within 60 days after issuance of such permit, or if the work is started and then discontinued and the work remains discontinued without justifiable cause for a period of 60 days, the permit becomes void, and no work shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all necessary fees paid. No refunds shall be made for permits that may become void. 
(Code 1973, § 5-80; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 6, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-122. - Revocation of permits. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the right to declare a permit null and void if there has been misrepresentation of facts or any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-81; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 7, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-123. - Personal home wiring permits. 
(a)  Any person shall be permitted to do electrical work on such property owned by him and used by him as a home and shall not be required to obtain a permit through an electrical contractor, but shall have the right to apply in person for such permit without being qualified as an electrician. 
(b)  The exception mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall not relieve any person attempting to perform work or do certain acts described above from applying in person for a permit prior to the beginning of work; and further, all work described above shall at all times be subject to the inspection and approval by the electrical inspector in accordance with the terms of all valid city ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations; and further, such persons shall comply with the ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations as to the types of material, quantity, and quality thereof as required by all inspections. 
(c)  Any person mentioned above shall be required to pay the same permit and inspection fees as shall be required of any other person under the electrical code and building code of the city; provided, however, that no person may exercise the exception mentioned above save and except on his own premises as was mentioned above. 
(Code 1973, § 5-82; Ord. No. 1118, art. VI, § 8, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-124-10-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-145. - Inspections required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device, or equipment on an installation for which a permit is required, as set forth in this chapter, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring, device, or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 5-83; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 1, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-146. - Rough inspection. 
(a)  When the rough wiring or installation work is completed on any premises, the person responsible therefor shall notify the electrical inspector that the job is ready for inspection, giving proper identification of the work, address, and permit number. The electrical inspector shall then make an inspection of the electrical installation within 48 hours from the time of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays). 
(b)  If the wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall sign the inspection card, noting thereon the date of approval of the work. More than one rough inspection may be made without charge when the progress of construction requires such inspection. 
(c)  Faulty work. If the electric wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty or incorrectly or defectively installed, the electrical inspector shall notify the responsible person who installed such work of the changes necessary to be made in order that the work may conform to this chapter. 
(d)  Rectification of faulty work. The electrical contractor shall make or start to make the changes ordered immediately and shall proceed with the work until the same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the reinspection fee, he shall notify the electrical inspector that such faulty work has been corrected. The latter shall then cause the reinspection to be made, and if the work has been found to comply with this chapter he shall sign the inspection card, noting thereon the date of approval of the work. If the electrical inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, he shall notify the responsible electrical contractor of the necessary changes, and shall collect an additional reinspection fee. If the responsible electrical contractor does not make the required change within a reasonable time, the electrical inspector shall refuse to issue to any such person any further permits until the work in question is corrected and approved. 
(Code 1973, § 5-84; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 2, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-147. - Final inspection. 
    Upon the completion of all electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment in any building or on any premises, the electrician in charge shall notify the electrical inspector that the work is ready for final inspection, giving the electrical permit number and street address, and the electrical inspector shall then cause inspection to be made within 48 hours from the time of receipt of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), and if any faulty or defective wiring or equipment is found, the electrician in charge shall be notified of the changes to be made in order that such work shall conform to this chapter. If such work is found to be correctly installed, replaced or repaired, the electrical inspector shall endorse his approval upon the inspection certificate stating that the wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. For each and every final inspection requested by the electrical contractor s in charge of a job, after the first has been made, the final inspection fee shall be paid as hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1973, § 5-85; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 3, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-148. - Work left open. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cover or cause to be covered any part of a wiring installation with flooring, lath, wallboard, or other material, until the electrical inspector shall have approved the wiring installation, in part or as a whole, except as herein set forth. 
(Code 1973, § 5-86; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 4, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-149. - Inspector's removal request. 
    It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to cause all abandoned dead wire or equipment inside or on the outside of a building, unused poles, or electrical apparatus on the outside of the buildings or in streets or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owners thereof, by giving the owners written notice. 
(Code 1973, § 5-87; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 5, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-150. - Interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If, in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or equipment have previously been installed in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be immediately given to the authorized person using the electrical conductors or equipment, and he shall be required to accomplish this needed change in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-88; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 6, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-151. - Periodic general inspection. 
    The electrical inspector shall inaugurate thorough periodic reinspection of installation of all electric wiring, electric devices, electric equipment, including radio towers, antennas, transmission towers, and electrical roof signs, now installed or that may hereafter be installed within the city, and within the scope of this chapter, and when the installation of any such wiring, device, or equipment is found to be defective, dangerous, or in an unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating the wiring, device, or equipment shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, device, or equipment in a safe condition, within five days or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector in the notice. The electrical inspector shall immediately order the disconnection or discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, device, or equipment until it has been made safe, as directed. When old buildings are remodeled, all wiring shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-89; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 7, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-152. - Proper supervision. 
(a)  In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing any electrical wiring device or equipment for which a permit is required by this chapter, there shall be present and in direct supervision a qualified electrician of the proper classification or registration. 
(b)  In erecting a sign for which a building permit and an electrical permit have been issued, the registered electrical sign contractor shall direct supervision until such time as the sign is ready to be connected to a source of power. Connecting the sign to a source of power will be done by an electrical contractor, or a journeyman electrician operating under a licensed electrical contractor. 
(Code 1973, § 5-90; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 8, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-153. - Electrical service connection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electric energy to any electrical wiring, device, or equipment which has been disconnected by order of the electrical inspector, or the use of which has been prohibited for reasons herein set forth, until a certificate of approval has been issued by him authorizing the reconnection and use of such wiring, device, or equipment. Whenever the service wires are once disconnected in any commercial building in the city limits or any building in the fire limits, the service shall not again be connected until the same has been wired so as to conform to this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91; Ord. No. 1118, art. VII, § 9, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-154-10-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TELEVISION ANTENNA REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-175. - Lightning protection. 
(a)  An approved lightning arrestor should be placed in each conductor of a ribbon-type lead-in. 
(b)  An antenna system using coaxial cable is suitably protected against lightning by effectively grounding the outside metal shield. 
(c)  Metal masts must be effectively grounded. 
(d)  Ground wires used in lightning protection systems should be No. 6 Copper A.W.G. 
(e)  Ground clamps must be of the "approved" type. 
(f)  Lightning arrestors must be located outside the building at the point of entrance of the downlead into the building and away from highly combustible materials. 
(Code 1973, § 5-93; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 2, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-176. - Clearance. 
(a)  An antenna system must have a full clearance of eight feet from other antennas on flat roofs. An antenna system must be eight feet above all points on a flat roof. 
(b)  An antenna system must not cross a public way or above or below light, power, and communication lines. 
(c)  Downleads must be separated by at least two feet from power lines with potential up to 250 volts, ten feet from lines with potentials higher than 250 volts, and six feet from lightning rod systems. 
(d)  Location of the antenna system must be such that sagging, swinging, or collapse of the antenna will not result in contact with light, power, or communication lines. 
(Code 1973, § 5-94; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 3, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-177. - Strength of structures. 
(a)  Anchor screws or lead expansion shields must be used in masonry at anchor points of mast and guy wire supports. 
(b)  Support insulators for downleads must be spaced at least every ten feet, or the leads may be securely taped to the mast. 
(c)  Guy wires must be at least 3/32 inch, five strand cable, galvanized steel. 
(d)  Antenna systems must be adequately supported to withstand extreme conditions of wind. 
(e)  Chimneys must be in good condition and have at least a two square foot cross section to be suitable as a mast support. 
(f)  Masts should not extend above eight feet from the top of a chimney unless properly guyed. 
(g)  All antennas, except those of the self-supporting type, with masts ten feet or higher shall be guyed at one level of the mast. Masts from 20 to 50 feet high should be guyed at two levels. 
(h)  Antenna supports on frame structures must be fastened to rafters or beams. 
(Code 1973, § 5-95; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 4, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-178. - Resistance to corrosion. 
    Mast and miscellaneous hardware should be noncorrosive. 
(Code 1973, § 5-96; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 5, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-179. - Quality of materials. 
    The materials entering into the construction of the antenna system shall be of a quality that meets the standards of recognized testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories. 
(Code 1973, § 5-97; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 6, 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 10-180. - Prohibited areas and supports. 
(a)  Attachment of any part of the antenna system to light, power, or communication structures or poles is prohibited. 
(b)  No antenna shall be mounted on fire escapes or fire towers. 
(Code 1973, § 5-98; Ord. No. 1118, art. VIII, § 7, 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 10-181-10-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FENCES 

Sec. 10-199. - Issuance of permit. 
    No fence shall be constructed in the city without first obtaining a building permit in the manner provided in this chapter. The application for permit shall include a description of the proposed location, height and construction materials and the anticipated time for project completion and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
Sec. 10-200. - Regulations. 
(a)  With the exceptions only approved by the city's board of adjustment following due process, the only materials acceptable for fencing in all neighborhoods shall be limited to: 
Chain link Woven wire fence Split rail Rough posts split to form horizontal fence Board on board Wood frame fence Picket Narrow vertical wooden fence Decorative iron Ornamental iron sections PVC panels Ornamental man-made material fence Stucco Cement plaster Block tile Concrete block Shrub Vegetation Brick (Self-explanatory)  
(b)  Fences in neighborhoods shall not exceed eight feet in height, in rear and side yards as established by a structure in compliance with the set building code setbacks or only beyond the zoning ordinance building lines pursuant to the individual zones on a vacant parcel 
(c)  Fences in neighborhoods shall not exceed 48 inches in height in front yards or beyond the setback building lines for the particular property zone with the exception of corner lots addressed in section 46-1 to prevent obscured traffic intersections. 
(d)  Fences for front yards as permitted hereto shall be at least 75 percent open space for passage of light and air. 
(e)  Fences extending across the back and side yards shall be at least five percent open space of light and air. 
(f)  Gate access will be required for egress and ingress. 
(g)  Fences surrounding swimming pools within the city must adhere to fencing regulations established by article V of this chapter. 
(h)  Fences required whenever a zone change is granted for a business, commercial use, or for multiple dwelling in a residential zone shall adhere to specific fencing regulations established by section 56-122. 
(i)  Double fencing means two or more fences constructed more or less parallel to each other, and where there is less than a 30-inch clear and accessible separation between the fences at any point. The term "clear and accessible" refers to the area between two or more fences which must be accessible to lawn mowers up to 24 inches wide in order to keep the area free and clear of grass, weeds, and unsightly debris. 
(j)  The fence permit is good for a 60-day period and may be extended for an additional 30 days only if the building inspector finds circumstances warranting such extension. 
(k)  Fences prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed electrified fences or fences containing barbed wire within the city. Exception: Property within the city still undeveloped and used for agricultural purposes or qualified for agricultural tax exceptions may retain barbed wire fencing until that time that development for single-family, multiple-family or light commercial use takes place on the property or adjacent to the property at which time perimeter fencing for the developed area shall comply with the regulations herein established. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2101, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-201. - Appeal procedure. 
    Applicants aggrieved by the decision of the building inspector to deny a fence permit, by his application of the regulations herein adopted, may file an appropriate appeal procedure of the denial within 30 days from the date the fencing permit is denied to the city's board of adjustment for final determination, during which time all fence construction shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 4, 2-13-2007) 
Secs. 10-202-10-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-226. - Permit required. 
    No person shall move or transport any house or building from one location to another within the city, or move a house or building from without the city to a location within the city, or to move a house or building within the city to a point outside the city, or to move a house or building through the city, without first securing a permit therefor as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 9-14-1965) 
Sec. 10-227. - Permit application, bond. 
(a)  Written application for a permit to move a house or building shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state the location of the house or building to be moved and the lot and block where it is to be placed after it is moved if it is to be placed in the city, and the destination if it is to be moved to a place outside the city, and the streets over which same is proposed to be moved and the time desired within which to move it. The application shall be submitted to the building inspector. 
(b)  If the building inspector or someone under his direction shall determine that such house or building may be moved in safety and in full compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a permit to the applicant upon the payment by the applicant of a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule to cover the costs of investigating the application and of issuing the permit, which fee shall be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(c)  The building inspector shall also require the applicant to deposit a bond in the sum of $5,000.00 before he issues any permit to move the house or building over the streets of the city. This bond shall be signed by the applicant and two or more good and sufficient sureties or by the applicant and a surety company authorized to make surety bonds in this state, the bond being conditioned to indemnify all persons and the city for any damage, loss or reasonable and necessary expenses caused to or incurred by any persons or the city as a result of the moving of any house or building, and such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons, including the city, who suffer any damage or loss to property or person, or incur any reasonable and necessary expenses by reason of the moving of such house or building; provided, if any person making application for such permit desires to deposit a cash bond in the above mentioned amount instead of a surety bond, he may do so. In the event the applicant is in the house moving business and contemplates moving more than one house or building in the period of one year, he may make a blanket bond in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned as stated but covering all buildings and houses for which he may obtain permits during the year, and such bond shall be in force for a period of one year and it shall apply to all houses and buildings that may be moved by the applicant during such year. All such bonds shall be approved by the city attorney and shall be filed with the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 5-7; Ord. No. 764, § 2, 9-14-1965) 
Sec. 10-228. - Route, notice to utility companies. 
(a)  The chief of police, or someone under his control, shall at the time a permit to move a house or building is issued by the building inspector indicate the route to be followed by the applicant in moving the house or building, which route must be followed by the applicant. 
(b)  When such route has been indicated, and the permit issued, it shall be the duty of the person moving the house or building to give immediate notice of the move to all companies maintaining overhead wires across or along any street or alley included in the designated route along which such house or building is to be moved. The companies shall be told the time the move is to be undertaken and when it will be necessary to raise or cut such wires. The house mover shall arrange with the companies for the payment of all charges for moving, cutting or repairing wires, cables or poles or for other services rendered. 
(c)  After receiving such notice, it shall be the duty of the companies maintaining the wires to furnish one or more employees to cut, raise or move such wires in order to permit the house or building to be moved along the designated route. 
(d)  The house movers shall under no conditions nor under any consideration cut, raise or move any wire found across or along any street or alley and shall not remove the same from any post or support or damage the same in moving such house or building, but shall stop all operations in the moving of the house or building until such wire is raised, cut or moved by an employee of the company owning or maintaining the same. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8; Ord. No. 764, § 3, 9-14-1965) 
Sec. 10-229. - Lights at night. 
    No house or building shall be moved at night, nor be stopped or left on any street or alley of the city at night, unless there shall be attached to each end of such house or building a red light or lantern visible for at least 300 feet along such street or alley. 
(Code 1973, § 5-9; Ord. No. 764, § 4, 9-14-1965) 
Secs. 10-230-10-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 10-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Swimming pool means any structure, above-ground or at ground level, indoors or outdoors, having a depth of 18 inches or more, used or suitable to be used for bathing or swimming purposes, whether in use, temporarily not in use, filled with water or drained of all water. 
(Ord. No. 1836, § 2, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 10-253. - Enclosure required. 
(a)  Swimming pools in the city shall be completely enclosed by a fence, wall or screen enclosure not less than four feet in height. 
(b)  A building may be used as a part of such enclosure. The city building inspector may make determinations with regard to whether natural barriers or obstructions are sufficient to be used as part of a pool enclosure. 
(c)  All doors or gates in such enclosure that are accessible to the general public shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices that operate to keep the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use. 
(d)  Fences and walls of such enclosure shall be so designed as to eliminate any openings, holes or gaps in such enclosure that would permit the passage of a sphere six inches in diameter. 
(e)  Pools completely enclosed within buildings to which access by the general public is controlled, pools constructed above the ground floor of buildings to which access by the general public is controlled, or pools maintained within completely fenced or enclosed apartment complexes equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices on all gates or doors accessible to the general public and leading directly to the pool area, shall be considered to be in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  No final inspection shall be approved for any swimming pool constructed or erected unless, upon final inspection, the building inspector is satisfied that the enclosure requirements of this section have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1836, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 10-254. - Right of entry for inspection; violation declared nuisance; penalties. 
(a)  The city code enforcement official, building inspector, or any authorized city official may enter upon any and all parts of the premises of such swimming places to make examinations and investigations of their compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates this article is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, violation of this article constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1836, §§ 4, 5, 11-12-1996) 
Secs. 10-255-10-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION 

Sec. 10-272. - Created; purpose. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033, the city has created a building and standard commission to hear and determine cases concerning violations defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.032. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-273. - Members; terms; removal. 
    The building and standards commission shall consist of five members who are also members of the planning and zoning commission. Members of the building and standards commission shall serve two-year terms to run consecutively with their planning and zoning commission terms. The city council may remove a commission member for cause on a written charge. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-274. - Alternate members; appointment, terms, vacancies. 
    The mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, eight or more alternate members who shall serve in the absence of regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or the city manager. Alternate members shall serve the same period and are subject to removal in the same manner as regular members. A vacancy of an alternate member is filled in the same manner as regular members. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-275. - Chairman; election and authority to administer oaths and compel witness attendance. 
    The building and standards commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-276. - Procedural rules to be established. 
    The majority of the commission shall adopt rules in accordance with this article and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.034 et seq. The rules shall establish procedures for use in hearings, providing ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges brought by the city or its building officials relating to alleged violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-277. - Meetings; minutes and other records. 
    Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and shall be open to the public. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or abstains from voting. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the commission as public records. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-278. - Building official's statement of violation. 
    If the building official or his representative shall be of the opinion that a dangerous or unhealthy dwelling, building, improvement or condition exists within the city, he shall file a written statement with the chairman of the commission detailing the specific conditions rendering the dwelling, building or improvement or condition dangerous or unhealthy. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-279. - Notice of violation and hearing to interested parties. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the building official's statement of violation, the chairman shall cause written notice of the violation to be given: 
(1)  By personal service, certified mail, return receipt requested, or by delivery by United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk in which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; and 
(2)  To all unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of the improvements structure on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(b)  The notice shall identify the dangerous or unhealthy conditions that exist and require that such conditions be removed or remedied within ten days. The notice shall also set a date and time for a hearing before the building and standards commission, not less than ten days after that the notice is mailed and posted. 
(c)  The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-280. - Hearing. 
    All cases heard before the commission shall be heard by a majority of the commission. At the hearing, the building official or his representative shall present all available information and facts as to the condition of the premises. In addition, any person having an interest in the property shall have the opportunity to appear at the hearing to present relevant facts and hear the reports of city personnel or other witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-281. - Findings and final order; enforcement of penalties. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall make written findings of fact as to whether the premises constitutes a dangerous or unhealthy condition. Such findings of fact shall be made by majority vote of the commission. The commission may, in accordance with its findings and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.036: 
(1)  Order repair of the violating conditions within a fixed period of time; 
(2)  Declare a building substandard in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54; 
(3)  Order, in appropriate cases, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of this Code, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building found to exist; 
(4)  Issue orders or directives to any peace office of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the city police chief to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the commission; and 
(5)  Determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty, if assessed by the commission, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017. 
(b)  An abbreviated copy of the order shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within ten calendar days after date of delivery or mailing of the copy as provided in this article, including the street address or legal description of the property; the date of the hearing; a brief statement indicating the results of the order; and instructions stating where a copy of the order may be obtained and a copy shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.037, a determination of a civil penalty shall be final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court of jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in accordance with the established penalty. To enforce a civil penalty hereunder, the city secretary shall file with the county district clerk a certified copy of the order of the commission establishing the amount and duration of the penalty. No other proof is required for the district clerk to enter final judgment on the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-282. - Emergency intervention by city; recovery of costs. 
    A condition subject to this article is an emergency if it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life and safety of any person, or an unhealthy condition exists for any person, unless an uninhabitable or dangerous dwelling, building or improvement is immediately repaired, vacated, demolished, or immediate remedy of such building or condition takes place. The city may, at its option, take steps to remedy an emergency condition. The cost of emergency repair, vacation, demolition or remedy by the city or its designees shall be assessed against the owner and such assessment shall become a lien upon the property which shall be filed in county lien records. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-283. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any owner, lienholder, or mortgage of record jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the commission may present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds for the illegality. 
(b)  The petition must be presented to the court within 30 calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the commission is delivered, mailed by first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to all persons whom notice is required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.035. The commission shall deliver or mail that copy promptly after the decision becomes final. 
(c)  The judicial review procedures set forth in the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.039 are adopted to the extent applicable and made a part of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 10-284. - Conflict with state law. 
    If a provision of this article conflicts with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.031 through 54.042, state law shall supersede the conflicting provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2259, 5-12-2015) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.; uniformity required in the issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; occupations generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1.001 et seq.; Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Tent shows restricted to county fairgrounds. 
    It is unlawful for any open or tent show to exhibit on any grounds, lots or blocks in the city, except on the location so designated by the city, and the show grounds or district so designated shall be the county fairgrounds. In addition, it is unlawful for any person, including employees, agents and persons in charge, to exhibit any open or tent show except only on the county fairgrounds. 
(Code 1973, §§ 10-1, 10-2; Ord. No. 167A, §§ 1, 3, 7-29-1929) 
Secs. 12-2-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax, prevent or otherwise regulate hawkers and pawnbrokers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; cancellation of certain home solicited consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code § 601.001 et seq.; certain peddlers regarded as retailers for purposes of sales and use taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.024. 

Sec. 12-21. - Definitions; applicability. 
(a)  As used in this article, the terms "itinerant merchant," "itinerant vendor" and "itinerant peddler" are synonymous and mean any person who shall not maintain an office or business establishment within an area of the city zoned for business uses under the provisions of the city zoning ordinance, wherein there are kept, used and maintained either office or business equipment or business supplies of a kind and type reasonably commensurate with the requirements of the business activity engaged in by such person or an inventory of such goods, wares, merchandise, services (including tools of trade or parts), products, photographs, newspapers, magazines, books, pamphlets, periodicals or other reading matter, equipment for the taking, printing and reproduction of photographs and related supplies, or any other item, product or thing offered by such person for sale, rent or lease to the public, and which are subject to rendition and assessment for ad valorem taxes by the tax assessor-collector. The terms "itinerant merchant," "itinerant vendor" and "itinerant peddler" also mean any person who does not maintain such business establishment or office or such inventory and who goes about calling upon the inhabitants of the city from door to door, at any house, place or building, or who communicates with the inhabitants thereof by means of the telephone from within or without the city, for the purpose of soliciting, selling, renting, leasing, taking orders for or offering to solicit, sell, rent, lease or take orders for any such goods, wares, merchandise, services, products or reading matter. 
(b)  It is the intention of this article that any such person who is in fact an itinerant merchant, vendor or peddler, as herein defined, shall apply for and be issued such license before engaging in any of the above described activities within the city, irrespective of the manner, method or means of communication employed by such person in contacting prospects, clientele, customers, ultimate users, purchasers, recipients, subscribers and consumers of the product, item, thing or service, which is the subject matter of the business activity and endeavor pursued by such person; but shall not apply to the resident citizens of the county who actually raise, grow, harvest and produce the items mentioned in section 12-23(b) on land situated within the county, or to persons residing outside the county who actually raise, grow, harvest and produce the items on land situated within the county; nor shall the provisions of this article apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under the authority of any ordinance or franchise heretofore promulgated and issued by the city, nor shall the provisions of this article apply to commercial dealers operating within the city under licenses granted by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-14; Ord. No. 441, §§ 2, 8, 7-8-1958; Ord. No. 633, §§ 1, 3, 1-8-1963; Ord. No. 666, § II(a), (c), (e), 8-13-1963) 
Sec. 12-22. - Purpose. 
    This article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of the city, and all of the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 10-15; Ord. No. 441, § 1, 7-8-1958) 
Sec. 12-23. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person acting as an itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, itinerant peddler or in any other similar capacity, to solicit, sell, rent, lease, take orders for, or to offer to solicit, to offer to sell, to offer to rent, to offer to lease or to offer to take orders for any such goods, wares, merchandise, products, photographs, services, newspapers, magazines, books, pamphlets, periodicals or other reading matter of whatever kind or character, by personal calls or contacts upon and with the inhabitants of the city, or by telephone communication emanating either from within or without the city, without first having applied for and obtained a license to do so from the city secretary, and without having such license upon his person when actually engaged in the business or activity for which the license is issued. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, except as exempted herein, for any person acting as an itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor or itinerant peddler to sell or offer to sell, or to take orders for any fruit, vegetable, produce, truck crop or any other food, poultry or dairy product or other merchandise for human consumption, whether in solid or liquid form, and whether in open or sealed containers, from any cart, car, truck, wagon or other vehicle upon the public streets, alleys and ways, or from any temporary stand, structure, shack, tent or other enclosure situated upon any public or private property within the city, or going about the city from house to house or from building to building for such purposes as set out in this article, without having first applied for and obtained a license to do so as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 10-16; Ord. No. 441, § 2, 7-8-1958; Ord. No. 633, § 1, 1-8-1963; Ord. No. 666, §§ I, II(b), 8-13-1963) 
Sec. 12-24. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license required by this article shall make written application to the city secretary at least seven days prior to the date on which such person intends to sell or solicit in the city, for a license to do so, which application shall show: 
(1)  Name and address of the company, if any. 
(2)  Full and complete description of the goods, wares and merchandise or other articles, which description shall give in detail the grade, make, character or property to be sold. 
(3)  Whether the applicant upon any sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(4)  The period of time the applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city. 
(5)  The full name and post office address of the applicant. 
(6)  The state, county, town or city in which the applicant permanently resides. 
(7)  The age, height, weight, complexion, color of hair, color of eyes and fingerprints of the applicant. 
(8)  If the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or sex crime, it shall be so stated in the application, giving the name of the offense, name of the court and date of each conviction and the time served under each conviction. 
(9)  Names and post office addresses of three persons as references to which the city secretary shall write, within two days of the date of filing of the application, with reference to the character and moral integrity of the applicant. 
(10)  Attached to the application there shall be a photographic likeness of the applicant. 
(11)  The state registration numbers of the vehicles to be used by the applicant and his driver's license number shall also be indicated on the application. 
(Code 1973, § 10-17; Ord. No. 441, § 3, 7-8-1958) 
Sec. 12-25. - Bond. 
    The application for the license required by this article shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00, signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, newspapers and other articles in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify all purchasers or customers for all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of the bond, at the delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on the bond, or to an agent or employee of the principal; provided, in case the applicant is engaging in such activity through one or more agents or employees, such persons shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum of $1,000.00 as above required, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all its agents or employees. 
(Code 1973, § 10-18; Ord. No. 441, § 4, 7-8-1958) 
Sec. 12-26. - Fees; term. 
    The license fee for an itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be as reflected in the city fee schedule; provided, however, when any person engages in any activity mentioned in section 12-23 through one or more agents or employees, such person shall in addition to the fee, pay a license fee as reflected in the city fee schedule for such agent or employee so engaged, all of which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of the licenses. 
(Code 1973, § 10-19; Ord. No. 441, § 6, 7-8-1958; Ord. No. 1503, § I, 10-1-1984) 
Sec. 12-27. - Denial for false statement. 
    Any false statement on the application shall cause the request for license to be denied by the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, § 10-20; Ord. No. 441, § 7, 7-8-1958) 
Sec. 12-28. - Personal; nontransferable; notice of time of operation; cancellation. 
    The license required by this article shall in all things be personal to the applicant and issued showing his name as well as the company he represents, and it shall not be transferable. The license may be canceled by the chief of police for good cause shown. Any time the licensee works in the city other than the period of time reported on the application for license, it shall be his duty to report that fact to the chief of police. It shall be the duty of each licensee to have in his possession at all times his license which shall be exhibited by him when requested. 
(Code 1973, § 10-21; Ord. No. 441, § 9, 7-8-1958) 
Secs. 12-29-12-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET AND SIDEWALK VENDORS 

Sec. 12-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Goods means any item offered for sale including, without limitation, wares, merchandise, services, food (including frozen and perishable food) and domestic or farm animals. 
    Perishable food item means both frozen and non-frozen items regardless of whether or how packaged. 
    Street vendor or sidewalk vendor means a person, acting on his own behalf or on behalf of an entity, engaging in sale of retail or wholesale goods on public owned right-of-way or on private property duly zoned for such enterprise. 
Sec. 12-41. - Enhanced penalties applicable. 
    This article is an exercise of the police power of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of city citizens, and violations of this article shall be subject to the enhanced penalties applicable to such regulations under state law. 
Sec. 12-42. - License required except for sales to dealers by commercial travelers and sales agents. 
    It is unlawful for any person acting as a street or sidewalk vendor retailing or wholesaling goods within the city, whether on public owned right-of-way or on private property, when properly zoned, without having first applied for and obtained a license to do so from the city secretary; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business. 
Sec. 12-43. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for licensure under this article shall be made in writing to the city secretary prior to set for or conduct of any sales. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full name and permanent mailing address. 
(2)  Complete description of goods, wares and merchandise or other article, to be sold including, when applicable, the grade, make, and character of the merchandise. 
(3)  Whether applicant upon sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(4)  The period of time applicant wishes to sell or solicit sales in the city, not to exceed 31 consecutive days. 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's current sales tax license issued by the state comptroller's office. 
(6)  A signed and dated statement from the property owner giving permission for use of his property for the proposed sale during the time specified in the application. 
(7)  Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or sex crime and, if so, details with regard to each such conviction. 
(8)  A passport size photograph of the applicant; and 
(9)  The number of the license to be issued (to be supplied by the city secretary). 
(b)  Any false statement on an application submitted under this article shall be grounds for denial of licensure. 
Sec. 12-44. - Fee. 
    The fee for licenses issued under this article shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 12-45. - Display of license. 
    It is the duty of each license holder to the license in his possession at the time items are being offered for sale. Licenses shall be prominently displayed, visible from the main street providing access to the sale, at all times during which sales are solicited or conducted. 
Sec. 12-46. - Licenses not transferrable; term of license; cancellation by police chief. 
    License issued under this article are personal to the applicant and, if applicable, the company he represents and are not transferable. Licenses shall expire 31 calendar days from the date of issue, and may be cancelled by the police chief at any time for good cause shown. 
Sec. 12-47. - Nonprofit organizations exemption and registration requirement. 
(a)  Local organization. Local nonprofit organizations based in the city or county shall be exempt from the license and fee requirements of this article but must pre-register with the city secretary's office prior to conducting any street or sidewalk sales. The exemption granted in this section is limit to sales on one weekend per month and such sales shall comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(b)  Non-local non-profit organizations. An exemption under this section for Texas based nonprofit organizations that are not based in the city or county must be first approved by the city council. Non-local non-profit organizations granted exemption under this section shall comply with all other requirements of this article. 
Sec. 12-48. - Zoning restrictions applicable. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize sale of goods in any area where such sale is forbidden by city zoning regulations. 
Sec. 12-49. - Perishable foods to be maintained in approved containers. 
    Perishable food items, both frozen and non-frozen, shall be maintained in containers and conditions acceptable by the county community affairs office. 
Secs. 12-50-12-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 12-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any individual, firm or corporation in the process of attaining either a license to operate or a city taxi driver permit. 
    Conduct a taxicab business means the use of one or more taxicabs within the city, by the owner thereof, for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the same driven by some other person, provided that this definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver by any person holding a license to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
    Driver means an individual who drives or operates a taxicab. 
    Holder means a person who is granted an annual operating permit to operate a taxicab service under the provisions of this article. 
    Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Operating permit means the permission granted by the city to operate a taxicab service inside the city for a period of one year, renewable under the provisions of this article. 
    Rate card means a card for display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare in force. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire and not operated on a fixed route, other than a limousine. 
    Taxicab business means a service consisting of the provisions and operation of motor vehicles for hire which carry passengers and are not operated on a fixed route, and does not include limousine services. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1; Ord. No. 253, § 1, 7-11-1946; Ord. No. 2222, § 1, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-61. - Vehicle inspection. 
(a)  Before being allowed to operate upon the streets of the city, each taxicab shall be inspected and approved annually by the chief of police or his representative. 
(b)  No taxicab shall be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the same is in safe condition and free from mechanical defects, and it must further meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Have a current valid state inspection sticker and be in compliance with the safety requirements of the state motor vehicle code as amended; 
(2)  Have a seat belt for each passenger; 
(3)  Have an operating heater and air conditioner; 
(4)  Have a fire extinguisher that is in good operating order; and 
(5)  Have a taxi-top light. 
(c)  The vehicle identification number and license number of each taxicab must match the numbers listed for that taxicab on the permit application. 
(d)  Insignia of taxicab must be the same as that indicated on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 2, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-62. - Condition of the vehicle. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept clean and in sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 3, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-63. - Designation of taxi. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall have painted on both sides the trade name of the organization under whose operating permit such taxicab is being operated, the taxicab unit number, and the business telephone number of the holder of the operating permit. Such letters and numbers shall be not less than three inches high with one-half inch stroke, painted on each taxicab with permanent, non-washable paint of a color sharply contrasting to the color of the taxicab so that the same will be readily apparent. 
(b)  No design shall be approved that, in the opinion of the city, conflicts with or imitates that of any vehicle already operating under an operating permit granted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 4, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-64. - Taximeter required. 
(a)  A person may not drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab unless the taxicab is equipped with an operational taximeter that displays an accuracy seal, certifying its accuracy in accordance with procedures determined by the chief of police. 
(b)  For purposes of determining a fare for taxicab service, a person may not use a device other than a taximeter for measuring distance or time. 
(c)  Except as provided by section 12-65(e), a person may not drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab unless an accurate taximeter is used to determine the fare to be charged. 
(d)  When using a taximeter to compute a fare, a driver shall place the taximeter in the revenue-earning position when a passenger enters a taxicab, or at the pre-arranged time, if any, after the customer is informed of the taxicab's presence. 
(e)  When using a taximeter to compute a fare, a driver shall call the attention of passengers to the amount registered on the taximeter before resetting the taximeter. The taximeter may not be reset to the "vacant" position until after the fare is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 5, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-65. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
(a)  This section establishes maximum fares that the owner or operator of a taxicab can charge. Rates are annually set by city council and are subject to change. 
(b)  For four or fewer passengers, the owner or operator of a taxicab may charge a pickup fee of not to exceed $5.00. For five or more passengers, the owner or operator of a taxicab may charge $1.00 for each additional passenger. 
(c)  For trips wholly within the city, the fare shall be a maximum of $2.00 per mile, regardless of the number of passengers. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge no more than $0.50 per one-fourth of a mile. 
(d)  For trips that originate in the city, the fare shall be a maximum of $2.00 per mile, regardless of the number of passengers. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge no more than $0.50 per one-fourth of a mile. 
(e)  A taximeter is not necessary to determine the maximum fare for a trip under a contract with a governmental agency, a nonprofit organization, or as otherwise reasonably necessary to provide a public service. 
(f)  The maximum fare for wait time will be $15.00 for each hour the driver must wait for a passenger. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge a maximum of $0.25 per minute of wait time. 
(g)  A cab driver may charge a cleaning fee if a passenger soils a taxicab to the extent that the taxicab must be pulled from service for cleaning. The cleaning fee shall not exceed $250.00. 
(h)  Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare established by this section displayed in a place in view of all passengers. The rate card shall instruct customers to call the city police department at (361)358-8100 or any successor non-emergency telephone number if they have questions or concerns about the rates. 
(i)  In January of each year, the chief of police shall review the rates of fare to determine whether the fares need to be reconsidered. The chief of police shall base such the determination on the consumer price index, the costs of gasoline, and other reasonable costs of operating a taxicab service. The chief of police shall report his findings each year to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 6, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-66. - Attempt to defraud passenger. 
    A person who operates a taxicab commits an offense if the person intentionally extends the distance or time for a trip beyond the distance and time necessary for the trip for the purpose of increasing the fare for the trip. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 7, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-67. - Solicitation of business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab or for any other person acting for the driver to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such taxicab by word or sign while driving any such taxicab over, through, or on any public street or public place of the city. Drivers may solicit business when the taxicab is legally parked. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 8, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-68. - Additional passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of the additional passenger. 
(b)  No driver shall permit more people to occupy a taxicab than the number of seatbelts installed and operational in that taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 9, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-69. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
    No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless: 
(1)  The taxicab is previously engaged; 
(2)  The person is disorderly; 
(3)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; 
(4)  The driver is in fear of his personal safety; or 
(5)  The driver reasonably believes, based on a person's behavior, that transporting the person would damage the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 10, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-70. - Service. 
    The permit holder shall determine the operating hours for cab service and shall provide information of operating hours to the chief of police. All calls for services inside the city during these hours shall be answered as soon as reasonably possible. If the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the holder shall notify the prospective passenger how long it will be before the call can be answered and the reason for the delay. Any holder who refuses to accept a call anywhere in the city during these hours when the holder has available cabs, or who fails or refuses to provide high quality service, shall be deemed to violate this article and the violation shall be grounds for revocation of the operating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 11, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-71. - Manifest. 
    Every driver of a vehicle operated pursuant to this article shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each tap and the amount of fare. All completed manifests shall be returned to the designated agent of the holder of an operating permit at the conclusion of each tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the holder. The holder shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and the manifests shall be available to the city at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 12, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-72. - Holder's records and reports. 
    Every operating permit holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and any other operating information required by the city. Every holder shall maintain the records containing this information and other data required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 13, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-73. - Operating permit. 
    No person shall engage, directly or indirectly, in the taxicab business upon the city streets without having first obtained an operating permit from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 14, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-74. - Permit application. 
(a)  An application for an operating permit required in section 12-73 shall be filed with the city secretary's office upon forms provided by the city. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the information in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be provided for each partner. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and place of residence of all of the officers of the corporation, a duly certified copy of its charter and bylaws, the amount of capital stock, the character and value of its assets, its liabilities and the security therefor and, if a corporation, a duly certified copy of its certificate of authority to transact business in the state. 
(4)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(5)  Any facts the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of an operating permit. 
(6)  The name, usual trade description, seating capacity, equipment, motor number, state license number, rated horsepower and factory number of each motor vehicle to be operated or controlled by applicant, and the year in which each automobile was manufactured. 
(7)  The location of any stand at which the taxicabs will remain when not in actual service. 
(8)  The name and address of the person who will be in active charge and control of the taxicab business. 
(9)  The proposed fares. 
(10)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the applicant. 
(b)  No operating permit required under this article shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee as provided in the city fee schedule for each year for each vehicle operated under an operating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 15, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-75. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a certificate under this article, a time and place shall be set for a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom operating permits have been previously issued. Due notice shall also be given to the general public by publication of the notice, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  Any interested person may file with the city council a statement in support of or opposition to the issuance of an operating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 16, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-76. - Issuance. 
    If the city council, after the public hearing required by section 12-75, finds that further taxicab service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to provide the public transportation and to conform to this article, the city council shall issue an operating permit stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 17, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-77. - Insurance required. 
    Each holder of an operating permit for the operation of a taxicab business shall at all times during the term of the operating permit maintain a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state on each and every motor vehicle operated under the terms of the operating permit in the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; and in the amount of $100,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The policy shall list the city as an additional insured. The policies shall be approved by the city attorney and filed with the city secretary. The policies of insurance shall not be cancelled or surrendered except after ten days' written notice to the city secretary. Failure of the operating permit holder to procure and file the policies of insurance as required by the section or failure to keep the policies in force shall immediately forfeit and make the operating permit null and void, and all rights there under shall at once cease. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 18, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-78. - Transferability. 
    No operating permit required under this article may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 19, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-79. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Upon complaint alleging violation of any of the provisions of this article filed by any person with the chief of police, or upon the person's motion, the chief of police, after five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the owner or operators of the taxicab service against whom complaint is made, shall hear evidence with reference to such complaint, and after such hearing, the chief of police may revoke or suspend the operating permit of such holder with good cause shown. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of an operating permit will include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of the operating permit holder to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit as set forth in this article; 
(2)  Obtaining an operating permit by providing false information; 
(3)  Discontinuing operations for more than ten days; 
(4)  Violating any ordinance of the city, the laws of the United States or of the state, the violation of which adversely affects the ability of holder to offer public transportation; or 
(5)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(c)  The holder shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the city manager within ten business days of the notice of suspension or revocation. Such appeal will be submitted by a letter addressed to the city manager stating that an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is desired to the city manager. Upon receiving such notice of appeal, the city manager, as soon as practical thereafter, shall conduct a hearing at which the appealing party will be given an opportunity to present evidence and make arguments in the person's behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section. The city manager shall make its ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The city manager will affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(e)  If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the chief of police in the time and manner provided in this article, the ruling of the chief of police shall be final. 
(f)  Any person who continues to operate a taxicab under a permit that has been suspended or revoked for any reason while the suspension or revocation is in effect shall be considered guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be assessed a penalty accordingly. Every day's violation shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 20, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-80. - Driver's permit. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the city streets and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, unless the driver of the taxicab shall have in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 20, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-81. - Driver's permit application. 
(a)  The holder of an operating permit shall file with the city secretary's office an application for a taxicab driver's permit for each driver employed by the holder. On the application the holder shall certify that there is currently in effect an insurance policy covering the driver while the driver is engaged in providing taxi service. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the holder to immediately notify the city secretary's office if the insurance required by subsection (a) of this section is no longer in effect for a driver holding a driver's permit and employed by the holder. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 21, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-82. - Driver's permit issuance; duration. 
(a)  Upon submission of the application for a taxicab driver's permit, a permit shall be issued which shall bear the name, address, signature and photograph of the driver. 
(b)  The driver's permit shall be in effect for one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 22, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-83. - Driver's permit display. 
    Every driver operating pursuant to this article shall post the driver's permit in full view of all passengers while the driver is operating a taxicab. The permit shall be in sufficiently large type that a person with normal eyesight can read the permit from the back seat of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 23, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-84. - Failure to comply with laws. 
    Every driver receiving a driver's permit under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the suspension or revocation of the permit. The police chief shall initiate the revocation or suspension. No permit shall be suspended or revoked unless notice and an opportunity to be heard have been provided the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 24, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-85. - Suspension and revocation of driver's permit. 
(a)  Upon complaint alleging violation of any of the provisions of this article filed by any person with the chief of police, or upon the person's motion, the chief of police, after five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the driver and to the owner or operators of the taxicab service against whom complaint is made, shall hear evidence with reference to such complaint, and after such hearing the chief of police may revoke or suspend the driver's permit of such driver with good cause shown. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of a driver's permit will include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of the driver's permit holder to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit as set forth in this article; 
(2)  Obtaining a driver's permit by providing false information; 
(3)  Violating any ordinance of the city, the laws of the United States or of the state, the violation of which adversely affects the ability of the holder to offer public transportation; or 
(4)  Violation of any part of this section. 
(c)  The holder shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the city manager within ten business days of the notice of suspension or revocation. Such appeal will be submitted by a letter addressed to the city manager stating that an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is desired to the city manager. Upon receiving such notice of appeal, the city manager, as soon as practical thereafter, shall conduct a hearing at which the appealing party will be given an opportunity to present evidence and make argument in the person's behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section. The city manager shall make its ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The city manager will affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(e)  If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the chief of police in the time and manner as provided in this article, the ruling of the chief of police shall be final. 
(f)  Any person who continues to drive a taxicab under a driver's permit that has been suspended or revoked for any reason while the suspension or revocation is in effect shall be considered guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be assessed a penalty accordingly. Every day's violation shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 25, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-86. - Driver's conduct. 
(a)  While on duty, a driver shall: 
(1)  Act in a professional and courteous manner; and 
(2)  Maintain a well-groomed appearance. 
(b)  While on duty, a driver may not: 
(1)  Consume an alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle, and may not drive a vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle; 
(2)  Sell or otherwise provide an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance to a passenger in a ground transportation service vehicle; 
(3)  Monitor the communication frequency of a ground transportation service other than the driver's own frequency or respond to a service call assigned to another driver; or 
(4)  Possess communication equipment, including scanners, capable of receiving the frequency of a service other than the driver's own. 
(c)  If a person is convicted of an offense prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section, the conviction results in the automatic revocation, without further notice, of all chauffeur's permits held by the person. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 26, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-87. - Soliciting for other business prohibited. 
    A driver may not solicit business for a hotel, motel, or similar business or attempt to divert patronage from one lodging business to another. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 27, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-88. - Unlawful acts. 
    A driver may not knowingly permit an unlawful act to be conducted in the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 28, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-89. - Distracting driver. 
(a)  A person may not distract or attempt to distract the driver of a taxicab by physical contact or disorderly behavior while the driver is operating the taxicab. 
(b)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 29, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-90. - Training required. 
(a)  Before applying for a driver's permit, each applicant must attend and complete training on recognizing the symptoms of alcohol poisoning and what to do when they observe someone with the symptoms. 
(b)  Before applying for a driver's permit, each applicant must attend hospitality training. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 30, 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-90.1. - Investigation; license issuance or denial. 
(a)  The city secretary or a duly authorized representative shall conduct an investigation into the background of all applicants for a taxicab license. The investigation shall include making a permanent record of the identity of all applicants, and shall not exceed 15 working days to conduct. As authorized by state law, a license issued pursuant to this article must be denied, suspended or revoked if the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty or no contest to, any of the following offenses within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of an application: 
(1)  Unauthorized use of motor vehicle; 
(2)  Violation of state or federal laws regulating firearms; 
(3)  Violence to any person (except for conduct classified as a Class C misdemeanor); 
(4)  Indecency with a child; rape, sexual abuse, sexual assault; 
(5)  Sale or use of illegal drugs; or 
(6)  Driving while under the influence (drugs or alcohol); 
(7)  The application contains a false statement by the applicant. 
(b)  The city secretary shall deny issuance of a license of the application or investigation shows the applicant has had a taxicab business license revoked within the two years preceding the date of application. 
(c)  Criminal background check fee will consist of a $5.00 payment to the City of Beeville. 
(Ord. No. 2303, § 31, 8-23-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2303, § 31, adopted Aug. 23, 2016, enacted new provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 12-90.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 12-91. - Operation without licenses prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a taxicab on any of the streets of the city without the owner and driver thereof having licenses to so operate as is required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2; Ord. No. 327, § 1, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-92. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity or license required; application; investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Before the city secretary shall issue an operator's license under the provisions of this article, a certificate or permit declaring that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of such license shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(b)  Every person who may desire a license as owner to operate a taxicab shall file with the city secretary a written application signed by such applicant and stating: 
(1)  His name and place of residence, sex, age, customary occupation, the character and value of the assets of his taxicab business and whether any other persons own any interest in the business and what persons own any title or interest in any vehicle for which such license is requested. 
(2)  The name, usual trade description, equipment, rated horsepower and factory number of such vehicle and, as nearly as practicable, the year in which the automobile was manufactured or first used. 
(3)  The stand or stands at which the automobile will remain while not in actual service. 
(4)  The kind of written insurance which the applicant desires to furnish the city. 
(5)  The rated seating capacity of such automobile. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and place of residence of the officers of such corporation; the amount of its capital stock and the amount thereof fully paid up; the character and value of its assets, its liabilities and the security therefor, and when required by the city council, such corporation shall file as an addition to its application a duly certified copy of its charter and bylaws, and if it be a foreign corporation, a duly certified copy of its permit to do business in the state. 
(c)  Whenever application for a certificate required by this article is made to the city secretary under the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the city secretary to submit such application to the city council at its next regular meeting and such application shall be considered an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as well as an application for a license to operate such vehicles. The city council shall make or cause to be made investigations, including any hearing deemed desirable as to any applications for such certificates, and shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicabs and whether the applicant is fit to conduct such business and may investigate the fitness of the officers and stockholders of any corporation making such application, and in determining whether a certificate should be issued, the city council shall give weight and due regard to, among other things: 
(1)  Probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant; 
(2)  The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant and its organization and personnel; 
(3)  The character of vehicles; 
(4)  The character and location of depots and terminals proposed to be used; and 
(5)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(d)  If the city council finds that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of a greater or lesser number of vehicles than that for which the certificate has been applied for, and that the applicant or owner is fit to conduct the business, and that the other requirements of this article have been complied with, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. If it finds that public convenience and necessity do not require the operation of any such vehicles or that the applicant is not fit to conduct such business, it shall forthwith refuse such application and no certificate or license shall be issued to such applicant. If it shall be determined that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such vehicles, and that the applicant is fit to conduct such business, the applicant shall within 60 days thereafter furnish to the city council or such person as it may designate, information as to the particular vehicles for which certificates are granted, such information to include the make, the state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the motor power thereof, the names and addresses of the persons from whom the vehicles were purchased and any other information required by the city council. If the city council finds that the applicant is the owner of such vehicles and the same are fit and safe for the transportation of passengers and conform to the requirements of this article and other ordinances of the city applicable thereto, and to such other requirements as the city council may make under the authority of this article, it shall issue or cause to be issued to the applicant the certificate required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3; Ord. No. 327, §§ 3(f), 4(b), (c), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-93. - Transfer; substitution of vehicles. 
    The certificate required by this article shall not be transferable without the consent and approval of the city council, and, after application, notice and hearing, as provided on original application; but the person to whom the certificate is issued may by appropriate endorsement made thereon, under the direction of the city council, substitute another vehicle in the place of that for which the certificate was granted. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4; Ord. No. 327, § 4(d), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-94. - License fee. 
(a)  At the time of issuance of a license to an owner of a taxicab, the owner shall pay to the city secretary the sum provided in the city fee schedule for each taxicab to be operated in the city, for a 12-month period ending December 31, provided, if such license is granted for less than the full year, the owner shall pay to the city an amount prorated according to the number of months for which the license is issued. Each owner shall file with the city secretary a statement in writing under oath signed by him showing the make, model, motor number and state license number and the city cab number of each taxicab. If at any time the holder of a taxicab license shall desire to use any additional vehicles under the license, he may do so only after he has made application to the city council for a license to operate such additional vehicles and had his application for such license granted, and he shall furnish to the city secretary the same information regarding such additional vehicles as is required in this section regarding those covered by the original license, and shall pay to the city secretary the fee as provided by this section. 
(b)  The annual fee provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be due and payable to the city no later than January 31 for the year for which the license is taken out, it being the intention to grant to such licensees a one-month grace period in the payment of such annual fee. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5; Ord. No. 327, § 2(c), 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 425, § I, 3-25-1958) 
Sec. 12-95. - License issuance. 
    Upon presentation of the certificate within 30 days of its date to the city secretary, the city shall issue licenses for the operation of such vehicles as provided in this article after the payment of all fees and compliance with other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6; Ord. No. 327, § 4(f), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-96. - Determination of number of vehicles. 
    The number of vehicles for hire authorized to operate in the city and for which certificates of public convenience and necessity may be issued under the terms of this article shall be at any time determined by the city council upon proper hearing. 
(Code 1973, § 16-7; Ord. No. 327, § 4(e), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-97. - Insurance or bond. 
(a)  Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay the license fee required by law and furnish to the city, for each such vehicle to be licensed, evidence of the issuance of an insurance policy, or a good and sufficient surety bond, approved by the city attorney as to form, and approved by the city council as to sufficiency, and in the amount hereinafter required, and conditioned that the insurance company or bond surety, shall well and truly pay to the mayor of the city, and to his successors in office, for the benefit of any persons injured by reason of the negligent operation of such vehicle, any amounts which may be awarded by the final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction against the owner or operator, not exceeding however, for any injury to any person while traveling in a vehicle not exceeding seven passenger capacity, the amount required by state law. 
(b)  The insurance policy or surety bond shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Such insurance policy or surety bond shall be executed by a solvent insurance company or surety company. An action shall survive in case of the death of the person injured for the benefit of the legal beneficiaries of such person. Such insurance policy or surety bond shall not be exhausted by the first recovery, but shall be subject to successive recoveries. Such insurance shall not be affected by any alterations for the route or termini of such vehicle during the time the policy continues in effect. The insurance policy, or surety bond, shall further provide and operate to the benefit of any person suffering damage to his property through the negligent operation of such vehicle in a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. 
(d)  No insurance company or surety on a surety bond shall cancel any policy or surety bond, unless such insurance company or surety has satisfactorily settled all claims arising under the policy or bond. 
(e)  The city shall not be deemed to have assumed any pecuniary responsibility for the solvency of any insurance company or surety company, or in any manner to have become liable for any sum on account of any such claim, or on account of any act or omission of any officers of the city in connection with any matter relating to such vehicle, nor shall the lawful liability of the owner or operator be in any manner either limited or enlarged, by anything in connection with this article or such insurance policy or bond, but persons having any cause of action secured thereby, shall be authorized to sue upon such insurance policy or surety bond without impleading the city. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8; Ord. No. 327, § 5, 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 488, § 1, 5-12-1959) 
Sec. 12-98. - Cessation of operation. 
(a)  The validity and existence of any license, permit or franchise granted by the city council for the operation of any taxicabs or other vehicles for hire in the city shall be contingent upon the continuous operation under the terms of the license, permit or franchise without interruption or cessation for any period of more than 120 consecutive days, it being the intention hereof that if after the granting of any such license, permit or franchise, service under such license, permit or franchise shall lapse or not be provided by the holder of the license, permit or franchise for 120 consecutive days, the license, permit or franchise shall automatically be cancelled and become null and void and of no force and effect for all purposes. 
(b)  If, after cessation or other interruption of operation under such a license, permit or franchise granted hereunder, the operator thereof resumes providing taxicab or vehicles-for-hire service, such resumption of service must be general in all respects and in good faith, it being the intention hereof that no token or bad faith resumption of service shall toll the running of such 120-day period of suspension of service before automatic cancellation of the license, permit or franchise. The city council, from the evidence it may have before it, shall have full power and authority to determine the question of whether any such resumption of service is in good faith or is provided merely for the purpose of tolling the 120-day period. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9; Ord. No. 327, § 4(f), 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 362, § 1, 9-13-1955) 
Sec. 12-99. - Gross receipts tax. 
    Each owner of a taxicab business holding a license shall make and file an affidavit on the tenth day of each month stating under oath the gross receipts received during the preceding month from the operation of such taxicabs. On or before December 31 next following the date of issuance of each license, all such affidavits will be reviewed and an adjustment will be made between the city and the owner of such taxicabs so that such owner shall pay to the city a total sum, exclusive of the license fee required by section 12-94, equal to one percent of the gross receipts from the operation of his taxicabs in the city, for the period for which a permit was granted. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10; Ord. No. 327, § 2(b), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-100. - Chauffeur's license required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city unless such person operating such taxicab shall first obtain a taxicab chauffeur's license issued by the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11; Ord. No. 327, § 6, 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 624, § II, 10-23-1962) 
Sec. 12-101. - Application. 
    It shall be the duty of each driver of a taxicab to apply to the chief of police for a taxicab chauffeur's license upon forms to be furnished giving the name, age, present address, address and place of employment during the past two years, with the reasons for leaving, whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony, or if he has a police record. Such applicant shall likewise attach to his application for a taxicab chauffeur's license affidavits from two reputable citizens attesting to the character of the applicant. He shall also attach to such application a report to his physical condition based upon a complete physical examination made by a licensed physician within 30 days of the date of filing such application, and such report shall contain a statement as to the applicant's visual acuity. Such report must be signed by a licensed physician practicing within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12; Ord. No. 327, § 6(a), 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 624, § II, 10-23-1962) 
Sec. 12-102. - Issuance, term, transferability; denial, appeal. 
(a)  After the application for a taxicab chauffeur's license has been made in accordance with this article, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to determine whether a taxicab chauffeur's license shall be issued to such applicant, which license, if issued, shall run for a period of two years from date of issuance. The license, when issued, shall not be transferable; however, it shall be lawful for the holder of such license to use the same license should he change employment from one operator or owner of taxicabs to another. 
(b)  In the event the chief of police determines that no such license should be issued to such applicant, written notice of such denial by certified U.S. mail shall be given to the applicant who shall have the right of appeal of such denial to the city council by giving written notice of such appeal to the city secretary within 30 days of his receipt of such written denial, which appeal shall be heard by the city council at a regular meeting, within 30 days from receipt of notice of such appeal. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13; Ord. No. 327, § 6(c), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-103. - Fingerprints, photographs. 
    No taxicab chauffeur's license shall be issued to any driver of any taxicab until the police department shall have taken fingerprints and been provided with two photographs of the applicant for such license. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14; Ord. No. 327, § 6(b), 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 624, § II, 10-23-1962) 
Sec. 12-104. - Hiring unlicensed driver; filing drivers' names. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of a taxicab to employ a driver who has not been licensed as a taxicab chauffeur under the provisions of this article. The names of all drivers shall be filed with the city secretary by the owner or operator. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15; Ord. No. 327, § 6(e), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-105. - Display of license and photograph. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of a taxicab to have his license, together with his photograph, the size to be prescribed by the city council affixed and displayed in the driving compartment of the taxicab. 
(Code 1973, § 16-16; Ord. No. 327, § 6(d), 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-106. - Vehicle lettering. 
    Each owner or operator of a taxicab shall have plainly printed on each such vehicle operated by him a sign giving the name, trade name or firm name under which he operates such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17; Ord. No. 327, § 7, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-107. - Vehicle air conditioning and radios. 
    All taxicabs used for hire shall be equipped with operable air conditioning and two-way radios. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18; Ord. No. 327, § 7, 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 827, § 1, 12-23-1966) 
Sec. 12-108. - Ownership information. 
    Each taxicab operator shall file with the city secretary an affidavit disclosing the names and addresses of all owners or persons interested in the business being operated by him, such initial affidavit to be filed when license is granted and an affidavit to be filed immediately upon any change in the ownership of the business. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19; Ord. No. 327, § 8, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-109. - Transporting persons for immoral or unlawful purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or driver to transport or offer to transport or to aid or assist in transporting, directly or indirectly, any person in, on, over or through the streets, alleys or public highways of the city by means of taxicabs for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, or for any other unlawful or immoral purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 16-20; Ord. No. 327, § 10, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-110. - Vehicle inspection. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning a taxicab to have such vehicle inspected every 60 days by the parties to be designated by the city council to determine if such vehicle is in good mechanical condition and safe for use as a taxicab. If such vehicle is found to be in good mechanical condition and safe for use as a taxicab, a certificate of inspection will be issued as evidence thereof. No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab without the certificate of inspection; and further, such certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times in the taxicab for which the certificate of inspection was issued and a copy of same shall be delivered to the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, § 16-21; Ord. No. 327, § 12, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-111. - Passenger fares; meters; schedule. 
(a)  Each service automobile, taxicab and other motor vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire within and from the corporate limits of the city, other than busses operated upon regular and fixed schedules, shall be equipped with a mileage and rate meter of a standard and uniform make, manufacture and model approved by the city manager, which meter shall be installed on the right side of the dashboard or at such other place in the vehicle as may be approved by the city manager and shall be clearly visible to the passengers. The meter shall be maintained at all times in good repair, capable of displaying the correct mileage of and charge from each point of departure, throughout and to the termination of each trip. 
(b)  The following schedule of rates shall apply and be charged for transportation of persons and property in such vehicles effective immediately: 
(1)  For the first one-fourth mile (1,320 feet) or fraction thereof, for not more than two persons, the charge shall be $1.25. For each additional one-fourth mile or fraction thereof there shall be an additional charge of $0.25. For more than two persons in one cab, there shall be an additional charge of $0.12. If the trip exceeds ten miles there shall be charged an additional 20 percent of the total metered trip fare. 
(2)  There shall be charged a waiting time fee of $4.80 per hour. The waiting time period to begin when the speed of the taxicab drops below 12 miles per hour thus engaging the waiting time clock. 
(Code 1973, § 16-22; Ord. No. 327, § 13, 5-11-1953; Ord. No. 947, § 1, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 5-22-1973; Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 8-13-1974; Ord. No. 1383, § I, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 12-112. - Violation; suspension of license of person charged. 
    Any licensed taxicab owner or driver who is charged with the violation of any city ordinance or state law may, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court, have his license suspended, provided that such suspended owner or driver shall have the right to appeal from the suspension to the city council at its next regular meeting, and the action of the city council upon the suspension shall in all things be final. 
(Code 1973, § 16-23; Ord. No. 327, § 11, 5-11-1953) 
Sec. 12-113. - Punishment; injunction. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. Each act constituting a violation and each failure or refusal to comply with any provision of this article shall be a separate offense and shall be punished as such. Each charge made and each trip made upon the streets of the city answering a call or carrying a passenger by any person who does not have a written license in full force and effect at the time shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city may file in the proper court a suit for injunction and may enjoin the use of the streets of the city by any person operating a taxicab when such person at such time does not have a written license in full force and effect procured under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-24; Ord. No. 327, § 17, 5-11-1953) 
Secs. 12-114-12-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of home rule municipalities to regulate the location and conduct of theaters, movie theaters, bowling alleys and other places of public amusement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074; sports, amusements and entertainment generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2001.001 et seq. 

Sec. 12-140. - Requirement. 
    No person shall operate amusement devices defined in this article within the city without first obtaining a permit and paying the required permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 1-28-2003; Ord. No. 2184-B, § 1, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 12-141. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement redemption machine means a skill or pleasure coin-operated machine that is designed, made, and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of chance or a combination of skill and chance affords the user, in addition to any right of replay, an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of a value redeemable for those items. 
    Coin-operated machine means and includes a machine or devise operated by the payment or insertion of paper currency or any other consideration. 
    Machine placed in the establishment means a machine physically located in the establishment regardless of whether operational. 
    Representation of value means and includes cash paid under authority of sweepstakes contests as provided in V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 43, or a gift certificate of gift card that is presented to a merchant in exchange for merchandise. 
(b)  Excluded machines. An amusement redemption machine does not include: 
(1)  A machine that awards the user non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties solely and directly from the machine, including claw, crane, or similar machines; nor 
(2)  A machine from which the opportunity to receive non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, varies depending upon the user's ability to throw, roll, flip, toss, hit, or drop a ball or other physical object into the machine or a part thereof, including basketball, skeeball, golf, bowling, pusher, or similar machines. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2000, § 2, 1-28-2003; Ord. No. 2004, § 1, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2184-B, §§ 2, 3, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 12-142. - Local permit fee. 
(a)  Fee. An owner, operator, or lessee of premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to others shall be required to secure a permit by paying to the city an annual amusement redemption machine premises permit fee for each machine registered with the county tax assessor/collector's department in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Expiration and renewal. Permits issued under this article shall automatically expire on the last working day of February of the year next following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such permit shall also automatically expire if the holder thereof sells, transfers equity, or otherwise disposes of such devises. 
(c)  Refunds and proration. The city shall not refund any portion of an amusement redemption machine premises permit fee after the permit is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the city except those businesses that begin operation during the middle of the operating year. 
(d)  Machines placed in the establishment after annual permit is obtained. The total fee applicable for the number of machines located on premises with the addition of new machines after the annual permit is obtained or renewed shall be the total fee due upon addition of added machines in one establishment and thereafter the fee due on the last working day of February of the year. Fees will not be prorated. 
(e)  Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a permit, and within 30 days thereafter, the person making the device available to others shall obtain a renewal thereof in the same manner as an original permit if he wishes to continue operating premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to others. Failure to pay this fee within 30 days will require such person to pay an additional late fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(f)  Sealing. The city shall have the authority to seal any coin-operated machine located at an establishment for which an amusement redemption machine premises permit fee has not been secured. A fee as provided in the city fee schedule will be charged for the release of any machine sealed for non-payment of the amusement redemption machine premises permit fee and assessed late penalties. 
(g)  Posting of permit. The permit shall be conspicuously posted inside the building at the address registered with the county tax assessor/collector's office. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. The city council may revoke any permit to maintain and operate premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to others when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this article or any applicable state statute. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the premises are being maintained and operated in full compliance with law and this article; provided, however, that an owner, operator, or lessee of premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to others, who is found to be in violation of this article based on a finding that the number of amusement redemption machines exceeds the number for which the premises is permitted, shall be required to pay an amount equal to twice the difference of the original permit fee and the permit fee required for the number of machines actually on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2000, § 3, 1-28-2003; Ord. No. 2004, § 2, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2184-B, § 3, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 12-143. - Occupation tax. 
    Every owner or operator who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, or who permits to be exhibited in the corporate limits of this city any coin-operated machine which is not exempt from payment by under state law shall pay an annual occupation tax for each machine. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 2, 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 12-144. - Amount of tax. 
(a)  For each coin-operated machine, the tax shall be $15.00, one-fourth of the amount imposed by state statutes per applicable coin-operated machine, and which, under the statutes of the state, may be imposed by the city. Such tax shall be due and payable annually to the city's tax assessor-collector, or duly designated party, on the first regular day of business following January 1 of each year. 
(b)  Prorated amounts based on the $15.00 tax herewith imposed shall be applied and collected between the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and January 2000. Upon payment of the tax required by this section, the tax assessor-collector or duly designated person shall issue a receipt showing payment of the tax levy for the coming year which receipt shall be affixed to the duly permitted coin-operated machine. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 3, 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 12-145. - Untaxed machines prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or exhibit, within this city, any coin-operated machine subject to the provision of this article without having attached thereto a valid occupational tax receipt showing payment of the tax for the current year. 
(b)  The city police chief, or a duly appointed representative of the city police chief, acting under the request of the tax assessor-collector or duly designated party, shall have the power to seal any coin-operated machine on which the city occupational tax has not been paid. The city police chief, or a duly appointed representative of the city police chief, is authorized to release any machine so sealed upon payment to the tax assessor-collector of all occupational taxes due and payment of a fee as provided in the city fee schedule for each machine so sealed. Whosoever shall break the seal affixed for nonpayment of the occupational tax hereby levied by this article, or whosoever removed a sealed machine from its location when the seal was affixed, shall be deemed in violation of this article and upon conviction shall be assessed a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 4, 11-9-1999) 
Secs. 12-146-12-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITATION OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax, suppress or otherwise regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; cancellation of certain home solicited consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code § 601.001 et seq.; certain peddlers regarded as retailers for purposes of sales and use taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.024. 

Sec. 12-174. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable contribution is hereby defined pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.007(c) as being "a contribution to an organization defined as charitable by the standards of the United States Internal Revenue Service." 
(Ord. No. 2082, § 5, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-175. - Solicitation in right-of-way prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person other than those specified in sections 12-176 and 12-177 to stand in the right-of-way within the city to solicit a charitable contribution from any occupant of a vehicle without first having obtained the necessary and, hereto established, permit and displaying the day identification tag. 
(Ord. No. 2082, § 4, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-176. - Registration of solicitors. 
(a)  Employees or agents of the city shall, before commencing solicitations of contributions on all local streets and highways, register and file an application with the office of the city secretary, ten days or more before conducting the solicitations. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The date or dates and times when the solicitations will take place. 
(2)  The purpose for the solicitations. 
(3)  Each location at which solicitations are to occur. 
(4)  The number of solicitors to be involved in solicitations at each location. 
(5)  Solicitors under this section shall wear a uniform or identification clearly indicating their association with the city. 
(b)  There shall be no fee nor other requirements for these employees or agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2082, § 2, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-177. - Regulations for nonprofit solicitors. 
(a)  All other nonprofit organizations that desire to conduct solicitations of charitable contributions as pedestrians upon city streets or highways must comply with all of the following regulations: 
(1)  Register with the office of the city secretary ten days or more before conducting such solicitations. 
(2)  File an application indicating the same requirements established for employees or agents of the city as per section 12-176 and, in addition, provide a copy of the formal documentation from the internal revenue service acknowledging their organization as a nonprofit organization in the state. 
(3)  Furnish to the city proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 to cover the cost of damages that may arise from the solicitation. The insurance provided must also provide coverage against claims against the applicant and claims against the city arising from their permitted solicitation. 
(4)  Pay a fee per day as provided in the city fee schedule during the time they propose to solicit on the streets and highways of the city through the city secretary to cover up to ten solicitors acting on behalf of the qualified organization. No more than ten solicitors for a particular organization will be permitted in a single day within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Upon filing the required information and fee, the city secretary shall issue a day permit to the applying nonprofit organization and provide personal tags to be worn by the solicitors during solicitation showing the month and day permitted which shall be conspicuous to law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 2082, § 3, 9-12-2006) 
Chapter 14 - COURTS AND JAILS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 21.001 et seq.; municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.002 et seq.; justice and municipal courts, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.001 et seq.; code of judicial conduct and candidates for judicial office, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 34.001 et seq.; judicial personnel and officials, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; court administration generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 71.001 et seq.; municipal court fees and costs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 101.161; municipal and county authority relating to jails, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Secs. 14-19-14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COURT COSTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-40-14-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND 

Sec. 14-67. - Established. 
    A municipal court technology fund is hereby established pursuant to the authority given to the city council by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-68. - Amount payable upon conviction of misdemeanor. 
    Defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a municipal technology fee as provided in the city fee schedule as a cost of court. The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the city who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(Ord. No. 2030, § 2, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-69. - Disposition of funds; administration. 
    The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or maintaining technology enhancements for the municipal court of the city. "Technology enhancements" shall include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172(d). The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. The purpose of the use of any funds remaining in the fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this article and for that purpose this article remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2030, §§ 3, 7, 7-13-2004) 
Secs. 14-70-14-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND 

Sec. 14-97. - Established. 
    The city has created and established a municipal court building security fund pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(Ord. No. 2031, § 1, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-98. - Fee assessed; collection. 
(a)  The municipal court shall assess a municipal court building security fee in the amount provided by the city fee schedule against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if: 
(1)  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(b)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund. 
Sec. 14-99. - Disposition of funds; administration. 
    The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices or services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. "Security devices or services" shall include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d). 
(Ord. No. 2031, § 1, 7-13-2004) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq.; statewide mutual aid system, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.111; disaster mitigation, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.121 et seq.; citizen duties and claims of compensation resulting from disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.151 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Fees for emergency medical services. 
    Fees for emergency medical services shall be as established by the city council from time to time as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1792, § I, 10-25-1994) 
Secs. 16-2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 16-21. - Director; coordinator. 
(a)  The city has established the office of city-county emergency management director, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. The city and the county each contribute one-half of the director's compensation and participate in the city-county emergency management plan implemented by the director. 
(b)  The director is responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city, and in the county to the extent authorized by the county, and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct of an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant of the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization, as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal, emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001. 
(Ord. No. 1561, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-1986) 
State Law reference- Municipal emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103; emergency management directors, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.1015. 
Sec. 16-22. - Officers and employees; functions and duties. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-24-1986) 
Sec. 16-23. - Emergency management plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency management plan for the city shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. 
(b)  It is the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. 
(c)  The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 3, 6-24-1986) 
State Law reference- Declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.108; local and interjurisdictional emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.106. 
Sec. 16-24. - Article supersedes other law during periods of emergency. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 4, 6-24-1986) 
Sec. 16-25. - No liability created by article or assistance with local emergencies. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate of other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 5, 6-24-1986) 
Sec. 16-26. - Funding; expenditures. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 6, 6-24-1986) 
Sec. 16-27. - Obstruction of personnel, impersonation of personnel, and warning simulations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 7, 6-24-1986) 
State Law reference- Interference with public duties, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.15; use of siren, whistle and bells restricted, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.501; impersonating public servant prohibited, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 37.11. 
Sec. 16-28. - Conflicts with state, federal and military law and rules. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state for federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 9, 6-24-1986) 
Secs. 16-29-16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEM MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm protective service means any service whereby the person providing such service installs, services, repairs, maintains, sells, replaces, or responds to an alarm system or which causes any of the activities to take place. 
    Alarm site means a single premises, residence, or location served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, device or devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police respond. The term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "holdup alarm system," and "manual holdup alarm system" and specifically excludes: 
(1)  Fire alarm systems and other alarm systems that monitor temperature, humidity, or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises. 
(2)  An alarm system installed upon the premises occupied by the United States government, the this state, the city, or any county government or school districts situated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle. 
    Alarm system user means the owner of the property on which an alarm system or systems is maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of a robber. 
    Burglar alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into an area protected by the alarm system. 
    False alarm means any activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence of the owner, agent, or person in control of the property or any other such activation which is not a result of an emergency or threat of emergency for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and which the responding police officer finds no evidence of any criminal activity. The term "false alarm" shall not include any activation of an alarm system which is caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, or earthquakes. 
    Five minute shutoff means an automatic device associated with an alarm system which automatically causes the alarm to shut off and discontinue the emission of an audible signal after a period of tome not to exceed five minutes of continuous operation. 
    Holdup alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
    Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
    Permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the police department to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property which authorizes the operation of an alarm system or systems at an alarm site. 
    Permit holder means any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to whom an alarm system permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 1, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-61. - Alarm system permits. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an alarm system or systems at an alarm site unless a valid permit has been issued by the police department for such system. This requirement shall not be applicable to an alarm protective service unless the alarm protective service is the owner of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect. An alarm system user shall be in violation of this article if he permits the operation of such system without a proper permit. 
(b)  An alarm system user or his agent shall obtain a permit for each alarm site. 
(c)  Application for a permit for the operation of an alarm system or systems at an alarm site shall be made with the police department by the owner having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. Application shall be made in writing on a form designed by the city. 
(d)  The police department shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation or other legal entity in control of the property to be protected upon submission in person of a completed application and payment of the appropriate fee, unless any statement made on the application is incomplete or false. 
(e)  The police department shall treat all information on the application as confidential. 
(f)  Any permit issued pursuant to the article shall be applicable only to the permit holder and is not transferable. 
(g)  Each permit issued to an alarm system user shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The permit holder is required to obtain a renewal permit within ten days upon expiration. 
(h)  Each permit automatically becomes void upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  Control of protected property is transferred from the permit holder; 
(2)  Permit holder voluntarily discontinues services provided by a particular alarm protective service, or disconnected the alarm system; 
(3)  Revocation of the permit by the police department pursuant to this article. 
(i)  Each permit holder shall notify the police department of any change of information, or of any occurrence that voids the current permit. 
(j)  The fee for a permit issued or renewed pursuant to this article shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 2, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-62. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  The city police chief may revoke an alarm system permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated this article or any of its provisions; or 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a service fee assessed under this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permit to operate an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 4, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-63. - Appeal of permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  If the city police chief refuses to issue or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the city police chief to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the city police chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the city police chief is revoking a permit until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the city police chief is final. 
(b)  The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at any appeal hearing; the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the city police chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 5(A), (B), 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-64. - False alarm response service fees; appeal. 
(a)  Service fees for alarm responses shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. A permit holder will not be assessed a service fee for a response to notification of the activation of an alarm system if the permit holder shows to the police chief or his designated representative that the activation was not a false alarm and any response by the police department to such notification of an alarm system will not be included in determining the service fee set out above. For the purposes of determining the service fee, the burden shall be on the permit holder to prove that the activation of the alarm system was not a false alarm. 
(b)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision to assess a service fee by the city police chief or his designated representative as provided for in this article, may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days after the city police chief or his designated representative renders the decision. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the city police chief in assessing a service fee until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the city police chief or his designated representative is final. 
(Ord. No. 1819, §§ 3, 5(A), 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-65. - Rules, standards and procedures may be established by police chief. 
    The city police chief may promulgate regulations reasonable necessary to further the enforcement of this article. In addition, the city police chief may set reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm protective service when giving notice to the police department of activation on an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm system business requesting same. 
(Ord. No. 1819, §§ 6(A), 7, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-66. - Automatic dialing devices prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing devise which when activated uses a telephone devise or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the communication center of the police department and then transmits any prerecorded message or signal. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 6(B), 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 16-67. - Alarms must emit audible sound; five minute shut-off required. 
    All alarms systems which emit an audible sound shall have a five-minute shut-off. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 6(C), 12-12-1995) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; outdoor burning, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.018; pollution prevention, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.501 et seq.; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authorizing municipalities to take all necessary and reasonable actions to comply with the requirements and criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315; Geothermal Resources Act, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 141.001 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, or E. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study . 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area . See Area of special flood hazard . 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, 16 USC 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure to such extent that the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 2, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. I, § B, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-21. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. I, § C, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-22. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. I, § D, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-23. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § A, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-24. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bee County," dated May 20, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated May 20, 2010, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The adopted study is the basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § B, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-25. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § C, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-26. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § D, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § E, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-28. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city council, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § F, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 3, § G, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-30. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
(a)  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be subject to the highest penalties permitted by state law. Nothing herein contained shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § G, 4-14-2010) 
Secs. 18-31-18-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-49. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city manager is appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 4, § A, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-50. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agencies, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ( TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer this article. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the city's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(b)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 4, § B, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-51. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-79(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 18-50(a)(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 4, § C, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-52. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the city, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(k)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(l)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of this section are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 4, § D, 4-14-2010) 
Secs. 18-53-18-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-78. - General standard. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § A, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-79. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following requirements are applicable: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to at least 18 inches above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least 18 inches above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on the city's FIRM or FHBM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated 18 inches above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM that are not otherwise subject to the provisions of this section shall be elevated so that either the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 18 inches above the base flood elevation or the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles must be placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM either on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the permit requirements of this article and the elevation and anchoring requirements of this article for manufactured homes. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § B, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-80. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with the requirements of this article. All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of this article. 
(b)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this article. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § C, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-81. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in this article are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 18 inches above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 18 inches above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(4)  Areas within Zones AH or AO must have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § D, 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-82. - Standards for floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in this article are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, a part of the NFIP regulation, the city may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the city first completes all of the provisions required by the cited regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2071, art. 5, § E, 4-14-2010) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt and enforce fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; fire control and prevention generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 344.001 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fire escapes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.002; city fire loss lists, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, § 2003.051; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; prescribed burning standards, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 153.047. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Enforcing officers. 
    The fire chief, city police officers and city building official have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the fire code adopted by reference herein. 
(Code 1973, § 7-19; Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 2-9-1971) 
Secs. 20-2-20-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-49. - Fire limits. 
    The fire limits of the city have been established by the city council as depicted on the plat on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Ord. No. 886, § VII, 6-11-1963) 
Sec. 20-50. - International Fire Code adopted by reference; definitions. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference, as though set forth fully in this article, the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, subject to any amendments and exceptions provided in this chapter, as the fire code for the city. Copies of the adopted code are available in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  When the term "municipality" is used in the adopted code, it shall be held to mean this city. When the term "fire chief" or "chief of the fire department" is used in the adopted code, it shall be held to mean the chief of the Beeville Volunteer Fire Department. 
(Code 1973, §§ 7-18, 7-20; Ord. No. 1033, §§ 1, 3, 2-9-1971; Ord. No. 2181, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 20-51. - Modifications. 
    The fire chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article upon application in writing by a property owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief shall be entered upon the records of the department and signed copies shall be furnished the applicant and the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, § 7-22; Ord. No. 1033, § 5, 2-9-1971) 
Sec. 20-52. - More restrictive provisions apply. 
    If regulations of the city electrical, plumbing, building or housing standards codes or other ordinances of the city are more restrictive than the minimum fire prevention regulations adopted in this article, the regulations of the electrical, plumbing, building and housing standards codes or other ordinances shall apply. 
(Code 1973, § 7-23; Ord. No. 1033, § 9, 2-9-1971) 
Sec. 20-53. - Above-ground liquid petroleum products tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or to cause to be constructed, or to use or to cause to be used, within the city any storage facilities above the level of the ground not in existence on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived of whatever size, kind and character for the purpose of storing liquid petroleum products, including gasoline, oil and other hydrocarbon products and any and all other liquid petroleum products, for purposes of resale. Underground storage facilities for liquid petroleum products shall be unlimited and without restrictions as to size and capacity within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-5; Ord. No. 311, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-1952) 
Sec. 20-54. - Structures and devices posing fire risk prohibited. 
(a)  Structures constituting fire hazard. Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Creating and maintaining other fire hazards; penalties. Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, health or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, flammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  Notice prerequisite to prosecution. No prosecution shall be brought under this section until the order required in this section is given and the party notified has failed or refused to comply with the order. 
(Code 1973, §§ 7-45-7-47; Ord. No. 326, §§ 9-11, 4-13-1953) 
Sec. 20-55. - Appeal of decisions of fire chief. 
    If the fire chief denies an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted by the chief, the applicant or any other person may appeal the decision of the fire chief to the board of standards and appeals established in chapter 10. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the fire chief, the city secretary and the board of standards and appeals within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1973, § 7-26; Ord. No. 1033, § 6, 2-9-1971) 
Secs. 20-56-20-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; authority for local ordinances regulating fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; fireworks safety and education program, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.253. 

Sec. 20-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means and includes any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs, or any other substance, in whatever combination and by any designated name, intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks. 
(Code 1973, 11-21; Ord. No. 1132, § 1, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-87. - Territorial application of article. 
    This division shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory within the city limits. 
(Code 1973, 11-22; Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-88. - Manufacture, sale, use, etc., prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, receive, keep, sell, offer, or have in his possession with intent to sell, or use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroad and which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any such railroad for use in railroad operations; nor shall this section apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flares or rockets are transported or received or stored for use only as ship's stores; nor shall this section apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use, nor when a permit to use and discharge fireworks has been issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, 11-23; Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-89. - Parents and guardians not to permit children to discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit or allow such child to use, discharge, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks. 
(Code 1973, 11-24; Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-90. - Permit for public exhibitions. 
    Any person desiring to put on a public exhibition, display or showing of fireworks shall first obtain a permit to do so from the city manager by making application therefor accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. No such permit shall be issued unless application for same has been filed in writing with the city manager, stating the name of the exhibitor, the time, place and nature of the display, the name of the sponsoring association, and along with such application, the exhibitor must show financial responsibility in the amount of $100,000.00 to consist of either acceptable liability insurance, surety bond or cash bond. No permit for the public exhibition of fireworks shall be issued within seven days from date the application for same is filed with the city manager. 
(Code 1973, 11-25; Ord. No. 1132, § 5, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-91. - Unlawful fireworks declared nuisance subject to confiscation and destruction. 
    The presence of any fireworks in violation of this division is declared to be a common and public nuisance and the fire chief or any peace officer is directed and required to seize such fireworks and cause them to be safely destroyed. The fire chief, any member of the fire department, any city police officer or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally, until the fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(Code 1973, 11-26; Ord. No. 1132, § 6, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-92. - Right of entry to inspect and enforce. 
    The fire chief and police chief, and their designees, are authorized to enter any building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected to inspect the same for the presence of such fireworks. 
(Code 1973, 11-28; Ord. No. 1132, § 8, 8-28-1973) 
Sec. 20-93. - Penalties and injunctive remedies. 
    In addition to applicable penalties for violation of this division as provided in section 1-14, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks, and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(Code 1973, 11-27; Ord. No. 1132, § 7, 8-28-1973) 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Burning trash prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn paper, trash or other combustible matter in or on any street, sidewalk, alley, gutter, drain or other public property within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-5; Ord. No. 50; Ord. No. 363, § 2, 9-13-1955) 
Secs. 22-2-22-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-10. - Cleanliness of premises; duty to maintain. 
    Every owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of ground within the city shall keep such property owned or occupied by him free from stagnant water, weeds, tall grass, rubbish, brush, trash and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary substance or matter of whatever nature, and to fill up, drain or regulate any lot, ground and other property owned or occupied by him which shall have thereon any such substance or matter or which, from any other cause, is in such condition as to be liable to produce disease or fire and to keep every house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground owned or occupied by him at all times free from filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind. 
(Code 1973, § 9-1; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 9-13-1955; Ord. No. 643, § I, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 831, § I, 1-10-1967; Ord. No. 985, § 1, 10-28-1969) 
Sec. 22-11. - Declaration of nuisance; abatement required; definitions. 
(a)  Any condition mentioned in section 22-19 is declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is declared to be a public necessity; and it is hereby made and declared to be the special duty of persons owning or controlling such property to prevent such nuisances or promptly to remove and abate the same. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means and includes all trees or shrubs under seven feet in height, which are not cultivated and cared for by the person owning or controlling the premises. 
    Rubbish means and includes all refuse, rejected tin cans, and old vessels of all sorts, and all other things included in the ordinary definition of the term. 
    Weeds means and includes all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than one foot in height, or which may give rise to unpleasant odors or noxious vapors, or which is liable to become an unwholesome or decaying mass, or a breeding place for mosquitoes and vermin. 
(Code 1973, § 9-2; Ord. No. 62, § 1, 6-24-1915) 
Sec. 22-12. - Notice to abate, abatement by city; imposing lien. 
    The city manager is hereby directed to give notice to the owner or occupant of any property in the city requiring such owner or occupant of any lot to fill up, drain and regulate the drainage thereof and remove the stagnant water therefrom and to keep the lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush and any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature, and if such owner or occupant fails or refuses to do so within ten days after such written notice addressed to him at his post office address, the city may do such work or cause the same to be done, and may pay therefor, and charge expenses incurred in doing or having such work done or improvements made, to the owner of such property as herein provided; and the city council shall also, in addition to the foregoing remedy, have the power to cause any of the improvements above mentioned to be done at the expense of the city, on account of the owners, and cause the expense thereof to be assessed on the premises upon which such expenses are incurred. On filing with the county clerk a statement by the mayor or the city health officer of such expenses, the city shall have a privileged lien thereon, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements to secure the expenditure so made, plus ten percent interest per annum on the amount from the date such payment is made. For any such expenditures and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvement. 
(Code 1973, § 9-3; Ord. No. 643, § II, 5-14-1963) 
Sec. 22-13. - Publication of notice of abatement by city. 
    If personal service in writing may not be had upon any owner required to be notified by section 22-21, or if the owner's address is not known, the city shall give such notice by publication in a newspaper published in the city two times within ten consecutive days before commencing any work. 
(Code 1973, § 9-4; Ord. No. 643, § III, 5-14-1963) 
Secs. 22-14-22-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-24. - Disposal of abandoned property. 
    All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind, including motor vehicles, which shall remain unclaimed with the police department for a period of four months without being claimed or reclaimed by the owners, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at public auction as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 9-6; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 1-27-1959) 
Sec. 22-25. - Preparation of list; delivery of property to city manager. 
    The chief of police shall give to the city attorney a list of all property subject to sale under this article, and if the city attorney determines that such property is subject to sale under this article, he shall give to the city manager such list of all property, and the chief of police shall deliver the property, except motor vehicles, to the city manager before the date of sale and he shall take receipt from the city manager, showing in detail all property so delivered. Motor vehicles shall be kept by the chief of police until a sale has been made. 
(Code 1973, § 9-7; Ord. No. 467, § 2, 1-27-1959) 
Sec. 22-26. - Notice of sale. 
    Thirty days' notice of the time and place of sale, and a descriptive list of the property to be offered for sale, shall be posted at the courthouse door, and in a conspicuous place in the city hall and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner, in the event the name of the owner is known, and thereafter the property shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for each piece of property separately or assembled in lots, whichever, in the discretion of the city manager, shall offer the best price obtainable for the property or, in the alternative, the procedure provided in V.T.C.A., Property Code title 6. 
(Code 1973, § 9-8; Ord. No. 467, § 3, 1-27-1959) 
Sec. 22-27. - Conduct of sale; record, deposit of proceeds. 
    The public auction provided for in section 22-26 shall be conducted at the place and hour designated in the notice and all sales shall be for cash. The city manager or his representative shall conduct such sale, and he shall keep an accurate record of each article or motor vehicle or both sold and the price bid and paid therefor, and shall make a complete report in writing of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale. All funds received shall be deposited to the general fund of the city and a copy of the report attached to the city's copy of the deposit slip. 
(Code 1973, § 9-9; Ord. No. 467, §§ 4, 5, 1-27-1959) 
Sec. 22-28. - Disposal of worthless property. 
    Any property which has been listed and offered for sale and for which no price or sum has been offered, if deemed in the opinion of the city manager to be worthless and without value, shall be disposed of in such manner as he shall prescribe. The description of all property destroyed or disposed of as worthless or without value shall be reported to the city council together with the date and manner of disposal. 
(Code 1973, § 9-10; Ord. No. 467, § 6, 1-27-1959) 
Secs. 22-29-22-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 22-39. - Junked motor vehicles; definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 22-29 through 22-33, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the plural number shall include the singular number; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Junked motor vehicle . 
(1)  Any motor vehicle, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
a.  Wrecked; 
b.  Dismantled; 
c.  Partially dismantled; 
d.  Inoperative; 
e.  Abandoned; 
f.  Discarded. 
(2)  Exceptions. The term "junked motor vehicle" shall not apply to: 
a.  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways; 
b.  Any motor vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes rather than for salvage or for transportation; 
c.  Any motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment. 
(Code 1973, § 9-11; Ord. No. 1016, § II, 7-28-1970) 
Sec. 22-40. - Declared nuisances. 
    The presence of any junked motor vehicle on any private or public lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be deemed a public menace and nuisance; and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public menace and nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow any junked motor vehicle to be parked, left or maintained on his own real property, provided that this section shall not apply with regard to: 
(1)  Any junked motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any junked motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  Any junked motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained at a location officially designated and in a manner approved by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-12; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 7-28-1970) 
Sec. 22-41. - Evidence of abandonment. 
    If a junked motor vehicle has been situated on the private property of another, without such person's permission, for a period of 60 days or longer, this fact shall be prima facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle has abandoned the same. 
(Code 1973, § 9-13; Ord. No. 1016, § 4, 7-28-1970) 
Sec. 22-42. - Abatement. 
(a)  When in the opinion of the city health officer any such public menace and nuisance exists on occupied or unoccupied premises within the city in violation of this article, the chief of police or his duly authorized agent (hereinafter called police) shall order the owner of the premises, if in possession thereof, or the occupant of the premises whereon such public menace and nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the public menace and nuisance and its location; 
(3)  Specify the corrective measures required; 
(4)  Provide for compliance within ten days from service thereof. 
(b)  Such order shall be served upon the owner of the premises or the occupant by serving him personally or by sending the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the premises. If the owner or occupant of the premises fails or refuses to comply with the order of the police within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided, the police shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. The police shall thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in such manner as the city council may provide. If the owner or occupant of the premises so desires, he may, within the ten day period after service of notice to abate the menace and nuisance, request of the police in writing that the vehicle be removed for his account in which case the police will cause it to be removed and sold at private or public sale, all expenses of removal and sale to be deducted from the sale price, if any, and the remainder, if any, shall be paid over to the owner or occupant, but if there be no purchaser then all such expenses shall be paid by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1973, § 9-14; Ord. No. 1016, § III, 7-28-1970) 
Sec. 22-43. - Adoption of statute. 
    The provisions of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 49.09 regarding enhanced offenses and penalties shall apply to junked motor vehicles and the provisions of such statute are hereby in all things adopted for such purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 9-15; Ord. No. 1016, § 5, 7-28-1970) 
Sec. 22-44. - Mosquito control; unlawful water collection a nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any premises in the city or the agent of the owner, if the owner is a nonresident or absent from the city, to cause, suffer or permit any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, on such premises unless such collection of water is treated in the manner prescribed by the health officer so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, and any such collection of water so unlawfully maintained is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 9-16; Ord. No. 118, § 1, 6-9-1925) 
Sec. 22-45. - Definition of unlawful water collections. 
    The collections of water to be considered as coming within the terms of sections 22-34 through 9-20 are those which are contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, basements, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs), gutters, urns, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof, tanks of flush closets, automobile tires and other similar water containers. 
(Code 1973, § 9-17; Ord. No. 118, § 2, 6-9-1925) 
Sec. 22-46. - Methods of treatment. 
    The methods of treatment of any such collection of water for the purpose of preventing the breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer, and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch one way, or any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(3)  Using an approved larvacide. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstruction, and stocking with mosquito destroying fish; absence of half grown mosquito larvae to be evidence of compliance with the measure. 
(6)  Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(7)  Proper disposal of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 1973, § 9-18; Ord. No. 118, § 3, 6-9-1925) 
Sec. 22-47. - Inspection of premises. 
    The health officer shall enforce the provisions of sections 22-34 through 22-38 and for this purpose may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-19; Ord. No. 118, § 5, 6-9-1925) 
Sec. 22-48. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    If any person responsible for the existence of any condition which gives rise to the mosquito breeding refuses to take all necessary measures directed by the health officer to prevent the same in accordance with the terms set out in this article within 24 hours after notice in writing from the health officer to do so, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty prescribed in section 1-14, and each and every day's failure or refusal to remedy such condition after the expiration of the time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1973, § 9-20; Ord. No. 118, § 4, 6-9-1925) 
Secs. 22-49-22-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 22-65. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business building means any structure, whether public or private, regardless of the type of material used in its construction, located within the boundaries of the city that is adapted to the occupancy for transaction of business, whether vacant or occupied, for the rendering of professional services for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, rooming houses, beer parlors, office buildings, public buildings, stores, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops and factories. 
    Opening means an opening in the foundation, side or walls of any business building, including roof, chimney eaves, grills, windows, sidewalk grates and sidewalk elevators, through which a rat may pass. 
    Person means includes owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of any business building as defined herein. 
    Premises means all business buildings, outhouses, sheds, barns, garages, docks, wharves, piers, grain elevators and abattoirs, whether public or private, and all other structures used in connection with the operation of any business building as defined herein. 
    Rat harborage means any condition found to exist under which rats may find shelter or protection, and shall include any defective construction which would permit the entrance of rats into any business building. 
    Rat stoppage means an inexpensive form of ratproofing designed to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings. It is essentially the closing or protection of all openings in exterior walls and foundations or the grates in sidewalks of business buildings with ratproof materials installed in such a manner as to prevent rats from gaining entrance. 
(Code 1973, § 9-67; Ord. No. 245, § 1, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-66. - Inspections; ordering remedial action. 
    The health officer is authorized to make frequent and unannounced inspections of existing business buildings within the city for the purpose of determining any rat infestation, and order by written notice either the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of any rat-infected business building to protect the business building by rat stoppage as provided in this article, regardless of the need for the remodeling of or repairs to such buildings, and further order that such other rat control methods be employed as may be deemed necessary by the health officer to maintain business buildings free from rats. The written notice or order shall specify the time, in no event less than 30 days, for completion of such work and improvements. Failure to comply with such written notice or order within the time specified shall constitute a violation or this article. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 2, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-67. - During construction; interference with officer. 
    The health officer is authorized to make inspections during the course of and upon completion of any such construction, repairs, remodeling or installation of rat control measures to business buildings to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, and no person shall interfere with or refuse to permit such inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 9-69; Ord. No. 245, § 3, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-68. - Rat stoppage; minimum requirements. 
    For the purpose of obtaining maximum rat stoppage at a minimum cost to the owner or occupant of business buildings, the following regulations are set forth as the minimum requirements for applying rat stoppage to business buildings: 
(1)  The health officer shall approve all materials used and the method of installation. 
(2)  Solid sheet metal, expanded metal and wire cloth specified in this section shall have rust-resisting, protective coatings, preferably galvanized. 
(3)  All foundation wall ventilator openings shall be covered for their entire height and width with perforated sheet metal plates of a thickness not less than 14-gauge, or with expanded sheet metal of a thickness not less than 18-gauge, or with cast-iron grills or grates, or with any other material of sufficient strength and equal rat-resisting properties. The openings therein shall be small enough to prevent the ingress of rats, and in no instance shall be larger than one-half inch. 
(4)  All foundations and exterior wall openings, excluding those used for the purpose of ventilation, light doors and windows, such as those openings around pipes, electric cables, conduits, openings due to deteriorated walls, broken masonry or concrete, shall be protected against the ingress of rats by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete or masonry, or close-fitting sheet metal or suitable size pipe flanges or other material with equal rat-resisting properties, which shall be securely fastened in place. 
(5)  All exposed edges of the lower eight inches of wooden doors and doorjambs, serving as front, rear or side entrances into business buildings, from the ground, basement or cellar floors, and other doors accessible to rats, shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by covering the doors and doorjambs with solid sheet metal of not less than 24-gauge thickness. The same material shall be used on doorsills or thresholds, or such doorsills or thresholds may be constructed of cement, stone, steel or cast iron. Doors, doorjambs, and doorsills of coal chutes and hatchways that are constructed of wood shall be covered with solid sheet metal of 24-gauge or heavier, or they may be replaced with metal chutes of 24-gauge or heavier installed in such manner as will prevent the ingress of rats. 
(6)  All doors on which metal flashing has been applied shall be properly hinged to provide for free swinging. When closed, doors shall fit snugly so that the maximum clearance between any door, doorjamb and doorsill shall not be greater than three-eighths of an inch. 
(7)  Doorjambs and doorsills constructed of metal, concrete, masonry, stone or cement mortar, or cast iron and steel, when fitting closely to exclude rats, are not required to comply with the provision of subsection (5) of this section. 
(8)  All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation located in the side or rear of exterior walls and within 30 inches above the existing ground level immediately below such opening, shall be covered for their entire height and width, including frame, with wire cloth of 19-gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch. 
(9)  All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation in the exterior walls that may be accessible to rats by way of exposed pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances, shall be covered with guards of wire cloth of 19-gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch, or in lieu of wire cloth covering, the pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be blocked from rat usage by installing sheet metal guards of 24-gauge or heavier. Such guards when used on horizontal pipes, wires, conduits or other appurtenances shall be placed in a vertical position, and shall be snugly fitted around the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenances. The guards shall measure not less than 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance where the intervening space between the wall and pipe permits, and shall extend 30 inches in an upward direction and 12 inches in a downward direction, and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever practicable so that the guard will remain in a vertical position at all times. Such guards when used on vertical pipes, wire, conduits or other appurtenances shall be fitted snugly around the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance, shall be placed in a horizontal position (right angle to pipe, etc.) and shall extend horizontally from the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance for a minimum distance of 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance, where the intervening space between pipe and wall permits, and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever practicable in such manner that the guard will remain in a horizontal position at all times. 
(10)  Light wells with windows in exterior walls that are located below the outside ground level shall be protected from the ingress of rats by one of the following methods: 
a.  Installing over light wells cast-iron or steel grills or steel gratings, or other material of equal strength and rat-resisting properties, with openings in grills or gratings not to exceed one-half inch in shortest dimension, or with 16-gauge or heavier wire cloth with one-half inch mesh. 
b.  At the option of the owner, the opening in the wall of the building below the grate may be entirely closed with brick or concrete or partially closed with brick or concrete and the remaining open space covered with 19-gauge or heavier wire cloth with mesh not to exceed one-half inch. 
(11)  Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills less than 12 inches above the surface of the ground shall have the intervening space between floor sills and the ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing a solid masonry, concrete not less than four inches thick or solid sheet metal curtain wall of 24-gauge or heavier around the entire perimeter of the business building and extending the curtain wall to a depth of not less than 36 inches below the surface of the ground level and fastening securely to the exterior wall of the business building, in such a manner as will prevent rats from entering the building. 
(12)  In lieu of the installation of curtain walls, all ground floors of wood construction may be replaced with concrete of not less than three inches in thickness with the exterior walls protected for a height of 24 inches above the concrete floor with masonry, concrete or solid sheet metal of 24-gauge or heavier. Exterior wall protection shall be securely tied into the concrete floor at all points. 
(13)  Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills greater than 12 inches above the ground level shall have the intervening spaces between the floor sill and ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing curtain walls in accordance with subsection (12) of this section or by protecting the business building against the ingress of rats by installing solid sheet metal coverage of 24-gauge or heavier snugly around each pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service passing through the wooden ground floor. The metal coverage shall not be less than eight inches in diameter larger than the diameter of the pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service, and shall be securely fastened to the wooden floor. All other openings in the wooden ground floor through which rats may gain entrance into double walls or the interior of business buildings, such as an opening that may exist in floors and double walls above floor sills, shall be closed with 24-gauge or heavier solid sheet metal or 16-gauge or heavier wire cloth of one-half inch mesh or masonry or with concrete. Wood frame constructed business buildings having concrete or masonry foundation walls shall have ventilators in foundation walls protected as provided in subsection (4) of this section. All miscellaneous wall openings, doors and windows shall be protected in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1973, § 9-70; Ord. No. 245, § 4, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-69. - Protection from climbing rats. 
(a)  In order to protect business buildings from what is commonly called the climbing or roof rat, it shall be unlawful to permit fishing poles, ladders or any other object that a rat could climb on in order to reach the roof of business buildings, to lean against the sides or walls of such business buildings. 
(b)  The owner of business buildings shall also protect elevator shafts, fire escapes and guy wires in such manner that rats will not have means of ingress to any business building. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person in charge of a business building to trim the branches of all trees extending over and against any business building, and the same shall be cut and trimmed and kept cut and trimmed so that no part of any branch or any part of the tree shall be closer than ten feet to any business building, and the tops of all trees shall be cut back ten feet from a line extending perpendicularly from any exterior wall of a business building. 
(Code 1973, § 9-71; Ord. No. 245, § 7, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-70. - Open market regulations. 
    Curb or farmers' markets in which fruit or vegetables or any other food products are exposed and offered for sale, on racks, stands, platforms and in vehicles outside of business buildings, shall have floors paved with concrete or asphalt for the entire surface area of the market. Display racks, stands or platforms on which fruit or vegetables or any other food products are displayed or offered for sale shall be of sufficient height that all such fruits, vegetables or other food products shall be kept at a distance of not less than 18 inches above the floor pavement and be so constructed that rats cannot harbor therein or thereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 9-72; Ord. No. 245, § 5, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-71. - Extermination of rats; traps; poison. 
(a)  For the purpose of eliminating all rats that may remain in any business building after rat stoppage shall have been carried into effect, all storerooms, warehouses or other business buildings in the city shall be provided by the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of such business building with one or more traps, which shall be kept set and freshly baited at frequent intervals and maintained in good working condition, and shall be inspected daily, and any rats caught therein shall be killed, removed daily and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the health officer and such traps reset and rebated. 
(b)  Rats may also be destroyed by poisoning and fumigating in the manner approved by the health officer or by any authorized agency of the United States Public Health Service, or the state board of health and subject to applicable laws and ordinances relating to poisonous substances and fumigators. 
(Code 1973, § 9-73; Ord. No. 245, § 6, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-72. - Closing building pending. 
    When the health officer shall find any building, structure or premises so heavily infested with rats resulting in a present menace to public health, he shall have authority to close the same to any occupancy or use, until the rats have been eradicated, or, while the rats are being eradicated. 
(Code 1973, § 9-74; Ord. No. 245, § 8, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-73. - Use of infested building prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any business buildings or premises in such a manner that a rat harborage is brought into existence or maintained. 
(Code 1973, § 9-75; Ord. No. 245, § 9, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-74. - Dumping of food products. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place on any land or on any water or waterway within the city any dead animals, butchers' offal, seafood or any waste vegetables, animal matter or any food products whatsoever. 
(Code 1973, § 9-76; Ord. No. 245, § 10, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-75. - Garbage accumulations, other harborage. 
    No garbage, rubbish, waste or manure shall be placed, left, dumped or permitted to accumulate or remain in any building or premises in the city so that the same shall or may afford food for rats or a harboring or breeding place for rats. Rat burrows and other exterior harborage shall be treated under methods directed by the health officer. 
(Code 1973, § 9-77; Ord. No. 245, § 11, 12-12-1944) 
Sec. 22-76. - Lumber, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises, improved or unimproved, and all open lots and alleys in the city to accumulate lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks or stones and similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon and that may be used as a harborage by rats, unless the same shall be placed on open racks and elevated not more than 18 inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath to prevent the harborage of rats. 
(Code 1973, § 9-78; Ord. No. 245, § 12, 12-12-1944) 
Secs. 22-77-22-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 22-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adulterated means the condition of a food: 
(1)  If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity which may render it injurious to health; 
(2)  If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in excess of such tolerance if one has been established; 
(3)  If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption; 
(4)  If it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under insanitary conditions whereby it has become contaminated with filth, or whereby it has been rendered injurious to health; 
(5)  If it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal, or an animal which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or 
(6)  If its container is composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or deleterious substance which has rendered the contents injurious to health. 
    Employee means any person working in a food service establishment who transports food or food containers, who engages in food preparation or service, or who comes in contact with any food utensils or equipment. 
    Health officer means shall mean the health authority of the city or his designated representative. 
    Itinerant restaurant or temporary food service establishment means any food service establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time, not to exceed two weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering. 
    Restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment means any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen (including home kitchens where food and drink are prepared for sale); commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without charge or in which food is processed or otherwise prepared and packaged for human consumption. 
    Utensil means any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage, preparation, conveying or serving of food. 
(Code 1973, § 9-90; Ord. No. 946, § I, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-97. - Permit required; suspension, revocation, fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the health officer. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A person conducting an itinerant or temporary restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit. Such permit may be temporarily suspended by the health officer upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the health officer upon serious or repeated violation. 
(b)  An annual fee as provided in the city fee schedule will be charged for each permit issued. The permit shall not be transferable from one person or for one place to another person or for another place. 
(Code 1973, § 9-91; Ord. No. 946, § II, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-98. - Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or adulterated food or drink. 
    Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the health officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. 
(Code 1973, § 9-92; Ord. No. 946, § IV, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-99. - Grading; grades authorized to operate under. 
    No restaurant shall be operated within the city, or its police jurisdiction, unless it conforms with the grade A or grade B, or approved itinerant or temporary restaurant requirements of this article; provided, when any restaurant fails to qualify for any of these grades, the health officer is authorized to suspend the permit or in lieu thereof to degrade the restaurant and permit its operation during a temporary period not exceeding 30 days. 
(Code 1973, § 9-93; Ord. No. 946, § VII, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-100. - Sanitation standards. 
    The grading of all restaurants shall be based upon the following standards: 
(1)  Grade A. All grade A restaurants shall comply with all of the following items of sanitation: 
a.  Item 1, floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Floor drains shall be provided in all rooms where floors are subjected to flooding type cleaning or where normal operations release or discharge water or other liquid waste on the floor. 
b.  Item 2, walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared shall be finished in light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth, washable surface wainscoting to four feet. 
c.  Item 3, doors and windows. All openings (includes doors, air conditioners, glass, etc.) into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. 
d.  Item 4, lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared or in which utensils are washed shall be well lighted. 
e.  Item 5, ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated. 
f.  Item 6, toilet facilities. Every restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with the ordinances of the city. In restaurants hereafter constructed, toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food, drink or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair and well lighted and ventilated. Hand-washing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. When toilet facilities are provided for patrons, toilet facilities shall meet the requirements above. 
g.  Item 7, water supply and ice. The water supply at a food service establishment shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality and from an approved source. Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided in all areas where food is prepared or equipment, utensils or containers are washed. Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water which comes from an approved source, and shall be used only if it has been manufactured, stored, transported and handled in a sanitary manner. 
h.  Item 8, lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his hands. 
i.  Item 9, general requirements for equipment and utensils. All equipment and utensils used at a food service establishment shall be so designed and of such material and workmanship as to be smooth, easily cleanable and durable, and shall be in good repair, and the food contact surfaces of such equipment and utensils shall, in addition, be easily accessible for cleaning, nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent. When approved by the health authority, exceptions may be made to the above material requirements for equipment such as cutting boards, blocks and bakers' tables. All equipment shall be so installed and maintained as to facilitate the cleaning thereof, and all adjacent areas. Single service articles shall be made from nontoxic materials. 
j.  Item 10, cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment. All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single service containers shall be used only once. All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage. All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleansing or polishing of utensils. 
k.  Item 11, storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. 
l.  Item 12, disposal or wastes. All garbage and rubbish produced at a food service establishment and containing food wastes shall, prior to disposal be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids when filled or stored, or not in continuous use. Such containers need not be covered when stored in a special vermin-proofed room or enclosure, or in a food waste refrigerator. All other rubbish shall be stored in containers, rooms or areas in an approved manner. The rooms, enclosures, areas and containers used shall be adequate for the storage of all food waste and rubbish accumulating on the premises. Adequate cleaning facilities shall be provided, and each container, room or area shall be thoroughly cleaned after the emptying or removal of garbage and rubbish. Food waste grinders, if used, shall be installed in compliance with state and local standards and shall be of suitable construction. All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of with sufficient frequency and in such a manner as to prevent a nuisance. 
m.  Item 13, refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below 45 degrees Fahrenheit except when being prepared or served. Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of. Walk-in storage rooms must be kept in order and clean at all times. Food must be stored in sanitary containers. 
n.  Item 14, wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device; provided, this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if shucked shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant. 
o.  Item 15, storage, display and serving of food and drink. All food and drink shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used. 
p.  Item 16, cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink, utensils or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is prepared. 
q.  Item 17, miscellaneous. The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. 
(2)  Grade B. Grade B restaurants are those which fail to comply with items 1, 2, 4, 5, 16 and 17 in subsection (1) of this section, but which conform with all other items of sanitation required for grade A restaurants. 
(3)  Grade C. Grade C restaurants are those which fail to comply with either the grade A or grade B requirements in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  Itinerant or temporary establishments. An itinerant or temporary food service establishment shall comply with all provisions of this article which are applicable to its operation; provided, the health authority may prohibit the sale of certain potentially hazardous food and may modify specific requirements for physical facilities when, in his opinion, no imminent health hazard will result. 
(Code 1973, § 9-94; Ord. No. 946, § VI, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-101. - Placarding or public display of grade notice. 
    Every restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment, shall have displayed therein at all times in a place designated by the health officer, a notice approved by the health officer, stating the grade of the establishment. 
(Code 1973, § 9-95; Ord. No. 946, § III, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-102. - Inspection of restaurants, food service establishments or food processing establishments. 
(a)  At least once every six months, the health officer shall inspect every restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment located within the city. In case the health officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation required for the grade then held, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the grade requirements of this article. Any violation of the same item of this article on such second inspection shall call for immediate degrading or suspension of the permit. 
(b)  One copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the health officer upon an inside wall of the establishment, and the inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the health officer. Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the health department. 
(c)  The person operating the restaurant, food service establishment or food processing establishment, shall upon request of the health officer permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit copying any or all records of food purchased. 
(Code 1973, § 9-96; Ord. No. 946, § V, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-103. - Reinstatement of permit; supplementary regrading. 
    Any restaurant the grade of which has been lowered and all grade displays have been changed accordingly, or the permit of which has been suspended may at any time make application for regrading or the reinstatement of the permit. Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application, accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the violated provisions have been conformed with, the health officer shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional inspections as he may deem necessary to ensure himself that the applicant is again complying with the higher grade requirements, and, in case the findings indicated compliance, shall award the higher grade or reinstate the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 9-97; Ord. No. 946, § VIII, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-104. - Employee health card required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to work at, maintain or be employed at any store, place of vehicle at which food or drink is prepared or dispensed without having first obtained a health card from the county environmental public health department. 
(Code 1973, § 9-98; Ord. No. 946, § X, 2-11-1969; Ord. No. 1635, § II, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 22-105. - Food handlers training. 
    Proper and adequate training of food handlers in principles and practices of food service sanitation is of vital importance in the prevention of foodborne illness. Instruction in this subject should be started with an abbreviated or programmed type course before the person initially begins working as a food handler. This training is followed with a comprehensive formal course which each food handler attends every two years. Qualified environmental or public health personnel will conduct this training. Training certificates will be issued only after satisfactory completion of course. 
(Code 1973, § 9-99; Ord. No. 946, § XI, 2-11-1969; Ord. No. 1635, § I, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 22-106. - Term of card. 
    The health card issued by the health officer shall be valid for a period of 12 months from date of issue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-100; Ord. No. 946, § XII, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-107. - Certain persons not to be employed. 
    No person, while affected with boils, infected wounds, sores or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a food service establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals; and no person known or suspected of being affected with any such disease or condition shall be employed in such an area or capacity. 
(Code 1973, § 9-101; Ord. No. 946, § IX, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-108. - Notice to health authority of communicable disease. 
    Pre-employment and periodic medical examinations of food service establishment employees are not required by this article because such examinations do not provide protection against illness which might be transmitted by food. Examinations and tests for tuberculosis or venereal diseases should not be regarded as part of a food protection program, but rather as a part of the community's tuberculosis or venereal disease control program. 
(Code 1973, § 9-102; Ord. No. 946, § XIII, 2-11-1969; Ord. No. 1635, § III, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 22-109. - Procedure when infection suspected. 
    When the health authority has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment, restaurant or food processing establishment employee, the health authority shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated and take appropriate action. The health authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments; 
(2)  The immediate closure of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the health authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists; 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, of other employees and of his and their body discharges. 
(Code 1973, § 9-103; Ord. No. 946, § XIV, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-110. - Enforcement interpretation. 
    This article shall be enforced by the health officer in accordance with the interpretation thereof contained in the most recent 1943 edition of the U.S. Public Health Service Code Regulating Eating and Drinking Establishments, a certified copy of which shall be on file at the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1973, § 9-104; Ord. No. 946, § XV, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-111. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, there are excepted from the provisions of this article and not governed hereby the following: 
(1)  Church, school and civic club affairs commonly known as "covered dish" suppers at which food and drink are brought from homes to a central location and there served to members or guests at no cost. 
(2)  Persons who are members of and who prepare and serve food and drink at church, school and civic club affairs, whether or not the same are sold shall not be required to obtain and possess a health card as provided in section 22-104. 
(Code 1973, § 9-105; Ord. No. 946, § XVII, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-112. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who engages in, conducts or operates any business named herein, or who handles food in a public place in any manner, without first having obtained a permit or health certificate, as hereinabove required shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. Each day's violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who, having obtained such a permit or health certificate, continues to engage in, conduct or operate such business after the same has been suspended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. Each and every day's violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 9-106; Ord. No. 946, § XVI, 2-11-1969) 
Sec. 22-113. - [Regulation of food establishments.] 
(a)  Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(1)  The City of Beeville Texas adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Executive Commissioner of the Health and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(2)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or roadside food vendor. 
Municipality of Beeville, in this section, shall be understood to refer to the City of Beeville. 
Regulatory authority means the development services health inspections for the City of Beeville. 
State rules means the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the "Texas Food Establishment Rules." 
(b)  Permits and exemptions. 
(1)  A person may not operate a food establishments without a permit issued from the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this section. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this section. 
(2)  A food establishment operated solely by a non-profit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this section, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is non-profit for purposes of this exemption. 
(c)  Application for permit and fees. 
(1)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a new permit as for an initial permit. 
(2)  Prior to approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(3)  The following fee schedule applies to permits issued under this section. 
Annual Food Service Permits Fee Food service establishments $150.00 Retail food stores 150.00 Mobile units 250.00 Late fee (annual permits for food and retail establishments only ) 50.00 Each additional month 10.00  
Temporary Food Event Permits Fee Temporary food event $30.00 Temporary food event (non-profit) 20.00  
Food Handling Certification Fee Years Regular food handler card (individuals) $25.00 2 Fundraiser food handler card (non-profit organizations only) 25.00 Per group 2 *Food handler card expires 2 years from the date issued 1  
Fee Day care permits $100.00 Foster homes 100.00  
(d)  Review of plans. 
(1)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this section. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(2)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(e)  Suspension of permit. 
(1)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to the public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (e)(2) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(2)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspensions no longer exist. 
(f)  Revocation of permit. 
(1)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of a permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(2)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(g)  Administrative process. 
(1)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(2)  The hearings provided for these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(h)  Remedies. 
(1)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $200.00. 
(2)  The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2309, §§ 1-8, 9-27-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2309, §§ 1-8, adopted Sept. 27, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 22-113 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police forces generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq.; municipal authority relating to jails, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.001 et seq.; municipal contracts with county or private entity for jail facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.061 et seq.; general duties of officers, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 2.01 et seq. 

Chapter 28 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq.; regulation of certain types of housing and buildings, reservation of municipal authority, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1202.252; regulation by municipality of mobile and manufactured housing, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1201.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means designated inspection authority of the city, or its authorized representative. 
    Certificate of occupancy means certificate issued by the city council through the building official for the use of a building, structure, or land, when it is determined by him that the building, structure, or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
    Common access route/internal street means private drive allowing principal means of access to individual HUD-Code manufactured mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Driveway means minor entranceway of the common access route within the park, into an off-street parking area serving one or more HUD-Code manufactured mobile home. 
    HUD-Code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United states Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. Anything less than the length or width specified in this paragraph shall not be allowed in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    HUD-Code manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single entity ownership which has been placed and improved for the placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes, accessory uses, and service facilities, meeting all requirements of this chapter and any applicable deed restrictions and state laws. 
    License means written license issued by the city council, through its building official permitting a person to operate and maintain a HUD-Code manufactured home park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Mobile homes shall not be allowed in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    Parking, off-street, means a minimum space nine feet in width by 20 feet in length, located within the boundary of a HUD-Code manufactured home space, or in common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street. 
    Permit means written permit/certification issued by the building inspector permitting the construction, alteration, or extension of HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
    Plot plan/site plan means graphic presentation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
    Sewer connection means connection consisting of pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a HUD-Code manufactured mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service clean out plug of the sewage system serving the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    Sewer service clean out plug means that portion of sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a HUD-Code manufactured home space. 
    Space means plot of ground within a HUD-Code manufactured home park designated for accommodation of one HUD-Code manufactured home, together with such open space as required by this chapter the term "space" includes "lot" and "site." 
(Code 1973, § 91/2-1; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-2. - Federal and state standards to apply. 
    Manufactured housing design and construction will comply with construction and safety standards published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the requirements of the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., as amended, and the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Tex. Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq., as amended. All manufactured housing located within the city shall comply with all regulations of this state and such regulations are hereby incorporated into this section. 
Sec. 28-3. - Mobile homes prohibited in the city. 
    The installation of mobile homes for use or occupancy as a residential dwelling in the city is prohibited. This provision is prospective and shall not apply to any mobile home used and occupied as residential dwellings in the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1875, § 6, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-4. - Reports of trailers in trailer parks. 
    Any person doing business in the city as a trailer park operator or operating or controlling a trailer park, shall, upon demand of the assessor and collector of taxes on January 1 of each year, furnish to the tax assessor and collector, a list of the trailers, trailer coaches or mobile homes in such trailer park, showing the kind, make and year model, as well as the length and width of such trailer, coach or mobile home, together with each owner's name and his address. Any person or agent or representative of such person operating such a trailer park who shall fail to furnish such list and information as set forth above upon demand by the tax assessor and collector in which such property is located, shall be liable to such fine as may be imposed by ordinance or revocation of license, or both. 
(Code 1973, § 6-4; Ord. No. 599, § 1, 12-26-1962) 
Secs. 28-5-28-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 28-27. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend or expand any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the building inspector in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(b)  Application requirements. All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the building inspector and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Location and legal description of a HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). 
To this application shall be attached five copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more, and a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres. The site plan shall include all data required under section 28-28. 
(c)  Permit fee. All applications to the Building Official shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. When, upon review of this application, the planning and zoning commission is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of law, a permit shall be issued. 
(e)  Denial of permit/hearing. Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request in writing to the city council a rehearing on the matter and offer and offer additional evidence if desired as per section 28-28(c). 
(Code 1973, § 91/2-2; Ord. No. 1112, § 2, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1875, § 2, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-28. - Licenses. 
(a)  Application for original license. Application for original license shall be in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the permit fee above hereinafter provided, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  A copy of a valid certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  The location and legal description of the park. 
(4)  A site plan of the park prepared in accordance with section 28-27. 
(b)  Hearing granted applicants. Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied may request a rehearing on their application by the city council. The request shall be submitted to the city secretary in writing within ten calendar days following denial of the original application. The request must include new, or additional information not presented, or considered during the original application hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Transfer of license. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the city council within 15 days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). Application for transfer of license shall be made not later than 15 days after the date of the sale, transfer, or gift, or other disposition of interest in or control of HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) and the city council shall act thereon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  Transfer of license fee. All applications for license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(e)  Violations, notices, suspension of license. Whenever the building inspector finds the conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this article, he shall give notice in writing to the permittee or licensee or his agent that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 90 days; provided, however, that an additional 90-day extension may be authorized if a reasonable good faith effort is being made to correct the violations. At the end of the period of time and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the building inspector may suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee or his agent at the address provided in the application. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, licensee shall cease operation of such park within ten days after the notice is issued. 
(Code 1973, § 91/2-3; Ord. No. 1112, § 3, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1875, § 3, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-29. - Inspection. 
    Notice of violations; requirements of notices. Whenever it is brought to the attention of the building inspector that there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, the building inspector shall give notice of such alleged violation to the permittee or licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time of not less than 30 days nor more than one year, based upon the nature and severity of the violation and having due regard for the safety and protection of the community, for the performance of the act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action when if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article. If the violation is not remedied in accordance with the notice, and a breach of the ordinance continues, then the city may revoke any permits or licenses issued in addition to any punishment provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1973, § 91/2-4; Ord. No. 1112, § 4, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1875, § 4, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-30. - Site plan; design and construction criteria. 
(a)  Site plan. The site plan shall be filed as required by section 28-27(b) and shall show the following: 
(1)  The name, address, fee owner and record owner of the proposed or existing HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). 
(2)  Name of subdivision where the park is located. 
(3)  Names of adjacent public streets and roads. 
(4)  Contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
(5)  Locations and dimensions of all HUD-Code manufactured mobile home spaces, utilities easements, drives, recreation areas, streets and sidewalks. Each HUD-Code manufactured mobile home space shall be numbered. 
(6)  Scale of plan (no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet) and complete dimensions. 
(7)  Density in units per gross acres. 
(8)  Area and dimensions of site. 
(9)  Areas defined for waste containers and method of disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(10)  Water and sewer plans must be submitted showing the following: 
a.  Sewer lines locations, grades and sizes. 
b.  Water line locations and sizes and source of water supply. 
(11)  Paving and drainage plans must show the directions and calculated quantities of runoff and the proposed specifications for streets. 
The city manager shall notify the applicant in writing as to whether the plan was approved or disapproved, stating the reasons for disapproval and the modifications or conditions that must be made or met before approval can be obtained upon subsequent submission. 
(b)  HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) standards. Any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) constructed after adoption of this article, and any extension/addition to an existing HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) in the city shall be done in compliance with the following site requirements: 
(1)  Density. A HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) shall have no more than ten spaces per acre. 
a.  Park area. Each HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) designated for park and recreation activity shall provide a minimum of one acre in the area. 
(2)  Basic HUD-Code manufactured mobile home minimum site requirements. 
a.  Height regulations. 
1.  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called mobile home park) shall be 35 feet. 
2.  The average height of a HUD-Code manufactured mobile home frame above ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed four feet from the top of the pad. 
b.  Spacing regulations. HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any exterior wall to the closest exterior wall of the nearest HUD-Code manufactured home or pre-existing mobile home. 
c.  HUD-Code manufactured home space. Each and every HUD-Code manufactured home shall be located on separate space which shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Be served with sanitary sewer, water, electrical power, telephone service, and natural gas. 
2.  Provide a minimum average width of 40 feet and a minimum average depth of 80 feet. 
3.  Abut or have access to a private street for a minimum distance of 12 feet. 
4.  Provide a minimum area of 3,200 square feet, the area to be determined by the boundary lines of the space. 
5.  Provide a HUD-Code manufactured home pad which shall provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of one single-family HUD-Code manufactured home thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding rotation, and overturning. The pad shall: 
(i)  Be constructed of concrete which shall adequate support the weight of the HUD-Code manufactured home placed thereon and be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(ii)  Provide anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelet's embedded in concrete foundations or runway screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devises which secure the stability of the HUD-Code manufactured home, and shall be placed at least at each corner of the HUD-Code manufactured home. 
(iii)  Cover an area of at least 240 square feet or at least one-third the area of the largest HUD-Code manufactured home which is to be placed on the HUD-Code manufactured mobile home space, whichever is greater. No surface provided for a purpose other than the foundation of HUD-Code manufactured home shall be considered a part of such HUD-Code manufactured home pad. 
6.  Provide a minimum of two off-street parking spaces which shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt. 
7.  Double street frontage of HUD-Code manufactured home space shall be avoided. 
8.  No vehicular access to a HUD-Code manufactured home space is permitted from a public dedicated street. 
9.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) and especially beneath HUD-Code manufactured homes and other structures shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe efficient manner so as not to permit water to strand or become stagnant. 
(c)  Design and location of storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per HUD-Code manufactured home space, may be provided on the space, or in compounds located within 20 feet of space. Where provided storage facilities shall be faced with a durable, fire resistant material. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the HUD-Code manufactured home shall be permitted only if in such facilities. No storage shall be permitted under a HUD-Code manufactured home. Storage facilities shall not be located within ten feet of the boundary line of any HUD-Code manufactured home space boundary line. 
(d)  Location of HUD-Code manufactured homes and accessory structures. No HUD-Code manufactured home or accessory structure such as a refuse container, carport cabana, awning, fence, or storage locker shall be permitted within ten feet of a private street or the boundary line of a HUD-Code manufactured home space boundary line. Provided further that two HUD-Code manufactured homes shall not be placed less than 20 feet apart. 
(e)  Setbacks and screening. 
(1)  No HUD-Code manufactured home or structure in a HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) shall be located within the yard setback area. The minimum setback area for each space is: 
Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 5 feet Side yard 10 feet  
(2)  The following fencing requirements shall be applicable: Whenever a permit is issued for property adjacent to a residential zone there shall be erected by the park developer a six foot privacy fence with boards to be no more than one-eighth inch apart from each other on the property line adjacent to residential property on all sides with the exception of the frontage. Adjacent properties shall include those property tracts which physically abut one another, and those "across the street" properties separated by a public right-of-way or easement. 
(f)  Access; traffic circulation; parking. 
(1)  Internal streets shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and facilities for common use of park residents. 
(2)  All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications set by the city council and shall be maintained by the owner. 
(3)  All private streets shall be constructed with concrete or asphalt and shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(4)  Internal street dimensions; parking. 
a.  Internal streets shall be minimum pavement width of 20 feet. Parking shall not be allowed on the minimum street width. An additional lane of nine feet minimum width may be added to one or both sides for off-street parking. 
b.  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of each HUD-Code manufactured home. 
c.  Within each HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park), streets shall be named, and HUD-Code manufactured homes numbered. Park signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
d.  Private streets which may connect to public street rights-of-way, by the use of curves, offsets, location, or the use of two or more streets, shall be located so as to discourage through traffic. 
e.  Private street intersections shall generally be at right angle, offsets at intersections of less than 125 feet (centerline to centerline) shall be avoided, intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. 
f.  Dead-end private streets shall be limited to a maximum length of 1,000 feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space, with a turning circle of 80 feet in diameter. 
g.  Layout streets and blocks. Streets shall be laid out to provide a minimum distance of 240 feet, center to center of parallel streets, between intersections. 
h.  Lighting. The private streets, parking lots, walks, and service areas shall be lighted at all times so the HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) shall be safe for occupants and visitors, provided further all entrances and exits shall be lighted. 
(g)  Fire safety standards. 
(1)  Liquefied petroleum gases and flammable liquids are prohibited within the corporate limits of the city and its extra territorial jurisdiction once natural gas is made available by franchise. 
(2)  Access to HUD-Code manufactured home for fire-fighting. Approaches to all HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be kept clear for emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Fire protection. Water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided and suitably located for adequate fire protection as determined by the fire chief but in no case shall the park provide less than a system of standard hydrants located not more than 500 feet from each HUD-Code manufactured home space and served by water lines not less than six inches in diameter installed in a looped system. 
(4)  The HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) licensee or agent shall provide an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of rubbish. 
(h)  Water supply. 
(1)  All approved water supply for domestic use and fire protection purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). 
(2)  All plumbing shall be in accordance with applicable ordinances of the city. 
(i)  Sewage disposal. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Waste from all water closets, lavatories, sinks and showers in HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home parks) shall be discharged into a public sewer or a private disposal system approved by the building inspector. 
(2)  All plumbing shall comply with applicable plumbing codes. 
(3)  Each HUD-Code manufactured home pad shall have a sewer service clean out plug pipe of at least four inches which shall be capped when not in use. 
(j)  Electrical and telephone distribution systems. From and after the effective date of this article, the electrical distribution system shall comply with applicable electrical codes and other applicable laws of the state. 
(k)  Bathrooms and laundry facilities. All rooms containing bathrooms or laundry facilities shall. Have fire-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, tubs, lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture and resistant materials. 
(l)  Refuse and garbage. Solid waste shall be stored in city-approved solid waste containers, which shall be emptied regularly and maintained in a usable, sanitary condition and the collection and disposal of the refuse and garbage shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard. One three cubic yard solid waste container for every ten HUD-Code manufactured home shall be provided. The containers shall be located on concrete pads immediately adjacent to internal streets so as to allow free and clear access by collection trucks of the city or its contracted franchisee. 
(m)  Maintenance of park. The owner of the park shall be responsible to ensure that it is maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a hazard. Growth of plant materials such as weeds and grass, especially beneath HUD-Code manufactured homes and other structures shall be continuously controlled. All streets, parking and storage areas shall be maintained to provide a fully paved surface. 
(n)  Conform to codes. All HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) facilities and HUD-Code manufactured homes contained therein shall conform without limitations to the codes and ordinances of the city, including the building, plumbing, electrical, and fire codes and all applicable state law. 
(o)  Office. Every HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) shall have an office in which a copy of the park permit or license shall be posted and the park register shall be in such office. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner and occupant. 
(2)  The make, model, serial number, year, and dimensions of all HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
(3)  The date of arrival and departure of each HUD-Code manufactured home. 
The park operator shall submit the park register to the building inspector each year upon requesting license renewal and shall make the register available to any authorized city official upon reasonable request. Upon gaining knowledge of a departure of any HUD-Code manufactured home, the park owner shall notify the building inspector. Failure to do so shall place the operator in violation of this article. 
(p)  Ordinance compliance. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that all requirements of this article are met and maintained. Any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) issued an initial license after adoption of this article that is found to be in violation of any provisions of this article shall be notified in writing by the building inspector and upon failure to comply the license shall be revoked. 
(q)  Nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). 
(1)  Any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) in use or existence on the effective date of this article, and not complying with all applicable provisions of this article shall be considered a nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park). Such nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) shall conform to the requirements of the city mobile home park ordinance as it existed prior to the effective date of this article. Nonconforming parks shall however, comply with the requirements of subsection (n) of this section. 
(2)  Any land area added to a nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) shall conform to all requirements of this article. 
(r)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
(1)  Responsibilities of the park management. 
a.  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article shall apply. 
b.  The licensee or his agent shall operate the park in compliance with this and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park and all facilities in good repair, and in clean and sanitary condition. 
c.  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(2)  Responsibilities of park occupants. 
a.  All responsibilities of occupants set out elsewhere in this article shall apply. 
b.  The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
c.  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his HUD-Code manufactured home in its HUD-Code manufactured home pad and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
d.  The use of space immediately beneath a HUD-Code manufactured home for storage shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Mobile homes shall not be permitted in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(4)  Only HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be permitted in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(Code 1973, § 91/2-6; Ord. No. 1112, § 6, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1875, § 7, 6-30-1998) 
Chapter 30 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that it is dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare for lots in the city to have accumulations of stagnant water, litter or other unwholesome, impure or unsanitary matter in particular the debris being placed along the city streets throughout the city by its residents that may produce disease or attract disease carrying pests, and it is dangerous and constitutes a fire hazard to have weeds, tall grass, brush and litter on lots in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 1.3, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-2. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means decaying remains of cut or broken vegetation. 
    Code enforcement official means the designated authority charged with the enforcement of this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Cultivated means and includes, but is not limited to, tending, maintaining and removal of litter and brush. 
    Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
    Dispose means to discharge, deposit, inject, spill, leak, or place litter on or into land or water. 
    Improved lot means a lot on which a structure is located. 
    Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle that is inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded. The provisions hereof shall not apply to vehicles in operable condition specially adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways, vehicles retained by the owner for antique collection purposes rather than for salvage or for transportation, or vehicles stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment outside the continental and territorial limits of the United States. 
    Litter means: 
(1)  Decayable waste from a public or private establishment, residence, or restaurant, including yard trimmings, leaves or similar materials, animals and vegetation waste material from a market or storage facility handling or storing produce or other food products, or the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, but not including sewage, body wastes, or industrial by-products; or 
(2)  Non-decayable solid waste, except ashes, that consists of: 
a.  Combustible waste material, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber and plastics; 
b.  Noncombustible waste material, including glass, crockery, tin, or aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit or less; and 
c.  Discarded or worn-out manufactured materials and machinery, including motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm implements, building or construction materials, appliances, and scrap metal. 
    Lot means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by legal instrument of record. 
    Maintain means to provide for upkeep or support; to keep unimpaired or in proper condition. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, organization, government, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity. 
    Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the provability of disease transmission. 
    Shrub means all trees or shrubbery under four feet in height with trunk or stems less than two inches in diameter which are not maintained, cared for, or cultivated. 
(Code 1973, 11-41; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 1-23-1973; Ord. No. 1992, art. 2, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 30-4-30-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-44. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow a public nuisance to exist or remain on any premises in the city owned by him or under his care by contract or other enforceable commitments. Public nuisances include, without limitation: 
(1)  Stagnant water. Accumulations of stagnant water that may attract or harbor mosquitoes or produce disease. 
(2)  Unsanitary conditions; litter. Unwholesome, impure or unsanitary conditions that may produce disease or are likely to attract or harbor insects, rodents, vermin, snakes or disease carrying pests including, without limitation, accumulations of litter. 
(3)  Weeds and uncultivated vegetation. Weeds, grass, brush and shrubs taller than 18 inches that are uncultivated and lots in their natural state that share a common boundary with an improved lot shall be maintained by the owner of record in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1992, §§ 3.1-3.5, 6.3, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-45. - Compost piles. 
    Personal compost piles maintained and kept for residential use are encouraged and exempt from the prohibitions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 3.6, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 30-46-30-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 30-64. - Notice to abate public nuisance. 
    The code enforcement official shall give written notice to the owner of a lot to abate a violation found on the premises. The notice shall require the abatement of the violation within ten days of the date of the notice. 
(1)  Method of notice. The notice must be given: 
a.  Personally to the owner in writing; 
b.  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
c.  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
d.  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
1.  By publication at least once; 
2.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
3.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(2)  If the United States Postal Service returns the notice sent to a property owner as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(3)  Notice shall also inform the property owner that another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, will correct the violation at the owner's expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing, without notice, will take any action permitted by subsections (1) and (2) of this section and assess its expenses as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 4.1, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-65. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner of the property does not comply with the requirements of a notice to abate a violation, the city may perform or cause to be performed the work or improvements required. The city may pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as outlined in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 4.2, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 30-66-30-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES 

Sec. 30-88. - Owner responsible for fees. 
    Required work or improvements performed or caused to be performed by the city shall be charged to the owner of the property. The amount of such fees is as set forth in the city fee schedule. Related expenses shall include, but are not limited to, the costs of inspection or testing by third parties, photography, publication costs, title search fees, attorney's fees, costs incurred in identifying, locating, or contacting the owner, landfill fees, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 5.1, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-89. - Invoice. 
    The code enforcement official shall certify the expense incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article for invoicing to the owner of the property. The invoice becomes an account receivable upon completion and shall be due within 30 days of invoicing. The invoice shall be delivered personally or mailed to the owner's post office address. If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown, the lien may be filed after certification of the expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 5.2, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-90. - Lien. 
    If payment in full has not been received after 30 days from invoicing, the city shall assess the expenses against the property in the form of a lien. 
(1)  Execution of lien. The mayor, or other city official designated by the mayor, shall execute the lien on behalf of the city. The lien shall be filed with the county clerk. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk. The lien should contain the name of the owner, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, the interest rate to be charged and the balance due. 
(2)  Lien privileged. The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(3)  Release of lien. The lien shall be extinguished and released if the city is reimbursed for the total amount due. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 5.3, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-91. - Foreclosure. 
    The city may authorize its attorney to bring a suit for foreclosure of a lien in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. Such suit may be filed in any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 5.4, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-92. - Obstruction. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the order of the code enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 6.1, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-93. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (class C), and upon conviction shall be fined any sum up to $1,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city may direct its attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1992, §§ 7.1, 7.2, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 30-94. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city, or attorney retained by the city council, or an insurance representative for the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of this duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 9.1, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 30-95-30-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq.; abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq.; abandonment of personal property, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 72.001 et seq. 

Sec. 30-117. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. regarding abandoned vehicles are hereby adopted by reference as though completely set out herein. 
Sec. 30-118. - Authority to enforce. 
    The city manager or his agent may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. The municipal court of the city shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this article. 
(Code 1973, 11-46; Ord. No. 1103, § 6, 1-23-1973) 
Sec. 30-119. - Declaring certain property a nuisance; authorizing impoundment. 
    Any vehicle or other property or obstruction, placed, left, standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance of the city or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of the city is declared to be a nuisance, and any such property when so found shall be removed summarily by any police officer of the city and taken to the police pound and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as herein provided. 
(Code 1973, 11-42; Ord. No. 1103, § 2, 1-23-1973) 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles declared public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071; authority to take abandoned motor vehicles into custody, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011. 
Sec. 30-120. - Lien on impounded property. 
    The city shall have a lien on such impounded personal property for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, advertising, selling and providing notices with regard to such property and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens of ad valorem taxes, and the city may retain possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell the same as herein provided. 
Sec. 30-121. - Notice of sale of property other than motor vehicles. 
(a)  When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within 60 days after being impounded, the chief of police shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien of the city. Before selling such personal property, the chief of police shall post two notices thereof in conspicuous places as determined by the city council, the same being the entrance of the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a newspaper published in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the auction sale. 
(b)  The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting such notices as herein required. 
Sec. 30-122. - Notice of sale of motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to submit to the state highway department and similar agency of the proper state when the vehicle is from another state all information in his possession concerning the vehicle and to request that the department supply to him all information the records of the department contain on the vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by statute, immediately on receipt of such information, and not more than ten days from the date of impoundment, the chief of police shall notify the owner and lienholders as shown by the records of the department by registered mail with return receipt requested that the vehicle has been impounded and the provisions of this division in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property. The notice under this section shall include all information required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012. 
(c)  If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration has no address for the owner, or the determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible, notice shall be published, not more than ten days from the date of impoundment, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice under this section shall include all information required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012. 
(d)  In the event a motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 20 days from receipt of the return receipt of notice of non-delivery of the registered mail or 20 days from the date of publication of the notice, the chief of police shall prepare a notice of sale of such vehicle, in the manner prescribed in this division for other personal property, shall send a copy of the notice to owner and lienholders, as shown by the records of the highway department, by registered mail, and shall post and advertise the notices in the manner required in the preceding section. Notice by registered mail to the address shown on the records of the highway department shall constitute notice of the pending sale to such owner and lienholders. 
(Code 1973, 11-43; Ord. No. 1103, § 3, 1-23-1973) 
State Law reference- Seizure and auction of motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014 et seq. 
Sec. 30-123. - Sale of property. 
    When any impounded property, including motor vehicles, is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the chief of police shall sell the property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall execute bill of sale of the property to the purchaser thereof; provided, he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale unless and until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
Sec. 30-124. - Redemption. 
    The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of personal property impounded pursuant to this article may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying to the chief of police the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the chief of police. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; providing that the property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within 30 days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to the property shall become absolute in the auction buyer. 
Sec. 30-125. - Records and fees. 
    The chief of police shall keep a record book which shall contain a description of all property impounded, the date and time of such impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders, the return of receipts of registered notices, the date at auction, the amount realized for each article at such sale, the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known, the name and address of the auction buyer, and any such other information as he may deem necessary. Fees charged under this division shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1973, 11-45; Ord. No. 1103, § 5, 1-23-1973) 
Chapter 32 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipal authority for regulation of firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001; municipal regulation of discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.002; municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.; juvenile curfews in general law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; review of juvenile curfew orders or ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002; municipal policy regarding enforcement of drug laws, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.003; municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state Penal Code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; Weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 46; Controlled Substances Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 481; Simulated Controlled Substances Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 482. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Loitering. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city at nighttime to be in or about public or private buildings or premises, where he has no right or permission to be, under suspicious circumstances, and without being able to give a satisfactory account of the same. Violation of this section is punishable by a fine of up to $200.00. 
(Code 1973, 11-1; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 7-27-1965) 
Sec. 32-2. - Discharging firearms or air guns. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm of any description within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge, any air gun, air rifle or BB gun of any description within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply when the firing, shooting or discharging of the arms described herein is done in the necessary and lawful protection of persons, premises or property. 
(d)  There shall be exempt from the provisions of this section all commercial shooting galleries, pistol ranges, trap shooting, and skeet shooting establishments as may be established and operated in the city, provided the location of such commercial shooting gallery, pistol range, trap shooting or skeet shooting establishment is in full compliance with the zoning ordinance of the city and the building and fixtures of such establishment comply with the building code of the city, and all equipment used in connection with such business is approved by the city. 
(Code 1973, 11-14; Ord. No. 1129, § 4, 8-14-1973) 
Secs. 32-3-32-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 32-26. - Sale, delivery, offer or gift prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess to sell, offer to sell, deliver or to give the herein described product containing some or all products containing some or all of the above substance that are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: "K-2," "K-2 SUMMIT," "K-2 SEX," "GENIE," "DASCENTS," "ZOHAI," "SAGE," "SPICE," "KO KNOCK-OUT 2," "SPICE GOLD," "SPICE DIAMOND," "YUCATAN FIRE," "SOLAR FLARE," "PEP SPICE," "FIRE N' ICE," and "SALVIA DIVINORUM". 
(Ord. No. 2179, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 32-27. - Intentional intoxication by inhalation prohibited. 
    No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any glue or spray paint. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 3, 3-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-28. - Possession for intentional misuse prohibited. 
    No person shall for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this article, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession, or receive possession of any glue or spray paint. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 4, 3-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-29. - Use by minors regulated. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section and section 32-30, no person under 18 years of age shall possess or buy any glue or spray paint. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section and section 32-30, no person shall sell or transfer possession of any glue or spray paint to another person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  Provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of glue or spray paint to a person under 18 years of age for model building or other lawful use where the minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 5, 3-27-1980) 
Sec. 32-30. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 6, 3-27-1980) 
Secs. 32-31-32-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish a juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; requirement that juvenile curfew ordinances be reviewed and readopted every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002. 

Sec. 32-49. - Loitering of minors prohibited. 
(a)  No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter about the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, vacant lots, unsupervised places or any other place to which the public is admitted, whether with or without the payment of any consideration for such admission within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights when not accompanied by his parent, legal guardian, having legal custody and control of such person, or by the spouse of such person. 
(b)  It is defense to prosecution under this article that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent; 
(2)  In a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel, beginning, ending, or passing through city; 
(3)  Engaged in a n employment activity, including, but not limited to newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route; 
(4)  Involved in an emergency; 
(5)  On the driveway or yard of the minor's residence or on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
(6)  Attending an official school, civil, or religious, or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school district, or another similar activity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, taking a direct route, an official school, civil, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school district, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)  Attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United states Constitution, including the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; 
(8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law; or 
(9)  Accompanied by a person of at least 21 years of age, and the minor was carrying a written communication signed by the parent stating the name of the person who is at least 21 years of age and accompanying the minor and that the named minor has consent to be in the company of the named person. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 8-26-1986) 
Sec. 32-50. - Responsibility of parents. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any parent or person in loco parentis having the legal care, custody and control of any person under the age of 17 years to knowingly permit, aid, abet or encourage such person described in section 32-49 to violate any of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 2, 8-26-1986) 
Sec. 32-51. - Loitering defined. 
    The term "loiter" as used in section 32-49 means to idle, to loaf, to stand idly by, or to walk, drive or ride about aimlessly without lawful purpose and or specific destination. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 3, 8-26-1986) 
Sec. 32-52. - Not a limitation. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in any way limiting the present power of the right of law enforcement officers to make such investigations, detentions or arrests. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 4, 8-26-1986) 
Sec. 32-53. - Penalty clause. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be assessed a fine in a sum not exceeding $200.00, and each violation shall be considered a separate offense, provided that any such person falling within the age classification of a delinquent child under the laws of this state and amendments thereof, shall be proceeded against as a delinquent child. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 6, 8-26-1986) 
Chapter 36 - PARKS, RECREATION AND OTHER CITY FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal parks and other recreational and cultural resources generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 306.001 et seq.; municipal authority to acquire and maintain parks, museums, and historic sites, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001 et seq.; public use of municipal recreational facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007; municipal parks outside municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 315.001; municipal recreational programs and facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 332.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Assembly Hall. 
    Fees for rental of the Assembly Hall shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1505, §§ I, II, 8-28-1984) 
Sec. 36-2. - City golf course. 
(a)  The John C. Beasley Municipal Golf Course in Veterans Memorial Park may be used for golf only. No one may play without paying green fees unless previously approved for a specific purpose by the city council. 
(b)  Fees for use of the municipal golf course shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. One quarterly membership fee payable in advance shall include an individual and any members of their immediate family including spouse, or children up to 18 years of age. Membership fees are not pro-rated, refundable, or transferable. Purchase of a membership entitles the member to play without payment of normal green fees, but does not constitute a waiver of any other established normal fee. 
(Ord. No. 1730, § XII, 8-11-1992; Ord. No. 1779, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 1832, 9-10-1996; Ord. No. 1833, 9-10-1996; Ord. No. 1839, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1856, 9-9-1997; Ord. No. 1887, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 2015, 10-14-2003) 
Secs. 36-3-36-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARKS 

Sec. 36-23. - City park pavilions. 
(a)  Veterans Memorial Park Pavilions (Pavilions No. 1 and 2) are rented on a first come first serve basis. Reservations will not be made by telephone. Use of these pavilions is by reservation only. There shall be three portable picnic tables at each pavilion and these tables shall not be moved off the pavilion area. The concrete table and bar-b-que pit are part of the pavilion. 
(b)  The rental fee is as provided in the city fee schedule. Renters intending to cancel their reservations must call ten days prior to date reserved. Those renters failing to abide by this cancellation requirement will not be given a refund. All checks, money orders, drafts for rental use shall be made payable to the city. It shall be acknowledged by all renters that Veterans Memorial Park hours are from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and that the hours are subject to change. 
(c)  Renters of pavilions in Veterans Memorial Park must come by the city manager's office to make the reservations during regular city hall business hours (Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except between the hour of 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and on designated holidays.) 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1730, § II, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 36-24. - General park use regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in any city park: 
(1)  Hunt, shoot or kill birds, animals, or game of any sort; 
(2)  Fish on the golf course lakes in Veterans Memorial Park (or any other body of water on grounds maintained by the city); 
(3)  Pick, cut, or otherwise mutilate any wild flowers, trees, rocks, or shrubs; 
(4)  Willfully injure, destroy, or attempt to injure or destroy any property of any kind; 
(5)  Bring or use glass bottles or glass containers; 
(6)  Use or display firearms; 
(7)  Use or display fireworks except in compliance with this Code; 
(8)  Litter or otherwise fail to place all trash and garbage in appropriate trash containers; 
(9)  Engage in horseback riding; 
(10)  Have any pet in the city parks except on a leash; 
(11)  Climb over, under, or through any fence, structure, building, or water gap on all city parks and its perimeter fencing; 
(12)  Make loud noises, to cause unnecessary noises, and to cause public nuisance; or 
(13)  Wade, or swim in any body of water on grounds maintained by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, §§ 3-17; Ord. No. 1730, §§ I, III, IV, VI-XVII, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 36-25. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverages will not be allowed in Veterans Memorial Park at the two little league fields, the junior football, or the Babe Ruth field. 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, § 14; Ord. No. 1730, § XIV, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 36-26. - Use of picnic shelters. 
    Picnic shelters on all city parks are intended for public use. Tables shall not be moved off picnic shelters. All picnic areas are to be left clean. 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, § 15; Ord. No. 1730, § XV, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 36-27. - Ballfield use. 
    No person or group of persons shall have access to any ballfield without the specific permission of the organization or league that contracts with the city for operation and maintenance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, § 20; Ord. No. 1730, § XX, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 36-28. - Park hours. 
    Veterans Memorial Park hours are from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Park hours are subject to change. 
(Ord. of 10-23-1990, § 23) 
Sec. 36-29. - Vehicle use. 
(a)  Travel on city parks is limited to designated and authorized roads. It is unlawful for any person to drive or tow a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, wagon, trailer or any other wheeled carrier or vehicle in and upon the public parks, in the city, except upon designated roadways and parking areas thereof. 
(b)  All vehicles on city parks must be properly licensed for street operation. It is unlawful for any person to use off-road vehicles on city parks. 
(c)  Parking on city parks is limited to designated areas. It shall be unlawful for operators of authorized vehicles to park in non-designated areas. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any operator of an authorized vehicle to travel at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour on any city park. 
(Code 1973, § 17-10; Ord. No. 753, § II, 5-11-1965; Ord. of 10-23-1990, § 18; Ord. No. 1730, §§ XVIII, XIX, 8-11-1992) 
Secs. 36-30-36-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY SWIMMING POOL 

Sec. 36-47. - Operation schedule. 
(a)  The pool will open for late afternoon and weekend swimming during the later part of April or early May. The pool will open for the following schedule once school dismisses for the summer for the duration of the summer recess: 
12:00 noon to 8:00 p.m. Tuesday through Saturday 2:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sundays Closed Mondays Changes to the regular schedule may be made and posted at the pool for holidays, such as July 4 which occur during the summer.  
(b)  The pool's operating schedule is subject to weather conditions and coordination with school schedules. As a result the hours of operation are subject to change, and will be posted at the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § I, 3-26-1996) 
Sec. 36-48. - Regular admission fees. 
(a)  The regular admission fee for all adults and children is as provided in the city fee schedule. This applies to anyone who enters the pool grounds whether they intend to swim or not with the following exceptions: 
(1)  An adult who accompanies a child and does not enter the pool; or 
(2)  A child who is too young to swim and is accompanied by an adult. 
(b)  Admission fees are good for one admission only. Once a person leaves the pool grounds, he is required to pay a new admission fee if he returns. 
(c)  Cash refunds of admission fees are not allowed. The pool manager may issue "rain passes" if bad weather abruptly causes the pool to be closed. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § II, 3-26-1996) 
Sec. 36-49. - Reservations for special functions. 
(a)  The pool may be reserved for special functions or private parties to be held after normal operating hours. Reservations should be arranged with the pool manager, and are subject to: 
(1)  Availability of the pool; and 
(2)  Ability of the pool manager and staff to accommodate the request. 
(b)  The city requires that a minimum of two lifeguards from its staff be present at the pool during any special functions. The pool manager may require additional lifeguards at his discretion depending on the size of the group, age and type of function. 
(c)  A reservation fee as provided by the city fee schedule shall be payable when the reservation is made as compensation for use of the pool. This fee is not refundable unless: 
(1)  The reservation is canceled by notice to the pool manager ten days in advance of the reservation date; or 
(2)  Weather conditions force cancellation of the event. 
(d)  Prior to the reservation date, a $50.00 deposit shall be paid. Failure to pay the deposit automatically cancels the reservation without refund. The deposit shall cover: 
(1)  Cost of any damage done to the pool; and 
(2)  Cost of lifeguards provided for the function. Cost shall be calculated at a minimum of two hours per event at the lifeguard's hourly wage plus employer fringe costs. 
(3)  The remaining balance shall be refunded to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § III, 3-26-1996) 
Sec. 36-50. - Instructional classes. 
(a)  Instruction classes for swimming lessons or lifeguard certification may be conducted at the pool. 
(b)  The pool manager may conduct and charge a fee for classes taught before, during or after normal operating hours subject to the following: 
(1)  The instructor will schedule classes so that they do not interfere with his normal work schedule and responsibilities at the pool; 
(2)  The instructor will schedule classes when there is adequate space available in the pool; and 
(3)  The city shall be paid the amount specified in the city fee schedule as compensation for use of the pool facility. 
(c)  Other organizations may be authorized to conduct classes at the pool subject to the following: 
(1)  Only qualified and certified instructors will be allowed to conduct the classes; 
(2)  Classes may be scheduled when there is adequate space available in the pool; and 
(3)  The city shall be paid $15.00 per student enrolled as compensation for use of the pool facility. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § IV, 3-26-1996) 
Sec. 36-51. - Safety regulations. 
    The pool manager and staff are responsible for providing a clean and enjoyable swimming facility for the public, and insuring that it is safely and properly used. The observance of accepted safety standards is required in order to achieve this. The pool manager will post safety regulations at the pool. These regulations are subject to review on occasions, and may be revised by the pool manager upon approval by the city manager. Persons are reminded that failure to abide by these regulations or directions of pool lifeguards can result in being expelled from the pool grounds, and forfeiture of their right to return. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § V, 3-26-1996) 
Chapter 40 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 40-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means designated inspection authority of the city, or its authorized representative. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building official for the use of a building, structure or land when it is determined by him that the building, structure, or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinance, and regulations. 
    Common access route/internal street means private drive allowing principal means of access to individual recreational vehicle lots. 
    Driveway means minor entranceway of the common access route within the park, into an off-street parking area serving one or more recreational vehicle lots. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Natural or artificial barrier means any embankment, fence, hedge, or other feature that serves to block direct pedestrian access or visibility. 
    Operator means includes the person in charge of operating any recreational vehicle park, either under written or verbal (oral) lease, or any other arrangement whereby he exercises control over the premises. 
    Owner means and includes the person in whose name the title to the lot, block, tract, or parcel of land is shown to be. 
    Recreational vehicle means includes any of the following: 
(1)  Camping trailer. A folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation use. 
(2)  Motor home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(3)  Pickup coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation. 
(4)  Travel trailer. A vehicular structure built on a chassis with body width less than eight feet and body length less than 32 feet, that structure designed to be transported and intended for human occupancy as a dwelling for short periods of time and containing limited or no kitchen or bathroom facilities. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a contiguous parcel of land licensed or used in whole or in part, with or without charges, for the parking of recreational vehicles occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for any length of time. 
    Recreational vehicle space means a plot of land within a recreational vehicle park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatories and such other facilities shall be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § I, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-2. - Parks licenses. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city, and its extra territorial jurisdiction unless that person shall first obtain a license as issued by the building official of the city. This license shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year and is subject to renewal upon expiration. 
(b)  License fees. 
(1)  The annual license fee for each recreational vehicle park shall be in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(2)  The fee for transfer of a license shall be as provided by the city fee schedule. 
(3)  Upon inception of this article and applicable to all new parks, this annual fee shall be pro-rated to accommodate the December 31 expiration of all permits. 
(c)  License application. 
(1)  Application for initial license. An application for initial development of a recreational vehicle park shall be filed with and issued by the building official of the city. 
a.  The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
1.  The name and address of applicant; 
2.  The location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park; 
3.  A complete plan of the subject park in conformity with the requirements of section 40-4; 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the recreational vehicle park. 
b.  The building official of the city shall inspect the application and the proposed plans and specifications. In the event that the proposed recreational vehicle park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with the plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the building official shall approve the application, and upon completion of the park according to the plans, shall issue the license. 
(2)  Application for renewal license. Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license and upon payment of the annual license fee, the building official of the city shall conduct requirements established in this chapter. Subsequent to a determination of compliance, the building official shall issue a certificate renewing the license for another year. 
(3)  Transfer of license. Upon application in writing for a transfer of license, the provision of evidence of special permit transfer, if required, and payment of the license transfer fee, the building official shall issue a transfer of license. 
(4)  Expiration date of license. All licenses issued under the terms and conditions of this article shall expire on the December 31 following the issuance date. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § II, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-3. - Posting of license. 
    The license certificate shall at all times by conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the recreational vehicle park. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § III, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-4. - Development and operation regulations. 
    These development plans shall exhibit on a scale of 100 feet to one inch the following site improvement data: 
(1)  Name of the developer; 
(2)  Name of the record owner of the subject property; 
(3)  Legal description of the tract to be developed; 
(4)  Tract boundary lines, the precise locations and width of all existing or recorded streets, easements and other rights-of-way forming the boundary of the subject tracts; 
(5)  Scale, north arrow, and date; 
(6)  Final contour data at two-foot intervals to show drainage of the site; 
(7)  Width of each private street or other roadway or right-of-way; 
(8)  Source of water supply and layout of water system, including locations of standard fire hydrants, regarding fire protection; 
(9)  Method of sewage disposal and layout of sewer system; 
(10)  Name of the recreational vehicle park; 
(11)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements; 
(12)  Boundaries of each recreational vehicle space; 
(13)  Address assignments (number or letters) to identify individual recreational vehicle spaces; 
(14)  Entrance park name signage shall meet department of transportation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § IV, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-5. - Recreational vehicle park regulations. 
    The regulations described herein govern the development, operation, and maintenance of recreational vehicle parks, as previously defined. 
(1)  Park development requirements. Recreational vehicle parks shall be developed to conform to those requirements as herein delineated: 
a.  All access road leading to recreational vehicle parks shall be durably surface with asphalt or concrete shall allow for proper drainage of its right-of-way unto established city, county or state right-of-way connecting to the access roads. The drainage must comply with applicable entity regulations. 
b.  No minimum area is established for a recreational vehicle space except that utility hookups shall be located so that a ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between recreational vehicles when parked. 
c.  Not less than eight percent of the gross land area within the park site is to be utilized for common recreational purposes services buildings. 
d.  Internal streets shall be paved and shall exhibit the appropriate dimension as required in the following 
Street Width in Feet Comments One-way, no parking 11 Acceptable only if park provides less than 25 spaces One-way, parking on one side only 18 Acceptable only if park provides less than 50 spaces Two-way, no parking 24 Two-way, parking on one side only 27 Two-way, parking on either side 34  
e.  Parking facilities shall be provided at the park office as will accommodate five recreational vehicles. 
f.  Each recreational vehicle space shall afford parking and maneuvering space sufficient so that the parking, loading, and the like, of recreational vehicles shall not necessitate the use of any public right-of-way or privately owned property which may abut the park. 
g.  Each recreational vehicle space provided with electrical service shall be so served through an underground distribution system. The park office and service building may receive electrical service as provided through overhead facilities. 
h.  Each recreational vehicle park shall provide, at minimum, one sanitary disposal site (dump station) which discharges into the city sewage system or a state approved septic system with provided written confirmation. 
i.  All site-built structures located within the recreational vehicle park shall be constructed and placed in compliance with the technical codes of the city. 
(2)  Service building; laundry and sanitation facilities. Each recreation vehicle park shall provide one or more service buildings for the use of park patrons. 
a.  The service building shall provide for: 
1.  One flush toilet for women; 
2.  One flush toilet for men; 
3.  One lavatory for each sex; 
4.  One shower and dressing accommodation for each sex, provided in an Individual compartment or stall; 
5.  One washing machine; 
6.  One slop sink, not less than 14 inches by 14 inches deep; 
7.  One cloth dryer. 
(b)  Service building requirements. Service buildings providing the forenamed facilities shall satisfy requirements as included: 
1.  Service building housing sanitation or laundry facilities shall be permanent structures which comply with all applicable laws and ordinances regulating buildings, electrical installation, plumbing, and sanitation systems. 
2.  Service buildings shall afford appropriate illumination, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of moisture-proof materials, to include painted woodwork, as shall permit frequent clearing and washing. Floors shall be constructed of concrete or other equally impervious material, easily cleanable, and provided with floor drains which are connected to the sanitary system. 
3.  The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females either shall be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
4.  All service buildings and park grounds shall be maintained in a clean sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
5.  Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than 15 feet nor farther than 200 from any recreational vehicle space within the park; 
6.  Service building shall provide a common space for activities or meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § V, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-6. - Water supply. 
(a)  Recreational vehicle park shall provide an adequate supply of pure water to all recreational vehicle spaces within the park in accordance with applicable ordinances, each individual recreational vehicle space shall be provided with a cold water tap not less than four inches above the ground. 
(b)  All plumbing work performed within a recreational vehicle park shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the plumbing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § VI, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-7. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  Wastewater from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, lavatories, and laundry facilities within the service or other buildings within the recreational vehicle park, in addition to dump station facilities, shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances, or state approved septic systems where applicable. 
(b)  Each recreational vehicle park space located within a recreational vehicle park facility shall be provided a trapped sewer not less than four inches in diameter. The trapped sewer in each recreational vehicle space shall discharge wastewater into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § VII, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-8. - Electrical service. 
(a)  Electrical service to individual recreational vehicle spaces, in addition to any service or office buildings, shall conform to those requirements specified in the electrical code adopted for us by the city. 
(b)  Within recreational vehicle parks, trash dumpsters or garbage cans possessing secure covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. These garbage receptacles shall be located not further than 300 feet from recreational vehicle spaces. These receptacles shall be maintained in sanitary conditions at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the receptacles shall not overflow. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § VIII, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-9. - Animals and pets. 
    No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, or other pet animal shall permit that animal to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any recreational vehicle park. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § IX, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-10. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Registered occupants. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain a registry containing a record of all recreational vehicle owners and occupants located within recreational vehicle parks. The registry shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of each recreational vehicle occupant; 
b.  The name and address of the owner of each recreational vehicle within the park; 
c.  The make, model, year, and license number of each recreational vehicle located within the park; 
d.  The state, territory, or country issuing those licenses; 
e.  The date of arrival and or departure of each recreational vehicle. 
(2)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public hearing officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information, contained in the register. The registry record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(b)  Supervision. The licensee, or duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to maintain the recreational vehicle park, and its facilities and equipment, in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee is subject. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § X, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-11. - Complaints; license suspension. 
(a)  Where the building official, or his agent, determined that the operation of a recreational vehicle park violates some provision of this chapter, or any other provisions in this Code, a complaint may be filled in the municipal court for the city against either the owner or the operator of the park or both or in the appropriate court of the county or state where applicable. 
(b)  Where the building official, or his agent, determined that the operation of a recreational vehicle park violates some provision of this chapter; he may suspend the park's license to operate until that time as the park complies with the chapter. This license may appeal this suspension to the board of adjustment, as provided for in city zoning ordinance, regarding appeals, as amended. Operation of a park while the license is suspended shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § XI, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to section 1-14. Each day the violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Any person who is found guilty of violation of this chapter shall be fined a penalty not to exceed the maximum limit established by most current state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § XII, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-13. - Location. 
(a)  Recreational vehicle parks may be located only in an area zoned for such use under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The park shall comply with state and federal standards for accessibility for the mobility impaired. The applicant shall show proof of compliance as outlined by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § XIII, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-14. - Inspection. 
(a)  The building official, building inspector, the city fire chief, and the city police chief are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspection as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The building official, building inspector, the city fire chief, and the city police chief shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The building official, building inspector, the city fire chief, and the city police chief shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the registry containing a record of all residents of the park. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § XIV, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-15. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park where the license has been guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  After such conviction, a new license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 2180, § XV, 12-14-2010) 
Chapter 42 - SIGNS AND OTHER ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by municipalities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipal boards on sign control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.004; regulation of outdoor advertising generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.031 et seq.; licenses and permits for outdoor advertising, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.061 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate sign placement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 393.0025. 

Sec. 42-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to provide comprehensive regulation of signs, including the erection, alteration and maintenance of all types of billboards, signs, campaign signs, bills and posters within the city limits, in order to protect and enhance the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and provide such comprehensive regulations in a manner which will be compatible with all city ordinances. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide uniform sign standards which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride, thereby by strengthening the economic stability of the city's business, cultural and residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 1, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-2. - Objectives. 
    Objectives to be pursued to applying specific sign standards are as follows: 
(1)  To identify individual business, residential, and public use without creating confusion, unsightliness, or visual obscurity. 
(2)  To ensure that all signs are properly related to the overall adjacent land use, character and development lot size, scale, height, and location. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 2, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-3. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs, as that term is defined herein, within city limits, except for the following: 
(1)  Official government signs and notices. 
(2)  National, state, and local governmental flags. 
(3)  Scoreboards facing an athletic area. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 3, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Abandoned sign means any sign which no longer correctly advertises a business product, service, or activity. 
    Advertise means and includes promoting, identifying, or calling attention to a business, product, service, candidate, issue, or activity, through use of words, symbols, figures, or similar means. 
    Area means the area of a sign shall be the area of the sign face. In computing any maximum allowable sign area, only one side of the double sign face shall be considered. 
    Banner sign means any sign other than a pennant which is made from or on cloth or other limp material. Any such sign displayed behind glass or within a building shall be deemed a wall sign. 
    Billboard sign means any sign, with the exception of portable signs, pertaining to a business, activity, product, or service not being offered or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Campaign sign means any sign that promotes the election or re-election of any candidate or pro or con on an issue before the local electorate. M-1 campaign signs are hereto limited to private property and are prohibited for being lighted or from flashing lighting while on established residential areas. 
    Canopy sign means any sign attached to, hung from, or supported by a canopy structure. 
    Clearance means the smallest vertical distance between the ground or improvements underneath a sign and the lowest point of the sign, including framework and embellishments. 
    Construction sign means a sign identifying a business participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 
    Copy means the working, symbols, and figures on a sign face in either permanent or changeable form. 
    Directional sign means any on-premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information, such as parking or exit and entrance signs. 
    Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, emplace, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any other way bring into being or establish. 
    Electrical sign means any sign or sign structure which uses or incorporates electrical wiring, connections, lights or fixtures. 
    Electronic message sign means a sign, the copy of which automatically changes at least once every three seconds. Such signs shall be considered on-premises signs if no more than 50 percent of the total number of messages displayed on the sign relate to off-premises activities. 
    Face means the entire advertising area of a sign excluding framing, trim, or supporting structure. 
    Financing sign means any sign identifying a financial institution participating in development of the property on which it is located. 
    Freestanding sign means any on-premises sign permanently affixed to the ground which is not attached to a building. 
    Frontage means the length of the property lines of a lot which abut public streets. 
    Height means the vertical distance between the highest part of the sing or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the average ground level beneath the sign. 
    Lot means a parcel of land legally defined as a lot on a duly approved subdivision plat of record, or a parcel of land defined by a legal record or survey map. 
    Noncommercial sign means any sign that conveys a political, social, ideological, community service, or similar message. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building, lot, or sign, or structure is used or intended to be used. 
    On-premises sign means any sign which advertises a business, product, service, or activity offered, sold or conducted on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Pennant sign means any sign consisting of a series of flags constructed of cloth or other limp material. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building which is designed to permit removal and reuse. 
    Premises means a parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which is devoted to a particular commercial, industrial, or residential use. 
    Projecting sign means any sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not designed primarily to support a sign. 
    Public street or right-of-way means shall mean the entire width between property lines of any road, street, way, alley, bridge, or other similar thoroughfare publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic. 
    Realty sign means any sign used to advertise a real estate development site or to advertise that real estate is for sale, rent or lease. 
    Roof sign means any sign affixed to the roof of a building. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between a sign and the front lot line, as measured from the part of the sign nearest to the front lot line. 
    Sign means any object, display, or part thereof, visible from a public street, which is used to advertise a business, product, service, promoting the election or re-election of any candidate or pro or con on an issue before the local electorate, or any other activity. 
    Wall sign means any sign affixed flat against and parallel to a building wall. For the purposes of this definition, the term "wall" shall include window areas. 
(Ord. No. 2033, §§ 4, 5, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-5. - Sign design and construction criteria generally. 
(a)  No sign, sign structure, or sign support shall be placed upon or project over any public property or right-of-way; provided that a wall sign affixed to a building wall located upon a property line may project up to eighteen inches from the back of the curb so long as it maintains a clearance of at least eight feet. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any means of egress, or any opening necessary for required light, ventilation or firefighting or for escape from the premises, or as to prevent free passage from one part of a rooftop to any other part thereof. 
(c)  No sign shall be attached to any exterior stairway, fire escape, fire tower balcony, fire wall, or balcony serving as a horizontal exit. 
(d)  No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to interfere with the free operation of a counterbalanced section of a fire escape, and no projecting sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained without a minimum of seven feet clearance over any such counterbalance section. 
(e)  No sign shall obstruct the free use of any window above the first story as a required means of egress to a fire escape. 
(f)  The ground surface area under and adjacent to signs shall be kept clean of weeds, high grass, and rubbish. 
(g)  Signs shall maintain clearance from telephone, cable television, and electric power line in accordance with utility company standards. 
(h)  In the event that more than one sign-related definition applies to a proposed sign, resulting in conflicting regulations thereon, the sign applicant may choose the definition that is to apply, with the qualification that all regulations related to the definition must be adopted. Where the proposed sign is of a type that is prohibited, it shall remain prohibited notwithstanding that it may also come with the definition of an approved type of sign. 
(i)  All signs shall meet applicable construction standards of the Southern Building Code and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city. 
(j)  A noncommercial sign shall be allowed in any instance in which an on-premises or billboard sign is allowed within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 6, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-6. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Signs in zones other than "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District, "B-3" Central Business District, "I-1" Light Industrial District, and "I-2" Industrial District with flashing, blinking, or traveling lights, except for time and temperature or electronic message signs. 
(2)  Banners, flags, searchlights, twirling signs, sandwich or A-Frame signs, sidewalk or curb signs, balloons or other gas filled objects, except as expressly provided in section 42-9. 
(3)  Signs upon trees, rocks, bridges, power lines (all telephone poles), or signs utilizing such objects for all or part of their support. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 7, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-7. - On-premises signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs structure shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Only one such sign structure shall be allowed for each lot of 50 feet frontage or lease which front only one public street. Lots with fronts of 150 feet shall be allowed an additional such sign structure and one other such sign structure for every 150 feet of frontage thereafter. For lots fronting more than one public street, the same regulations shall apply to each street and sign. 
(2)  Permanent portable signs and portable trailer signs are exceptions and are handled in sections 42-10 and 42-11. 
(3)  The maximum height of such signs shall be 421/2 feet on lots within the city limits fronting United States and state highways, including Texas Farm to Market roads. 
(4)  Campaign signs shall be restricted to on-premises only and shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall be temporary in nature to be removed by the property owner or candidate within seven days following the election. 
(b)  Roof signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Such signs shall not project beyond any exterior wall of the building on which such signs are mounted. 
(2)  The maximum height of such signs shall be 15 feet above the building upon which such signs are mounted. 
(c)  Canopy signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The face of such signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(2)  Such signs shall not extend beyond the sides of the canopy. 
(3)  One sign may be hung beneath a canopy, provided such sign maintains a minimum clearance of eight feet. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of nine feet. 
(e)  Construction and realty signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Such signs shall be used only temporarily during relevant periods of development or listing. Such signs shall become abandoned signs upon occupancy of the premises. Realty signs, when anchored or mounted securely to the ground, shall not be considered to be portable signs. 
(2)  One construction sign up to 128 square feet, and one realty sign up to 32 square feet, may be used on a lot; provided that on corner lots, such allowable areas may be divided between two construction and two realty signs oriented towards different streets; and provided further that for lots with frontage exceeding 500 feet, one such realty sign may be sued for each 500 feet of frontage. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 8, 7-27-2004; Ord. No. 2042, § 1, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-8. - Billboards. 
(a)  No billboards shall be located: 
(1)  Within 200 feet of any on-premises freestanding sign. 
(2)  Within 100 feet of any intersection controlled by a traffic control signal. 
(3)  Within 300 feet of any other billboard on the same side of a street other than a highway designated as a "loop" highway. 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any other billboard on the same side of a highway designated as a "loop" highway. 
(b)  Billboards shall have maximum height of 421/2 feet and a minimum clearance of seven feet. 
(c)  The maximum area of billboards shall vary directly with the setback, in accordance with the following: 
Area of Sign Face Minimum Setback Less than 200 square feet 10 feet 200-300 square feet 25 feet More than 300 square feet 30 feet  
Billboards erected after passage of this chapter shall have an absolute maximum area of 325 feet. All single-faced billboards shall have their backsides painted with industrial or commercial coating. 
(d)  Extensions shall be allowed provided such extensions do not exceed 25 percent of the width of the sign, and provided the extension complies with the height limitations in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Billboards larger than 200 feet in area shall be built in compliance with all applicable Southern Building Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 9, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-9. - Banner and pennant signs, searchlights, flags. 
(a)  On-premises banner signs, flags, balloons, and searchlights may be used subject to the following: Such displays shall comply with height and setback requirements applicable to on-premises freestanding signs. 
(b)  Banner signs extending across a public street shall advertise only civic and nonprofit activities, and shall be allowed only with written permission of the city manager or designee and proper agents from the state and utility companies when affected and must be removed no later than 30 days after the advertised event ceases. Approved location of the banners shall be based on all aspects of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 10, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-10. - Permanent portable signs. 
    Permanent portable signs will be allowed on commercial property subject to meeting wind loads as specified in Southern Building Codes. 
(1)  Lighted permanent portable signs will be wired electrically to meet National Electric Codes. 
(2)  Only one permanent portable sign for every 300 feet of frontage and not to exceed two will be allowed per front frontage provided except two signs will be allowed if corner property is involved oriented toward different street or street corners. 
(3)  No part of permanent portable sign shall extend into right-of-way nor block adjacent properties, on-premises signs nor obscure visibility of any entering and existing driveway. 
(4)  Permanent portable signs shall require property permits from the city prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 11, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-11. - Portable trailer signs. 
    Portable trailer signs may be used for short promotions with a permit from the city, provided: 
(1)  Such sign is located entirely on private property; 
(2)  No electrical connections are made or that connections meet all National Electrical Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 12, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-12. - License and permit requirements. 
(a)  Only companies engaged in sign construction business with acceptable certificates of insurance with a minimum of $55,000.00 of liability coverage shall be allowed to erect and construct signs in the city. 
(b)  All lighted signs will require permits prior to installation. 
(c)  All non-lighted sign structures larger than 32 square feet will require permits prior to erection. 
(d)  Campaign signs, as herein defined shall be exempt from these fees provided they do not exceed subsection (c) of this section and only so long as they confirm to the provisions of section 42-7 and all other applicable provisions. 
(e)  Fees will be based on evaluation of work performed and product provided as with all city building permits issued. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 13, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-13. - Existing signs; applicability of chapter. 
(a)  Within this section, the term "existing sign location" shall mean the location of an on-premises sign in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter, upon premises where no lapse of business operations exceeding 180 days has occurred since that date. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to existing sign locations except as follows: 
(1)  New signs constructed or installed at existing sign locations shall be on the property of the business or activity. 
(2)  New signs constructed or installed at existing sign locations shall maintain clearance from utility lines in accordance with utility company standards. 
(3)  New signs constructed or installed at existing sign locations shall not exceed 421/2 feet in height for lots fronting U.S. Loop Highway 181, U.S. Business 181, U.S. 59, Texas Highway 202 and FM 673 and 35 in height for all other lots, and shall maintain adequate clearance for vehicles passing underneath and traffic viewing. 
(c)  On-premises signs on premises where a lapse in business operations exceeding 180 days has occurred shall be deems to be abandoned signs. Such abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises within 30 days after written notice to remove is given by the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee may cause the removal of any such sign remaining after such time, to be stored at owner's expense unless at discretion of the city such sign is allowed to stay with faces blacked out. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to billboards in existence at the time of adoption of this article; provided that any alteration or repair to the structure of such a billboard shall require such billboard to comply with the requirements of section 42-8 and shall not increase the area or height of such billboard. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 14, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-14. - Abatement of prohibited signs. 
(a)  All signs, sign structures, and supports placed upon or projecting across public property or right-of-way as of the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be removed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Those which present a danger to the persons or property because of their condition may be removed immediately by the city manager or designee and stored at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Those which may present a visual obstruction to traffic, as determined by the city engineer or such engineer's representative, may be removed immediately by the city manager or designee and stored at the owner's expense. 
(3)  All other such signs which become abandoned signs after such date shall be removed by the owner or user thereof within 30 days after written notice to remove is given by the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee may cause the removal of any such sign remaining after such time, to be stored at the owner's expense. 
Any such sign which is removed may be relocated on private property without regard to setback requirements otherwise applicable to such sign. 
(b)  All other signs in violation of any provision of section 42-6 or section 42-10 in existence as of the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be removed by the owner or user thereof within six months after such date. The city manager or designee may cause the removal of any such sign remaining after such time, to be stored at the owner's expense. 
(c)  Any sign constructed, installed, or erected after the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which becomes in violation of a location restriction contained in sections 42-8 and section 42-9 shall be made to conform to such restriction within six months after it becomes in violation, or such sign shall be removed. The city manager or designee may cause the removal of any such sign remaining after such time, to be stored at the owner's expense. 
(d)  Any sign which presents a danger to persons or property because of its condition may be removed by the city manager or designee and stored at the owner's expense. 
(e)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition in terms of structure and appearance. No sign owner or user shall allow the copy or face of a sign to become torn, cracked, or otherwise dilapidated. Upon the second or subsequent conviction of the owner or user of a sign for violation of this provision in the municipal court, the court may order the removal of such sign by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 15, 7-27-2004) 
Sec. 42-15. - Notice of sign removal. 
    The city manager or designee shall give written notice to the owner of a sign removed under this chapter of the right to reclaim such sign within 30 days of the notice of payment of the costs of removal and storage. Any sign not so reclaimed within such time may be disposed of by the city manager or designee in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. No. 2033, § 16, 7-27-2004) 
Chapter 44 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers relating to public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 122.006; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Resource Recovery Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 362.001 et seq.; Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery, and Conservation Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial account means any location whose primary function or purpose is other than for residential or living purpose excluding those served by garbage containers which shall be considered garbage container accounts. Motels and hotels shall be considered commercial accounts unless served by garbage containers. 
    Garbage means all animal or vegetable matter, such as waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, rooming and boardinghouses, and all other habitable structures, and shall include other deleterious substances and refuse generated through normal household, residential or commercial activity that is capable of being bagged, boxed or bundled, handled and collected by hand. 
    Garbage container (dumpster) accounts means residential or commercial type accounts serviced by garbage containers (dumpsters) provided by the city. 
    Residential account means single-family and multifamily dwelling units such as duplexes and apartments excluding those served by garbage containers which shall be considered garbage containers accounts. Motels and hotels shall be considered commercial accounts unless served by garbage containers. 
    Service address means the address or actual location where garbage collection service is provided, as opposed to any account's billing address. 
    Trash means items other than normal garbage that is too heavy or bulky to be collected by hand, usually consisting of items such as trees and tree limbs, lumber, construction debris, discarded furniture and appliances, etc. and rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans, paper, boxes, glass, grass, shrubs, yard cleanings, grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, wood shavings, sawdust and wood and lumber particles. 
(Code 1973, § 8-1; Ord. No. 985, § II, 10-28-1969; Ord. No. 1102, § 2, 1-23-1973; Ord. No. 1712, § II, 11-26-1991) 
Sec. 44-2. - Disposal of litter. 
    It is unlawful to dispose or allow or permit the disposal of litter at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, including a place on or within 300 feet of a public highway, on a right-of-way, or other public or private property. In addition, it is unlawful to receive litter for disposal at a place that is not an approved solid waste site and to transport litter to a place that is not an approved solid waste site for disposal at the site. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 6.2, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 44-3-44-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 44-25. - Collection within and outside city limits. 
    The city reserves the sole right to provide garbage collection service to locations within the city limits. The city may, if so requested, provide garbage collection services to locations outside of the corporate city limits at the city's discretion on an individual case basis with the right to adjust service rates, if warranted. 
(Ord. No. 1712, §§ III, IV, 11-26-1991) 
Sec. 44-26. - Fees. 
    Fees for garbage collection and disposal shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1712, § VII, 11-26-1991) 
Sec. 44-27. - Use of containers restricted. 
    The city will not collect garbage from containers (dumpsters) other than those owned and provided by the city. The city will equip containers with a lock mechanism (hasp) on the container lid to discourage this if requested by the customer. The customer will be responsible for providing the lock and key, and for unlocking and removing the lock during regularly scheduled pickup hours. Garbage containers may be shared by more than one customer. It is the responsibility of the customers to agree among themselves as to what is their fair portion of the monthly cost, and the city will then bill them accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1712, § VIIIF., 11-26-1991) 
Sec. 44-28. - Collection schedule; placement for collection. 
(a)  Garbage collection begins at 8:00 a.m. in residential neighborhoods, except during the summer months when it begins at 7:30 a.m. This summer period will correspond to the public school year system's dismissal of classes for the summer and then the beginning of classes for the fall. 
(1)  The city collects trash throughout the city on a regularly scheduled basis, and one truck load per month (approximately eight cubic yards) of trash collection shall be provided at the service address of each active customer account at no charge. 
(2)  Additional loads, or unscheduled collection, shall be provided at a cost of $15.00 per load. 
(3)  The allowance of one free load per month is good for one month only, and cannot be carried forward or accumulated from one month to the next. 
(4)  When trash is collected at a location, the entire pile of trash will be removed, and the customer charged for any truck loads exceeding the first complimentary truck load. Trash will not be left to be picked up one month at a time. 
(5)  Trash collection is done by mechanized equipment, and trash must be placed adjacent to the street so it can be removed by the equipment from the street. 
(6)  Trash should not be placed on top of or near utility service apparatus such as water or gas meters, utility poles, etc. The city will not remove trash if a potential risk exists for damage to property or personal injury. Customers will be held responsible for damage to property that occurs during removal of trash because the property was hidden or obscured by the accumulated trash. 
(7)  The city's ability to provide trash collection service may be limited by availability of personnel or suitable equipment so situations may arise where the city will not be able to provide the service because of the size, volume or type of trash to be removed. The customer will be responsible for removal and disposal of trash in these cases. 
(b)  Garbage for residential and commercial accounts must be bagged, boxed or bundled so that it can be collected by hand. The city will not collect loose garbage, or collect by hand loose garbage contained in an enclosure. 
(c)  Garbage must be placed adjacent to the street, or in some cases alley, so that it is accessible to garbage collection crews without having to enter onto private property. 
(d)  Garbage collection. The city shall provide a garbage container meeting the requirements of section 44-27. The customer shall place, or cause to be placed, the garbage container in the location for collection approved by the director. Pack out service is offered to residents in all areas of the city. Containers other than pack out shall be placed at the curb for collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to scheduled service and shall be removed by 7:00 a.m. the morning following the collection day. 
(1)  An authorized city employee has the authority to take the following actions if the garbage container is left in or about the curb area at any time other than the above described times: 
a.  First occurrence within a 12-month period. The city employee will move the container to the customer's front door area and post a notice on the customer's container notifying the customer of the violation of city Code section 44-28(d). 
b.  Second occurrence within a 12-month period. The city employee will move the container to the customer's front door area and post a notice on the container that notifies the customer of the violation of Beeville City Code section 44-28(d) and that a five-dollar container return fee will be assessed on the customer's utility bill upon the next occurrence of a section 16-4c violation requiring removal and return of customer's container. 
c.  Third occurrence within a 12-month period. The city employee will move the container to the customer's front door area and post a notice on the container that notifies the customer: 1) of the violation of this subsection, 2) that a ten-dollar container return fee has been assessed on the customer's utility bill for the violation of section 44-28(d) requiring removal and return of customer's container, and 3) that a twenty-dollar container return fee will be assessed on the customer's utility bill upon the next occurrence of a section 44-28(d) violation requiring removal and return of customer's container. 
d.  Fourth and subsequent occurrences within a 12-month period. The city employee will move the container to the customer's front door area and post a notice on the container that notifies the customer: 1) of the violation of Beeville City Code section 44-28(d), 2) that a forty-dollar container return fee has been assessed on the customer's utility bill for the violation of section 44-28(d) requiring removal and return of customer's container, and 3) that a twenty-dollar container return fee will be assessed on the customer's utility bill upon any subsequent occurrences of a section 44-28(d) violation requiring removal and return of customer's container. 
(Ord. No. 1686, 4-16-1991; Ord. No. 1712, §§ V, VI, IX, X, 11-26-1991; Ord. No. 2321, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 44-29. - Sanitary landfill. 
    The city operates a sanitary landfill that is open to the public during hours posted at the entrance. Fees for use of the landfill are as provided in the city fee schedule. Tickets for disposal of garbage or trash at the landfill will be sold at city hall. Complimentary tickets for disposal of trash at the landfill in lieu of trash collection at the customer's service address will not be issued. The types of materials that can be disposed of at the sanitary landfill are determined by federal and state regulatory agencies. Only allowable materials will be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 1712, § XI, 11-26-1991) 
Sec. 44-30. - Citizen's collection station. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The citizens collection station is provided for the convenience and exclusive use of residents to dispose of solid waste items which they would have normally taken to a landfill. It is not meant to be used for disposal of regular household and kitchen garbage, but instead for disposal of other than usual solid waste items homeowners sometimes need to dispose of. These items might include the larger than normal items the person wants to dispose of rather than placing them in front of their house for curbside collection. Some examples include furniture, mattresses, used clothing, old appliances, or debris from a homeowner's remodeling job. 
(b)  Location and hours. The citizen's collection station is located at 200 South Jackson Street, Beeville, Texas, and is open during the following hours: 
(1)  Mondays and Fridays, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Tuesdays through Thursdays, 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Saturdays, 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.; and 
(4)  Closed on Sundays and holidays observed by city. 
(c)  Fees. Fees for use of the collection station shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Persons collecting solid waste items for others in exchange for a fee or transporting debris generated at a work site where they are being paid to do work are prohibited from using the station. 
(e)  Prohibited items. The following items may not be deposited at the collection station: 
(1)  Organic household waste that may generate odor during decomposition, or attract rodents or flies; 
(2)  Brush or tree limbs; 
(3)  Dead animals, or slaughterhouse wastes; 
(4)  Used tires and oil filters; 
(5)  Wastewater treatment plant sludge, septic tank waste, or grease and grit trap wastes; 
(6)  Burned material; 
(7)  Batteries; 
(8)  Discarded materials containing asbestos; 
(9)  Any devices containing freon unless they have been drained of freon and tagged by a certified inspector; 
(10)  Hazardous waste as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq., as amended; 
(11)  Metal and plastic containers may be accepted if they are clean and dry, and the lids or bottoms removed; 
(12)  Roof debris (shingles, felt paper, etc.) in quantities exceeding one pickup load. 
(Ord. No. 1992, §§ 8.2-8.6, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 44-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter are intended to apply to land inside the city. 
(b)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to seek injunctive or other legal or equitable relief as may be necessary and appropriate to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The health official, building official, environment inspector or other authorized designee, or any peace officer may issue citations or summons for violation of this chapter regardless of whether a notice to abate is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 2-14-2017) 
Chapter 46 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; drainage on public roads, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 254.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Corner sight obstructions. 
    No person shall erect any wall, fence or other structure to a height greater than three feet above the level of the crown of the roadway or plant any hedge, tree, shrub or growth of a height greater than three feet above the level of the crown of the roadway, or maintain or permit the existence of any such wall, fence or other structure of a height greater than three feet above the level of the crown of the roadway, or maintain or permit the growth or existence of any hedge, tree, shrub or other structure to a height greater than three feet above the level of the crown of the roadway upon his property or on property under his control wherever such property is bounded on two adjacent sides by public rights-of-way for road, street, boulevard, alley or other public way, the area so restricted being the area of the corner or corners of such property, more particularly described as being that area bounded by two intersecting boundaries of the public rights-of-way for a distance of 20 feet of each of the boundaries from the point of intersection, and bounded by a third side determined by the drawing of a straight line from the points on the two intersecting boundaries 20 feet from their intersection; provided, however, the existence of a tree shall not be unlawful so long as such tree is free of branches and foliage for a height of at least seven feet above the level of the crown of the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 7-13-1954) 
Sec. 46-2. - Minimum height of wires. 
    Every person who shall place, string or hang any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other wire along, over or across any public street, alley, highway, park or other public property within the city shall place such wires at a height of not less than 20 feet from the ground. 
(Code 1973, § 14-2; Ord. No. 38, 7-3-1912) 
Sec. 46-3. - Street improvement assessment notice and hearing. 
    Whenever the city council shall propose to make any street improvement in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, the notice of assessment as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.041 shall be published as therein provided and the hearings shall be held before the city council, and shall be fully and fairly held, at which hearings the mayor shall preside under such rules and regulations as are required in judicial proceedings. 
(Code 1973, § 14-3; Ord. No. 87, § 1, 2-8-1921) 
Secs. 46-4-46-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 46-25. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any sidewalk, driveway or other way, for the use of any character of vehicle, on or across any sidewalk, parkway or other space between any public roadway or right-of-way and any private property without first securing a permit from the building inspector for constructing the improvements in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article, complying with the regulations which may be provided by any other ordinance; provided the approval of the city council on a plat approving specifications for driveways shall constitute a permit for a driveway complying with the indicated specifications, which permit shall be considered valid for a period of one year from the date of the plat. 
(Code 1973, § 14-15; Ord. No. 612, § I, 5-8-1962) 
Sec. 46-26. - Application, fee. 
    Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector showing the location of such proposed improvements, together with a map, plat or sketch drawn to scale fully describing the nature of the proposed improvements and the location thereof. In the event such application complies with the requirements of this article, and such other regulations concerning the matter as may be provided, a permit shall be issued by the building inspector after the payment of a fee as provided by the city fee schedule by the applicant to the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 14-16; Ord. No. 612, § II, 5-8-1962) 
Sec. 46-27. - Construction and layout requirements. 
    No driveway providing access from private property to any public right-of-way or roadway shall be constructed, unless a showing is made to the satisfaction of the city manager under section 46-28, unless such approach and driveway shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  No driveway shall have a width measured along the boundary line between the public right-of-way and the private property of more than 35 feet, except that, upon a showing under the provisions of section 46-28, such driveway may not be in excess of 45 feet in width. The number and location of driveways are shown on the following table: 
X A Curb Return Radii B Island C Corner Clearance No. of 
Driveways Frontage Min. Max. Min. Desirable Min. Max. Up to 58' 21/2' 15' None 5' None 1 58' to 95' 21/2' 15' None 20' 5' 1 58' to 95' 21/2' 15' 12' 5' None 2 96' to 135' 21/2' 15' x/8 10' 5' 2 136' to 320' 5' 15' x/6 20' 15' 2 321' to 600' 10' 15' x/3 20' 20' 3 601' and up, Special Design  
Typical access layout illustrating application of regulations to commercial and public access frontage: 
(2)  Except that upon a showing under the provisions of section 46-28, one additional driveway will be permitted, provided that this additional driveway be no closer than 35 feet from the driveway or driveways permitted under the table in subsection (1) of this section. Safety zones separating driveways shall be outlined by curbs or posts as necessary to prohibit parking or driving across zones for all nonresidential uses. If curbs are used, they shall be concrete, asphalt or masonry barrier type curbs approved by the city engineer and not less than four inches in height. If posts are used, they shall be round, six inches in diameter, with domed tops, 23/4 feet in length, and shall be installed six feet apart, extending 15 inches above the ground, painted white and shall have reflector buttons or patches for night visibility when feasible. The barrier line nearest the street shall not be less than 24 feet from the center of the pavement or on line with existing curbs or established curblines. 
(3)  Except where the curb is a roll type curb, the curb return on all driveways shall have a minimum radius of not less than 21/2 feet and the point where the return falls tangent to the curb shall be within the property lines extended of the property which the driveway is designed to serve. Should two or more adjacent grantees agree to combine their property frontage for a combined access facility, it would be authorized under applicable regulations. The frontage will then be the portion of the right-of-way lying between the most distant possible lines of the combined frontage drawn perpendicularly from the center line of the street to the grantee's abutting property line. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be constructed at an elevation so as to provide for a minimum of one-quarter inch per foot fall from the edge of the sidewalk farthest from the property line to the top of the curb, in business and commercial areas. Sidewalks in other areas will be located in accordance with current subdivision regulations of the city, except that where there is an established practice in the block, sidewalks shall be located to match the existing walks. 
(5)  Where a ramp section of the driveway is to be constructed, the ramp shall reach the grade of the sidewalk at a distance of not less than five feet from the outside edge of the street curbline. 
(6)  The grade for all curbs, sidewalks, driveways and ramps shall be fixed by the city manager. 
(7)  All driveway approaches, ramps and sidewalks constructed in connection therewith for business and commercial establishments shall be constructed of concrete having a minimum of 2500 psi in 28 days, and shall have a minimum thickness of six inches, and shall have reinforcing consisting of a minimum of six-inch by six-inch number six wire mesh, except that driveway approaches and ramps may be constructed of asphalt. 
(Code 1973, § 14-17; Ord. No. 612, § III, 5-8-1962) 
Sec. 46-28. - Variances. 
(a)  Upon the showing that unusual circumstances exist, or that a need for a driveway of greater width exists, or some variance from the requirements set forth in section 46-28 may be made, where such variances will not be contrary to the public interest and that literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship, the regulations may be varied with the approval of the city manager; provided in no instance shall any driveway opening be in excess of 45 feet in width. Any person requesting that the regulations in section 46-28 be varied because of unusual circumstances shall file a written request therefor with the city manager, setting forth the circumstances to show that literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. The city manager shall either approve or deny in writing a request for a variance of the provisions of this article within a reasonable time, but in no event shall the city manager withhold his decision for more than 30 days. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager under the provisions hereof shall have the right to appeal to the city council upon giving written notice to the city council, within five days after the refusal of the application made by him for a permit to construct such driveway or other way. 
(Code 1973, § 14-18; Ord. No. 612, § IV, 5-8-1962) 
Secs. 46-29-46-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 46-60. - Notice to owner. 
    The city council may by ordinance order and compel the laying and constructing of sidewalks by property owners in front of or abutting on their land after giving notice to the owners or agents of the property, the notice to be signed by the city manager attached by the city clerk by mail to the address shown on the city tax rolls, or when the owners or agents are unknown, such notice shall be served by publication in some newspaper published in the city, once each week for four successive weeks. The cost of such publication shall be a charge against the property of such unknown owners, adjacent to which such sidewalk is ordered to be constructed. 
(Code 1973, § 14-46; Ord. No. 31, § 2; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-61. - Completion time; curbing included; permit required. 
    All sidewalks ordered to be constructed shall be completed within 60 days from the serving of the notice provided for in section 46-60, and all curbing shall be completed within 30 days from the service of such notice. The serving of notice to construct sidewalks shall include curbing without special notice to construct curbing; and to secure uniformity in the construction of sidewalks and curbing, no person shall construct a sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the city inspector or city surveyor, who shall keep in his office a record of all permits issued. 
(Code 1973, § 14-47; Ord. No. 31, § 3; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-62. - Inspection; notice to noncomplying owners. 
    At the expiration of the time a sidewalk is ordered to be completed, the city inspector or city surveyor shall inspect the same and the premises along which such sidewalk was ordered to be constructed, and make his report in writing to the city council, showing what portions of such sidewalk have not been constructed. Thereupon, notice shall be issued to the noncomplying owners or agents of such property requiring them to show cause at the succeeding meeting of the city council, not less than five days after such notice shall have been served, why such sidewalks should not be constructed by the city as provided for in this article and the cost thereof fixed as a charge and lien on the property and premises abutting the same. 
(Code 1973, § 14-48; Ord. No. 31, § 4; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-63. - Construction by city. 
    After the provisions of sections 46-60 through 46-62 have been complied with, if the owner or agent of the property shall have failed or refused to so construct the required sidewalks, then it shall be the duty of the street commissioner in conjunction with the inspector or city surveyor to immediately construct such sidewalk, along the line of the street and abutting the property of the owner or agent failing, refusing or neglecting to construct such sidewalk, by contract or otherwise, after advertising for bids therefor; provided that if the city can do the work at a lower price than the lowest bid so received, then the work may be done by the city directly. The cost of such construction shall be a charge against the owner of, and a lien upon the lot, part of lot or block to be charged with the construction of the sidewalk on which it abuts. 
(Code 1973, § 14-49; Ord. No. 31, § 5; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-64. - Impressing lien. 
    When the required sidewalk shall have been constructed by the city, as is provided for in this article, it shall be the duty of the city manager to correctly estimate the cost of the construction, grading or filling up of the sidewalk abutting each lot, part of lot or block, along the line of the street and they shall enter in a book regularly kept for the purpose, opposite each lot, part of lot or block, the cost of the construction of such sidewalk directly abutting the same, a certified copy of which shall be filed with the county clerk and recorded in the records of mortgages and liens of the office, and shall constitute a lien against such property, and be a charge against the owner thereof, and collected as city taxes are collected under the laws and ordinances of this city. Such estimate shall be sufficient if it contains a general description of the property. Such estimate, duly certified to, showing the amount due by such owner or agent, shall be furnished him upon application therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-50; Ord. No. 31, § 6; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-65. - Repair. 
    Whenever any agent or owner of any lot or part of lot or block abutting on any sidewalk in the city, shall be notified to repair the same, and shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notification, the sidewalk shall be repaired by the city in the same manner and by the same means as is provided herein for construction of sidewalks, where the agent or owner fails, neglects or refuses to do so, and every provision of this article relating to the construction of sidewalks where the agents or owners fail, refuse or neglect to construct them, shall apply to the repair of sidewalks by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-51; Ord. No. 31, § 7; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-66. - Collection of cost; interest. 
    The cost of sidewalks and curbing shall be collected, if necessary, by sale of the lot or part of lot or block on which it fronts, together with the cost of collection, as taxes due the city are collected, and a sale of any lot or part of lot or block to enforce the collection of the cost of such sidewalk and curbing shall convey a good title to the purchaser, and the balance of the proceeds of the sale, after paying the amount due the city and costs of same, shall be paid to the owner; provided one-fifth of the cost of such sidewalk and curbing shall become delinquent six months after the completion of the sidewalk and one-fifth every six months thereafter until it is all paid and if one installment becomes due and is unpaid, the entire amount remaining unpaid shall immediately become delinquent, and collection thereof may be enforced, which sum shall bear interest from the time of the completion of the work at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(Code 1973, § 14-52; Ord. No. 31, § 7; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Sec. 46-67. - Punishment for violation. 
    If any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct sidewalks in front of or abutting on his land, after being ordered so to do, as in this article provided, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to repair such sidewalks or shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct curbing as provided by this article, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 for each day of such failure, neglect or refusal. 
(Code 1973, § 14-53; Ord. No. 31, § 8; Ord. No. 43, 10-7-1912) 
Secs. 46-68-46-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPENING AND CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS 

Sec. 46-93. - Request; contents. 
    All persons desiring to have the city council exercise its powers regarding the establishment or closing of public streets, alleys or other ways, shall file their request with the city secretary, in writing, directed to the city council. Such request shall contain an accurate description of the street or other public ways or portions thereof desired to be opened or closed or altered, as the case may be, and attached to the request shall be a list of all owners in the block abutting the street or alley, together with the last known address of all the owners. Unless all such owners of abutting property join in the petition, a statement shall be attached to the petition showing the reason for nonparticipation of those who have not signed the petition. 
(Code 1973, § 14-30; Ord. No. 561, § I, 1-24-1961) 
Sec. 46-94. - Deposit for administrative costs. 
    Upon the filing of a request in accordance with section 46-93 with the city secretary, a deposit shall be made with the city secretary of the sum as provided in the city fee schedule to cover the expense of mailing notices as required by section 46-95 and making any necessary publications. 
(Code 1973, § 14-31; Ord. No. 561, § II, 1-24-1961) 
Sec. 46-95. - Public hearing; setting, notice. 
    The city secretary, upon the receipt of a petition and receipt of the required deposit, shall notify the city manager, who shall at the next regular meeting of the city council, notify the city council of the filing of such petition and thereupon the city council, if it deems the request contained in the petition necessary in the public interest, shall direct that a notice of public hearing upon such petition be published in the official newspaper of the city one time and direct the city manager to notify by regular mail all known owners of property abutting on such street or public way or portion thereof of the date, time and place of such public hearing. 
(Code 1973, § 14-32; Ord. No. 561, § III, 5-24-1961) 
Sec. 46-96. - Holding. 
    A public hearing required by section 46-95 shall be held not sooner than ten days nor more than 30 days after the publication of the notice thereof in such newspaper. All persons interested in the matter contained in such petition shall be heard by the city council, after which the city council may, on the date of such public hearing or at any regular or special meeting of the council thereafter, order the street or other public way or portion thereof opened, closed, altered or abandoned as the case may be, and as the city council may find necessary and proper in the public interest. 
(Code 1973, § 14-33; Ord. No. 561, § IV, 2-14-1961) 
Sec. 46-97. - Ordinance directing improvement. 
    The action of the city council upon a petition shall be reflected in an ordinance duly passed by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-34; Ord. No. 561, § V, 2-14-1961) 
Chapter 48 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Territorial applicability of regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations shall govern the approval and requirements for plats of subdivisions within the corporate limits of the city and within one mile of the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 15-1; Ord. No. 638, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 2255, § I, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the city planning commission. 
    Street or alley means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, freeway, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Major arterial streets provide for through traffic movement between areas of the city and across the city. Access to abutting property is permitted from arterial streets. They connect principal traffic generators within the city and rural routes. Arterial streets should border residential neighborhoods rather than to bisect them. 
(2)  Major collector streets are connecting streets between major arterial streets and serve traffic from several neighborhoods collecting traffic from local or minor collector streets. 
(3)  Minor collector streets serve a single neighborhood or subdivision collecting traffic from local streets and leading to a major collector or major arterial street. 
(4)  Local streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting residential properties and which are intended to serve traffic within a limited residential district. 
(5)  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(6)  Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Subdivider or developer are synonymous and are used interchangeably, and means any person or any officer, agent, employee, servant and trustee thereof, who does, or participates in the doing of, any act toward the subdivision of land within the intent, scope and purview of this chapter. 
    Subdivision means the division of any tract of land within the city or within one mile thereof into two or more parts, or the laying out of suburban lots or building lots or any lots, and streets, alleys, parks or other property intended for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. This definition includes the resubdivision of land or lots which are a part of a previously recorded subdivision. The following are not defined as subdivisions: A division of land into tracts greater than five acres in size not involving any new streets or easements; a division of property between two or more owners of an undivided interest by court order. An addition is a subdivision as defined herein. 
    Townhouse subdivision means those developments in which it is proposed to partition land into individually owned lots for townhouses where under specific conditions the minimum lot sizes may be less than those required for other single family homes. The term "townhouse" is defined in city zoning regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 15-2; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 2255, § II, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-3. - Variances. 
(a)  Hardship. Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the general community plan or this chapter. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1973, § 15-9; Ord. No. 638, § VIII, 2-12-1963) 
Sec. 48-4. - Appeal. 
    Any subdivider contesting any disapproval or the interpretation or application of any rule, standard, regulation, determination, requirement or necessity set forth in this chapter directly or by delegation of authority shall have the right, by filing a written request with the secretary of the city council within 30 days of his receipt of the written objections of the planning commission to have a hearing thereon before the city council, within 15 days after the date of filing of such request. If the subdivider is dissatisfied with the finding of the city council after such hearing, he may appeal such ruling to any appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, in which the matter shall be determined in a trial be novo, and it is expressly provided that the substantial evidence rule shall not be applicable in such appeal. 
(Code 1973, § 15-10; Ord. No. 638, § X, 2-12-1963) 
Secs. 48-5-48-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 48-27. - Planning commission approval and conformity to chapter required. 
(a)  Before any plan, plat or replat of a subdivision of land inside the city or within one mile of the city limits thereof shall be recorded with the county clerk, it shall first be approved by the planning commission in conformity with state law and the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No transfer of land in the nature of a subdivision shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter even though the instrument or document of transfer may describe land so subdivided by metes and bounds. 
(c)  The filing of any plan, plat or replat without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the transfer of land by the filing of any instrument in the nature of a conveyance without having first complied with the requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 15-3; Ord. No. 638, § II, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 2255, § III, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-28. - Plat review and approval. 
(a)  Conference. Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall confer with the city manager or his designee on an informal basis to discuss the proposed plat, its conformity to this chapter, relationship to surrounding property, streets, etc. 
(b)  Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(1)  Any person proposing to subdivide a tract of land within the city or within one mile of the city shall first prepare and submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat together with supplementary material as specified in section 48-29, except that when no new street for the public use is involved and no more than three lots are involved, the person wishing to subdivide may file a final plat, if he wishes, without the necessity of a preliminary plat as specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Four copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning commission with written application for conditional approval at least 14 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(3)  On receipt of a preliminary plat and supplementary information, the planning commission shall render a decision thereon within 30 days. Such decision may consist of approval, disapproval or conditional approval. Conditional approval shall be considered to be approval of a plat or replat subject to conformity with the prescribed conditions, but shall be deemed to be a disapproval of such plat or replat until such conditions are complied with. All objections made to the preliminary plat or conditions imposed, shall be furnished to the subdivider in writing. 
(4)  When a preliminary plat has been approved, the subdivider may thereafter file a final plat or plats of sections of the subdivision upon which approval of the preliminary plat has been obtained, and upon the filing of a final plat or plats covering a portion of such subdivision, the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be deemed as considered approved or conditionally approved as in subsection (b)(3) of this section; provided, however, that such approval or conditional approval of the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be limited to a two year period; provided further, however, that the planning commission may at its discretion extend such period of validity. When a preliminary plat has been approved and thereafter the subdivider fails to file a plat of the subdivision or a section thereof within a period of six months, the approval of the preliminary plat shall be void, except, however, the planning commission may, in its discretion, extend such period of validity. 
(5)  The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the planning commission. 
(c)  Procedure for approval of final plats. 
(1)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat proposed to be recorded and developed at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission at least 14 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(3)  Four copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in section 48-29, and shall be submitted to the planning commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. 
(Code 1973, § 15-4; Ord. No. 638, § III, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 2255, § IV, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-29. - Plat standards and specifications. 
(a)  Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on a scale on 100 feet to the inch or larger and shall show the following: 
(1)  The title, north point, direction of prevailing breeze, scale and date; 
(2)  The name of the owner or owners and the engineer or surveyor; 
(3)  Vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more than 400 feet to the inch which shall show all existing subdivisions, streets and tracts of acreage in the area and the general drainage plan, ultimate destination of water and possible storm sewer connections by arrows; 
(4)  The outline of the tract the plat is proposed to subdivide with principal dimensions; 
(5)  The locations and names of existing streets and any blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines and watercourses or other natural features in the area affected, with principal dimensions, and all significant information, including ownership of the property immediately adjacent or across boundary streets on all sides for a distance of not less than 200 feet; 
(6)  The proposed plan of subdivision, showing streets, blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines, parks, etc., with principal dimensions. The preliminary plat shall cover all of the tract intended to be developed, at any time, even though it is intended by the developer or developers to file final plats and install improvements for parts of the tract by sections or units; 
(7)  The location of existing sewers, water and gas mains and other public utilities, if any; 
(8)  The names of proposed streets when new streets for public use are involved. Such names shall conform to the existing streets of which they may be or become extensions or otherwise shall not duplicate or conflict with the recognized name of any other street located in the area subject to this chapter; 
(9)  Proposed general plan for storm water drainage sufficiently detailed to indicate the location of drainage ditches or structures and the direction of flow when a new street for public use is involved; 
(10)  Any proposed zoning district change for which an application has been or will be made; 
(11)  Watercourses and all trees over eight inches in diameter between street lines when a new street for public use is involved; and 
(12)  Contours of not more than five-foot intervals may be required by the planning commission. 
(b)  Plats and data for final approval. The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger, in ink or linen, acetate film or velum, with all figures legible. The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  The title or name by which the subdivision is to be identified, north point, scale of the map and the name of the registered professional engineer or licensed state land surveyor responsible; 
(2)  A definite legal description and identification of the tract being subdivided, which description shall be sufficient for the requirements of title examination. The plat shall be a descriptive diagram, drawn to scale, and shall show by reference that the subdivision is a particular portion or part of a previously filed plat or an original grant, which diagram and description shall show as being included in the subdivision, at least, all of the smallest unit of the last filed subdivision, plat or grant, out of which the instant subdivision is divided, or so much thereof as is owned by the subdivider; 
(3)  The boundaries of the subdivided property, the location or designation of all streets, alleys, parks and other areas intended to be dedicated or deeded to public use, with proper dimensions. The boundaries shall be indicated by a heavy line equivalent to a number five Payzant pen and shall be tied by dimension to the established center line of all existing boundary streets; 
(4)  The location of all adjacent streets and alleys, with their names, and the names of adjoining subdivisions with exact location and designation by number of lots and blocks; 
(5)  All lot, block and street boundary lines, with blocks and lots numbered or lettered consecutively. Building lines and easements shall be shown and shall be defined by dimension. The actual width of all streets shall be shown, measured at right angles or radially, where curved. All principal lines shall have the bearing given and any deviation from the norm indicated; 
(6)  Accurate dimensions, both linear and angular, of all items on the plat; the boundary survey on the site shall close and the plat for record shall so show. The angular dimensions may be shown by bearings. Curved boundaries shall be fully described and all essential information given. Circular curves shall be defined by actual length of a radius and not by degree of curve. Complete dimensional data shall be given on fractional lots; 
(7)  The description and location of all lot and block corners and permanent survey reference monuments shall be shown; 
(8)  A certificate of ownership in fee of all land embraced in the subdivision, and of the authenticity of the plat for dedication, signed and acknowledged by all owners of any interest in the land. The acknowledgment shall be in the form required in the conveyance of real estate. Approval and acceptance of all lienholders shall be included; 
(9)  A certificate by the registered professional engineer in charge or licensed land surveyor, duly authenticated, that the plat is true and correct and in accordance with the determination of surveys actually made on the ground. If the engineer or licensed land surveyor who, prepared the plat did not make the original boundary survey, this fact should be noted in the certificate. Also the certificate should show whether or not the tract is within one mile of the city limits, measured in a straight line from the nearest point in the city limits, unless the information is shown in a suitable manner elsewhere on the face of the plat; and 
(10)  In addition to other required certificates, the following form shall be printed or lettered on the plat: 
"STATE OF TEXAS 
 COUNTY OF BEE 
This plat of ____________ Subdivision approved ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (date) by the city planning commission of the city. This the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
_____
Secretary _____
Chairman"  
(11)  If a subdivision is located outside the city limits, but within one mile of the city limits and provides for the dedication of area for streets or other public use, the plat shall provide a form in blank to record the acceptance of the plat by the county commissioner's court as follows: 
"STATE OF TEXAS COUNTY OF BEE 
I, ____________ , Clerk of the commissioner's Court of Bee County, Texas, do hereby certify that the foregoing map was approved and accepted by the commissioner's Court on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , as shown by order or record in minutes of the Court in Vol. ____________ on page ____________ . 
Witness my hand and the seal of the Court as office in Beeville, Texas, this the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
_____
Clerk of the Commissioner's Court 
of Bee County, Texas"  
(12)  The final plat submitted to the planning commission and to be filed for record with the county clerk shall not show the construction features such as curblines or public utility lines or other structures not involved in the title covenant. 
(Code 1973, § 15-5; Ord. No. 638, § IV, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 763, § I, 8-24-1965; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 2255, § V, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-30. - Platting of land for mobile home subdivisions. 
(a)  The regulations governing the requirements and approval for platting of subdivisions within the corporate limits of the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall apply for platting of land for mobile home subdivisions except as set forth herein. 
(b)  Mobile home subdivisions inside the city shall be located only in a "M/H" Mobile Home Park/Mobile Home Subdivision District and requirements of the "M/H" district shall apply for such subdivisions located inside the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 15-5.1; Ord. No. 1116, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-1973) 
Secs. 48-31-48-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN, REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 48-49. - Design standards. 
(a)  Streets. 
(1)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the general community plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(2)  Where such is not shown in the general community plan, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood, approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(3)  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(4)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(5)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(6)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets may be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the city or county. 
(7)  Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(8)  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(9)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure sight distance of not less than 50 feet for minor and collector streets and of such greater radii as the planning commission shall determine for special cases. 
(10)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees. 
(11)  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 15 feet, or of a greater radius where the planning commission may deem it necessary. The planning commission may permit comparable cutoffs of chords in place of rounded corners. 
(12)  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the general community plan and where not shown therein shall not be less than as follows: 
Street type Right-of-way (feet) Arterial (major thoroughfare) 100 Major collector 65 Minor collector 55 Minor or residential 50 Marginal access 40  
(13)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter; and where the planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(14)  Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall be longer than 400 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. 
(15)  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(16)  No street grade shall be less than three-tenths of one percent. 
(b)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys may be provided in subdivisions and in the case of commercial and industrial districts shall be required where other definite and ensured provisions are not made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(2)  The width of all alleys shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(4)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by the planning commission. 
(c)  Easements. 
(1)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot liens shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 15 feet wide when centered on rear lot lines. 
(2)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
(d)  Blocks. 
(1)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
c.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; or 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(2)  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,600 feet or be less than 300 feet in length. Whenever a block exceeds 600 feet, aerial side lot line easements of at least ten feet centered on side lot lines shall be provided for street light wiring from rear lot line utility easement or alley. 
(e)  Lots. 
(1)  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and shall conform to the standards and requirements of the city zoning ordinance, as amended. 
a.  Residential lots where not served by a public sewer shall not be less than 100 feet wide, nor less than 12,000 square feet in area. 
b.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(2)  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(3)  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
(4)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access may be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(5)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(f)  Unsuitable land. Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage and other features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare and general health of the future residents, and which the planning commission considers inappropriate for subdivision, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods for correcting same are formulated and agreed to by the developer. 
(Code 1973, § 15-6; Ord. No. 638, § V, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 885, § I, 3-12-1998) 
Sec. 48-50. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Monuments. 
(1)  Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate points as required by the planning commission. 
(2)  Monuments shall be made of an iron rod three-quarters of an inch in diameter and from 24 to 30 inches in length with its top set flush with the ground. 
(3)  Iron pins at lot corners shall be of one-half-inch iron rods, 24 inches long, with top set flush with the ground. 
(b)  Utility and street improvements. 
(1)  Before beginning any construction of the improvements outlined in this section on proposed roadways, sidewalks or public utilities pertaining to the subdivision, one complete set of plans and specifications of such construction, in the form of plats, maps and sketches or other satisfactory written description shall be prepared by the property owner or developer and shall be filed with the planning commission. These shall show such features as roadways, cross sections and longitudinal slope for drainage, full description of proposed pavement, sidewalk or street improvements, its grade and slope, dimensions and specifications concerning public utilities to be installed showing proposed position on the ground, specifications of material and construction, and profile maps of all sanitary and storm sewers showing both ground surface and flow line, and any other pertinent information of similar nature. The property owner and his agents or employees shall do and perform all work of building and constructing such improvements. All such work shall be performed under the city's supervision and approval. Performance bonds and complete insurance coverage shall be furnished as the city may require. All improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standard specifications adopted by the city council for other similar construction, or in the absence of adopted specifications, in accordance with specifications approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  The following minimum standards for improvements shall be agreed to and complied with in each subdivision or addition before final approval of a plat by the planning commission. 
a.  Street or roadway pavement. Widths of pavement, measuring from the face of the curb, for the various types of streets, shall not be less than the following: 
Major arterial Two 33 foot pavements with a 16-foot median Major collector 44 feet Minor collector 36 feet Local 30 feet Marginal access 20 feet  
b.  Curb and gutter. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on each side of each street within a subdivision. The curb shall be of a standard adopted by the city council. Subdivisions, the greater part of which are beyond one-half mile from the city limits and in certain other locations deemed by the planning commission to warrant special consideration, may have side ditches with side slopes not steeper than one on five. Where side ditches are elected, the minimum right-of-way for such street and side ditches shall be increased a minimum of ten feet and where deemed necessary by the planning commission, the required right-of-way width may be greater than the minimum to accommodate adequate size drainage structures. 
c.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required. They shall have a width of not less than four feet and a thickness of not less than four inches and shall be placed with the inside edge on the property line within the street right-of-way and shall extend along all street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends; provided, however, that where it is impractical for the subdivider to provide such sidewalks on the side lot lines abutting major thoroughfares or drainage ditches, then in those instances sidewalks shall not be required. 
d.  Alley pavement. Alley pavements shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and have a flexible base six inches thick, and a two course inverted topping. 
e.  Sanitary sewers. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, each lot within a subdivided area shall be provided with a connection to such sanitary sewer. The minimum size of mains shall be eight inches. When any proposed subdivision is not reasonably accessible to a public sanitary sewer, provision shall be made for the use of either septic tanks or an individual sewage treatment plant as follows: 
1.  Septic tanks. In all subdivisions planned for septic tank use, the minimum lot area shall be one-half acre per single-family dwelling. Septic tanks shall be installed on each lot concurrent with any development thereon, and the design of such system and the method of installation shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the county health unit. The county health unit shall have the authority to vary the lot area requirement where satisfactory evidence is presented indicating that soil conditions are such as to warrant a change. 
2.  Individual sewage treatment plant. In all subdivisions planned or to be serviced by an individual sewage treatment plant, lots may be of standard area and sewers shall be installed to serve each lot. The plant providing such sewage disposal facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the state board of health and with the approval and under the supervision of the county health unit. 
f.  Water lines. 
1.  Where an approved public water supply is reasonably accessible or procurable, each lot within the subdivided area shall be provided with access to such water supply. The design of the system shall be such as to form a loop of at least six inch mains. No main shall be smaller than four inches, except that two inch stubs may be extended to serve a maximum of three lots. 
2.  In areas where a public water supply is not available, the subdivider shall construct other facilities in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water shall be available to every lot in the subdivision. Such water supply system shall be constructed under the supervision of the county health unit and shall comply with all regulations of the state board of health in regard to such systems. 
g.  Utility lines. Where it shall be determined that larger mains or lines are required in order to provide for the future extension of the utility system beyond the limits of the subdivision in question, the city shall assume the responsibility for and pay any additional cost at the time of construction of same. 
h.  Drainage. Drainage shall be provided by surface construction or storm sewers. 
i.  Utility lines. All electric light and power lines and telephone lines shall be located in alleyways or along easements at the back side of lots where practical. No such utility lines shall be in the street right-of-way. 
j.  Utility extensions. Whenever a final plat of a subdivision is approved for which no city-approved water or sewer is available at the boundary of the subdivision, the same shall be provided at the subdivider's cost, as follows: 
1.  The city shall secure any necessary easement right-of-way therefor. 
2.  The subdivider shall install, or have installed, or contract with the city for the installation of such facility or facilities from the most practical existing source satisfactory to the city to the boundary of the subdivision in accordance with standard city requirements for comparable lines and extensions, and in conformity with the master plan for the extension of such utility and subject to the approval of the specifications, supervision and costs thereof by the city council. 
3.  The costs of such extensions shall be borne by the subdivider; provided, however, where the size of the extended facility is greater than is reasonably necessary to serve the subdivision adequately and the increase or excess in such size is made at the direction of the city, the city shall pay the pro rata cost of such increase or excess. In every such case, the city council shall first determine it to be in the public interest and convenience and necessity that the increase or excess facility size be made. 
(Code 1973, § 15-7; Ord. No. 638, § VI, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 763, § II, 8-24-1965; Ord. No. 1069, § I, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 2255, §§ VI, VII, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 48-51. - Maintenance of property. 
    It shall be the duty of the developer to maintain all vacant property owned by him in an approved subdivision within the city limits in a manner so as not to create any fire and health hazard through accumulation of debris, discarded building materials, weed growth or any other condition creating a fire or health hazard through a lack of maintenance. In the event the city health inspector or other authorized city official deems the property to be a health or fire hazard, and states so in writing to the developer, and requests that the property be cleaned of all such materials or weeds, and the developer fails to do so within ten days, the city shall have the right to clear the property with its own forces. A record of the hours and equipment used shall be kept for a total cost, which will be payable to the city by the subdivider owning the property. The city building inspector shall be furnished this information and shall issue no further permits to the developer until payment is received for the work done by the city in cleaning the property. 
(Code 1973, § 15-8; Ord. No. 638, § VII, 2-12-1963) 
Sec. 48-52. - Street lighting. 
(a)  The subdivider shall install, at the subdivider's expense, street lights on all interior streets and on those perimeter streets designated by the planning commission. 
(b)  Electrical supply cables to the street lights shall be placed underground unless a special or extraordinary condition exists that, in the opinion of the planning commission, would make underground installation undesirable. Installation shall comply with all applicable city building and zoning restrictions, in addition to the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Street lighting shall include at least one street light at each interior street intersection in the principal area of every cul-de-sac. Street lights shall be no more than 300 feet apart. 
(d)  Where feasible, the city shall establish such standards for street lights within a subdivision as conform to standards used in the local geographic area by the utility furnishing electrical power to the subdivision. Unless otherwise provided by the planning commission, all poles or standards for street lights shall be metallic and shall be uniform throughout the subdivision. 
(e)  The planning commission may, at its discretion, require and collect in advance from the subdivider payment for the operational cost of street lights for a period of one year from their final acceptance by the city, which acceptance shall be made in writing after the lights have been installed and operating for a period of two months. The advance payment shall be calculated using the current rates established by the utility for that type of service. 
(f)  If a street light or the standard upon which it is erected does not meet the manufacturer's warranty, or the light or standard shall fail because of defects of manufacturer or improper installation, the subdivision and the manufacturer shall be jointly and severally liable for prompt replacement or repair of the light or standard upon which it is erected, notwithstanding such warranty, in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1315, 5-22-1979) 
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.; Development Corporation Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 501.001 et seq.; real and tangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.01; intangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.02; freeport exemption of tangible personal property, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 11.251; homestead exemption, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 41.001; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq.; tax abatement in municipal reinvestment zones, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.201 et seq.; authority to levy certain occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX 

Sec. 50-19. - Ad valorem tax due and delinquency dates; penalties and interest. 
    The ad valorem taxes levied by the city council each year shall become due on October 1 of the year for which the levy is made and may be paid up to and including the following January 31 without penalty, but if not so paid, such taxes shall become delinquent on the following day, February 1, and the following penalty shall be payable thereon: If paid during the month of February, one percent; March, two percent; April, three percent; May, four percent; June, five percent; and on and after the first day of July, eight percent; Such unpaid taxes shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from February 1 of the year next succeeding the year for which such taxes where levied or assessed. 
(Code 1973, § 6-1; Ord. No. 210, 2-13-1940; Ord. No. 1642, 12-20-1989) 
Sec. 50-20. - Taxpayer's oath. 
    The following oath shall be administered to each person upon the rendition of property for taxation: 
"I solemnly swear that the above is a full and complete inventory of the property possessed or controlled by ____________ within the limits of the city, not exempt from taxation on the first day of January, so far as I know or believe." 
(Code 1973, § 6-2; Ord. No. 3) 
Secs. 50-21-50-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 

Sec. 50-44. - Tax on telecommunications services. 
    A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications devise from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1788, 9-27-1994) 
Secs. 50-45-50-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; levy of tax authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.002; tax rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.003. 

Sec. 50-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping and not including the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Extra territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) means the unincorporated area that is contiguous to corporate boundaries of the municipality and that is located within one mile of those boundaries, in the case of a municipality with 5,000 to 24,999 inhabitants. 
    Finance director means the finance director of the city. 
    Hotel means any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations, including hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but not including hospitals, or sanitariums or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than the permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Occupant means anyone who, of a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the city's fiscal year, the first quarter being composed of the months of October, November, and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February, and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May, and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August, and September. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 1, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-63. - Tax levied; exemptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. 
(b)  The following shall be exemptions from subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed on diplomatic personnel who present a tax exempt card issued by the United States Department of State. 
(3)  No tax shall be imposed on federal or state military personnel traveling on official military business. This exemption does not cover military personnel on leave or between stations. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 2, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-64. - Collection of tax. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel within the city limits and those within the ETJ of the city shall collect the tax levied by this article. The hotel-motel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as here in below provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel-motel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city or file a false report with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 3, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-65. - Quarterly reports to the finance director. 
    On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the finance director showing the price paid for all room occupancies and any other information the finance director may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the finance director. The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article. The finance director shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonably time documentation or information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 4, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-66. - Rules and regulations of the finance director pertaining to access to books and records. 
    The finance director shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 5, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-67. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the finance director the tax as imposed herein when the report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as penalty and after the first 30 days, he shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from due date. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.00 and each 24 hours of any such conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 6, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-68. - Additional penalties. 
    The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the collection over to the city and who failed to file a report, or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; or 
(2)  Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under Texas law. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 7, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-69. - Authorization to bring suit. 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 8, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-70. - Use of revenue. 
    The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used in accordance with the Tax Code, section 351 or amended thereof to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including instrument and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  Which are at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or 
b.  Which are located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates or other visitors to the municipality. 
(6)  Revenue derived from the hotel-motel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner, which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as here in before delineated. Such revenue shall not be used of the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality, which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 9, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 50-71. - Administrative requirements; accountability, keeping of records. 
(a)  The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenues from the tax provided by the municipality. 
(b)  The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account established for the purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(c)  The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided herein. 
(d)  City council's approval of the entity's annual budget to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)  A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity, and on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures here in before authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
(g)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity in which the primary purpose of not directly related to the promotion of the hotel and convention facilities of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1927, § 10, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 50-72-50-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING TAX ABATEMENT 

Sec. 50-100. - Findings and determinations. 
    The city, after conducting such hearings and having heard such evidence and testimony, has made the following findings and determinations based on the testimony and evidence presented to it: 
(1)  That the public hearing on the designation of the area within the city limits, as a residential tax abatement reinvestment zone has been properly called, held and conducted and that notices of such hearings have been published as required by law and delivered to all taxing units overlapping the territory inside the proposed reinvestment zone; 
(2)  That the boundaries of the reinvestment zone shall be the boundaries of the city limits as they exist upon adoption of this article; 
(3)  That the creation of the reinvestment zone for multifamily residential housing tax abatement in Beeville, and the improvements sought are feasible and practical and, will be a benefit to the reinvestment zone and to the city after the expiration of any tax abatement agreement entered into under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.204; and 
(4)  That the reinvestment zone meets the criteria for the creation of a reinvestment zone as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.202, as amended, in that it is reasonably likely as a result of the designation to contribute to the retention or expansion of primary employment or to attract major investment in the zone that would be a benefit to the property and that would contribute to the economic development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2094, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 50-101. - Property redevelopment. 
    Pursuant to the Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.001 et seq., the city hereby creates a Reinvestment Zone for multifamily residential housing tax abatement. The zone's boundaries shall be coterminous with the city limits upon adoption of this article, and such reinvestment zone is hereby designated as Beeville Residential Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number Two. The designation of this zone expires five years after the effective date of this article and may be renewed for periods not to exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2094, § 2, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 50-102-50-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENTERPRISE ZONE 

Sec. 50-131. - Designation. 
    The city hereby nominates the area set forth below as an enterprise zone in accordance with the Act: 
For the 742.7 acre tract of land within the city and particularly described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 11, Block 2, of the Beeville Industrial Park Subdivision; 
(2)  Thence north along the east boundary of the Beeville Industrial Park Subdivision a distance of approximately 1,650 feet to the south right-of-way line of T. Pfeil Lane; 
(3)  Thence west along the south right-of-way line of T. Pfeil Lane a distance of approximately 810 feet to the intersection of the west right-of-way line of St. Mary's Street; 
(4)  Thence north along the west right-of-way line of St. Mary's Street a distance of approximately 1,855 feet to the intersection of the west right-of-way line of Washington Street; 
(5)  Thence northward along the west right-of-way of Washington Street a distance of approximately 5,375 feet to the intersection of the south right-of-way of Corpus Christi Street; 
(6)  Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Corpus Christi Street a distance of approximately 720 feet to the intersection of the west right-of-way line of Madison Street; 
(7)  Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Madison Street a distance of approximately 2,190 feet to the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Carter Street; 
(8)  Thence west along the south right-of-way of Carter Street a distance of 250 feet to the west right-of-way line of Avenue E; 
(9)  Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Avenue E a distance of 500 feet to the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Walton Street; 
(10)  Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Walton Street a distance of 2,925 feet to the intersection of the west right-of-way of FM 673 (also known as Minnesota Street); 
(11)  Thence south along the west right-of-way line of Minnesota Street a distance of 1,375 feet to the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Hefferman Street; 
(12)  Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Hefferman Street a distance of approximately 975 feet to the intersection of the east right-of-way of Garfield Street; 
(13)  Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Garfield Street a distance of approximately 690 feet to the south right-of-way line of Corpus Christi Street; 
(14)  Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Corpus Christi Street a distance of approximately 3,565 feet to the northwest corner of Block 19, A. Curvier Abstract 139, city; 
(15)  Thence south along a straight line a distance of approximately 2,095 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 1 of the resubdivided Lot 8, Alta Vista Acres Second Addition, city; 
(16)  Thence eastward, approximately 7,875 feet, following the south city limits, and encompassing Carlos Reyes B. Park, to the intersection of the west city limit that runs along the west right-of-way of U.S. Business Highway 181; 
(17)  Thence southward, approximately 5,815 feet, following the west city limits to the southwest corner of Lot 19 of Block 2 of the Beeville Industrial Park Subdivision; 
(18)  Thence east a distance of approximately 1,940 feet along the city limit line to the southeast corner of Lot 11 of Block 2 of the Beeville Industrial Park Subdivision and thus to the point of beginning of the area. 
(Ord. No. 1695, § 1, 6-11-1991) 
Sec. 50-132. - Qualifications met. 
    The city council finds the zone area meets the qualifications of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1695, § 2, 6-11-1991) 
Sec. 50-133. - Refund eligibility. 
    An enterprise project so nominated by the city council and approved by the state department of commerce is eligible for a refund of state sales tax as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.429 and the deduction provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 171.10150 and also certain state taxes under V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 151.431 and 171.501. 
(Ord. No. 1695, § 3, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1702, 8-13-1991) 
Sec. 50-134. - No designation as reinvestment zone. 
    The area described in this article is designated as an enterprise zone only and not a reinvestment zone, subject to the approval of the state department of commerce. 
(Ord. No. 1695, § 4, 6-11-1991) 
Sec. 50-135. - Gas and electricity for residential use. 
    As permitted by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105(c), the city council has voted to retain its local sales and use tax on the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 1307, 2-27-1979) 
Secs. 50-136-50-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY TAX RATE 

Sec. 50-156. - Tax rate established. 
    The city council from time to time establishes a tax rate for annual taxes on the taxable value of real and personal property, subject to a homestead exemption for those qualified persons 65 years of age or older. The current tax rate is available in the office of the city finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2223, § 1, 9-27-2013) 
Sec. 50-157. - Taxpayer discounts. 
    The city adopts and authorizes "taxpayer discounts" as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 31.05(b). 
(Ord. No. 2223, § 3, 9-27-2013) 
Chapter 52 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 42.203; municipalities may not operate automated traffic control system for speed limit enforcement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.2035; municipal authority to regulate parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 601.001; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; railroad and roadway crossings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Traffic safety commission. 
(a)  Established; membership. The city has created a traffic safety commission, consisting of five members appointed by the city council. Members shall serve terms of two years staggered such that the term of two members expire in one year and the terms of the remaining three members expire in the following year. The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected annually by the members of the commission at their first meeting of each calendar year. 
(b)  Function. The commission shall be an advisory body. It may establish rules and regulations for its meetings and proceedings. It shall make studies of traffic conditions in the city and recommendations to the city council or administrative staff designed to reduce and eliminate traffic accidents, injuries and deaths resulting therefrom, and the best methods, which, in its judgment, should be adopted to accomplish such results. It shall seek the cooperation and coordination of any and all other civic groups created and working for the same common purpose of improving traffic conditions in the city. It shall make reports to the city council of its work from time to time. 
(c)  Incurring debts and other liabilities. The commission shall not be authorized to create any debts or incur any other liability on behalf of the city unless first authorized to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1973, §§ 17-7-17-9; Ord. No. 608, §§ 1-3, 2-27-1962; Ord. No. 700, § 1, 4-14-1964; Ord. No. 2144, §§ 1-3, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 52-2. - [Handheld mobile communication devices.] 
(a)  Definitions. In this article: 
    Bicycle means a device that a person may ride and that is propelled by human power and has two tandem wheels at least one of which is more than 14 inches in diameter. 
    Engaging in a call means talking to, dialing, or listening on a handheld mobile communication device, but does not include holding a mobile communication device to activate or deactivate the device. 
    Handheld mobile communication device means a text-messaging device or other electronic, two-way communication device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. section 332, that is designed to receive and transmit voice communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by internet or other electronic means. The term includes a mobile telephone, and a personal digital assistant (PDA). 
    Hands-free mobile telephone means a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of the mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person) whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate or deactivate the mobile telephone. 
    Operating a bicycle means sitting astride a permanent seat attached to the bicycle while the bicycle is in motion. 
    Park or parked shall mean for the operator to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For purposes of this section, "parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic-control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
    Text message means a two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers, images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted through either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. The term does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or navigation system. 
(b)  Use of handheld mobile communication devices prohibited. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if, while operating a motor vehicle or a bicycle on a public roadway or any area described under subsection (a) of this section, the person uses a handheld mobile communication device to: 
a.  Engage in a call; 
b.  Send, read, or write a text message; 
c.  View pictures or written text whether transmitted by internet or other electronic means; 
d.  Engage in gaming; or 
e.  Engage in any other use of the device while operating a moving motor vehicle. 
(2)  This section does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle or bicycle who is using a handheld mobile communication device: 
a.  While the vehicle or bicycle is legally parked or is being operated on private property; 
b.  If the device is affixed to the vehicle, whether permanently or temporarily, and being actively utilized as a global positioning or navigation system; 
c.  If the device is being used in conjunction with a hands-free mobile communication telephone or other such device through Bluetooth or other comparable technology; 
d.  While operating an authorized emergency vehicle in an official capacity; or 
e.  Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a hand held mobile communication device. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the person was using a handheld mobile communication device for the purpose of: 
a.  Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician's office, or a health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation; or 
b.  Preventing injury to a person or property. 
(c)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be punished by a fine of not more [than] $150.00 for a first offense and not more than $500.00 for any additional offenses. 
(2)  An offense under this section is not a moving violation and may not be made a part of a person's driving record or insurance record. 
(Ord. No. 2313, §§ 1-3, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2313, §§ 1-3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, enacted provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 52-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 52-3-52-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL RULES AND DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals and markings generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001 et seq.; sign manual, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001; traffic signals and signs in municipalities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 553.002. 

Sec. 52-21. - State rules of the road adopted. 
    Title 7, subtitle C, of the Texas Transportation Code, entitled "Rules of the Road" (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.), to the extent applicable within municipalities, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. A violation of the adopted state law or this chapter is a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, §§ 17-1, 17-2; Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 10-26-1971) 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
Sec. 52-22. - Stop intersections. 
    All vehicular traffic shall comply with stop signs placed at the following intersections: 
(1)  While proceeding north or south on Adams Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(2)  While proceeding north or south on Adams Street, shall stop at the intersection of Moore Street. 
(3)  While proceeding at the intersection of North Adams Street and East Huntington Street, drivers shall comply with the red lights thereon displayed to the east and west and the amber lights thereon displayed to the north and south. 
(4)  While proceeding north or south on North Adams Street, shall stop at the intersection of Inez Street, four-way. 
(5)  While proceeding east on Airport Road, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(6)  While proceeding north on Alta Vista Boulevard, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street before proceeding north on Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(7)  While proceeding north or south on Archer Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(8)  While proceeding north or south on Archer Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Inez Street. 
(9)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue B, shall stop at the intersection of Carter Street. 
(10)  On Avenue B and Ireland Street, controlling traffic on Avenue B. 
(11)  On North Avenue B where it comes perpendicular to West Third Street, controlling northbound traffic on North Avenue B. 
(12)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Carter Street. 
(13)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Fannin Street. 
(14)  On North Avenue C where it comes perpendicular to West Third Street, controlling northbound traffic on North Avenue C. 
(15)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue D, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(16)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue D, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Fannin Street. 
(17)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue D, shall stop at the intersection of Randall Street. 
(18)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue D, shall stop at the intersection of Ireland Street, four-way. 
(19)  On Avenue E and Carter Street, controlling traffic on Carter Street. 
(20)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue E, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(21)  While proceeding north or south on North Avenue E, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Walton Street. 
(22)  On Berry Street and Kennedy Street, controlling traffic on the southbound side of Berry Street. 
(23)  While proceeding north or south on Ballard Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(24)  While proceeding east on Bates Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(25)  On West Bates Street where it comes perpendicular to North Fenner Street, controlling westbound traffic on West Bates. 
(26)  While proceeding westward on West Bates Street, shall stop immediately before entering North Madison Street. 
(27)  While entering Bell Street from the College North Shopping Center exit ramps contiguous to the intersections of Bell Street and North Washington and McKinley Streets before entering upon Bell Street. 
(28)  While proceeding east on Bell Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(29)  Both the east and west ends of The Berdan Avenue where it comes perpendicular to North Madison Street and North Avenue E, respectively, controlling east and west bound traffic on The Berdan Avenue. 
(30)  While proceeding north or south on Berry Street, shall stop at the intersection of Bowie Street. 
(31)  While proceeding south on Berry Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(32)  While proceeding north on Berry Street, shall stop at the intersection of Kennedy Street. 
(33)  At the intersection of North Berry Street at East Huntington Street, controlling traffic on North Berry. 
(34)  For Blue Crest Lane and West Clare Street. 
(35)  While proceeding east or west on Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(36)  While proceeding east on Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Jackson Street. 
(37)  While proceeding west on Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Monroe Street. 
(38)  While proceeding east on west on Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(39)  While proceeding east or west on East Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(40)  A four-way stop intersection at the intersection of East Bowie Street and North Tyler Streets. 
(41)  On East Bowie Street where it comes perpendicular to Laurel Street, controlling traffic on East Bowie Street. 
(42)  On East Bowie Street where it dead ends with Wolfshol Street, controlling traffic on East Bowie Street. 
(43)  On West Bowie Street and FM 673, controlling traffic on West Bowie Street. 
(44)  On West Bowie Street and Hugosota Street, controlling traffic on Bowie Street. 
(45)  On West Bowie Street where it comes perpendicular to North Minneapolis Street, controlling traffic on West Bowie. 
(46)  While proceeding west on West Bowie Street, shall stop at the intersection of Farm to Market Road 673. 
(47)  On North Buchanan Street where it comes perpendicular to East Carter Street, controlling traffic on North Buchanan Street. 
(48)  On North Buchanan Street where it comes perpendicular to East Kennedy Street, controlling traffic on North Buchanan Street. 
(49)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of Dolan Street. 
(50)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Bowie Street. 
(51)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(52)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Flournoy Street. 
(53)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(54)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(55)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Hutchinson Street. 
(56)  While proceeding north or south, on South Buchanan Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Crockett Street. 
(57)  While proceeding north or south on Burke Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(58)  While proceeding south on Burke Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Hefferman Street. 
(59)  While proceeding north or south on Burke Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(60)  At the intersection of South Burke at West Milam Street, controlling traffic on West Milam. 
(61)  While proceeding east or west on Burr Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(62)  While proceeding west on Burr Street, shall stop at the intersection of South Washington Street. 
(63)  While proceeding east on Carter Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(64)  While proceeding east on Carter Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(65)  While proceeding east or west on Carter Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Morris Street. 
(66)  While proceeding east or west on Carter Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(67)  While proceeding east or west on West Carter Street, shall stop at the railroad crossing. 
(68)  While proceeding west on Catherine Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(69)  While proceeding east on East Catherine Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of South Adams Street; and while proceeding north and south on South Adams Street, shall immediately stop before entering the intersection of East Catherine Street. 
(70)  While proceeding east on Cato Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(71)  While proceeding east or west on Highway 181 (commonly called Cato), shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(72)  On Chittim Street and Fannin Street, controlling traffic on Chittim Street. 
(73)  On North Chittim Street and West Fannin Street, controlling traffic on North Chittim. 
(74)  On North Chittim Street where it come perpendicular to West Huntington Street, controlling northbound traffic on North Chittim. 
(75)  On North Chittim Street where it comes perpendicular to West Hutchinson Street, controlling southbound traffic on North Chittim Street. 
(76)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Avenue D. 
(77)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(78)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(79)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Hugo Street. 
(80)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of Morris Street. 
(81)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(82)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(83)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Washington Street. 
(84)  On the south side of East Clare Street at its intersection with Blue Crest Lane. 
(85)  On West Clare Street and Madison Street, controlling traffic on West Clare Street. 
(86)  At the intersection of Clay Street with East Corpus Christi Street, controlling traffic on Clay Street. 
(87)  Where Clay Street comes perpendicular with East Hefferman Street, controlling traffic on Clay Street. 
(88)  At the intersection of Clay Street with East Rosewood Street, controlling traffic on Clay Street. 
(89)  While proceeding east on Cleveland Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(90)  While proceeding west on Cleveland Street, shall stop at the intersection of Monroe Street. 
(91)  While proceeding east on College Drive, shall stop at the intersection of Charco Road. 
(92)  While proceeding east on College Drive, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(93)  While proceeding north on Comitas Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(94)  While proceeding east or west on Corpus Christi Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(95)  While proceeding east or west on Corpus Christi Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(96)  On East Corpus Christi Street where it comes perpendicular to Laurel Street, controlling traffic on East Corpus Christi Street. 
(97)  On East Corpus Christi Street where it dead ends with Wolfshol Street, controlling traffic on East Corpus Christi Street. 
(98)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett Street, shall stop at the intersection of Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(99)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(100)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett Street, shall stop at the intersection of Minneapolis Street. 
(101)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett Street, shall stop at the intersection of Quinn Street. 
(102)  While proceeding west on Crockett Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(103)  On West Crockett Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with South Comitas Street. 
(104)  On West Crockett Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersections with South Minnesota Street. 
(105)  On West Crockett Street at its intersection with South Filmore Street, controlling traffic on South Filmore Street. 
(106)  While proceeding west on Curvier Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(107)  On Diaz Street and Mesquite, controlling traffic on Mesquite. 
(108)  While proceeding west on West Diaz Street, shall stop at the intersection of Farm to Market Road 673. 
(109)  On West Doc Street where it comes perpendicular to South Adams Street, controlling traffic on West Doc Street. 
(110)  While proceeding east or west on Dolan Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(111)  While proceeding east on Dolan Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(112)  While proceeding west on Dolan Street, shall stop at the intersection of South Washington Street. 
(113)  While proceeding west on Elliott Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(114)  While proceeding south on Emily Drive, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(115)  On South Emily Drive and East Moore Street, controlling traffic on Emily Drive. 
(116)  While proceeding east or west on Fannin Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(117)  While proceeding east or west on Fannin Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(118)  While proceeding east or west on Fannin Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(119)  While proceeding east or west on Fannin Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(120)  While proceeding east or west on Fannin Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(121)  On West Fannin Street at its intersection with North San Antonio Avenue, controlling traffic on North San Antonio Avenue. 
(122)  While proceeding north or south on Fenner Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Fannin Street. 
(123)  On Fenner Street and West Inez Street, controlling traffic on Inez Street. 
(124)  On North Fenner Street and West Fannin Street, controlling traffic on North Fenner. 
(125)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall stop at the intersection of Bowie Street. 
(126)  On Filmore Street and Crockett Street, controlling traffic on Filmore Street. 
(127)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(128)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall stop at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(129)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall stop at the intersection of Inez Street. 
(130)  On North Filmore where it comes perpendicular to East Hayes, controlling traffic on Filmore Street. 
(131)  On North Filmore Street where it becomes perpendicular to East Steiner Street, controlling traffic on North Filmore Street. 
(132)  While proceeding east or west on First Street, shall stop at the intersection of Jackson Street, four-way. 
(133)  Repealing the current four-way stop intersection at the intersection of West First Street with North Jackson Street allowing through traffic on North Jackson Street and leaving stop signs on West First Street. 
(134)  While proceeding east or west on Flournoy Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(135)  On Flournoy Street and Archer Street, controlling traffic on Flournoy Street. 
(136)  While proceeding east or west on Flournoy Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(137)  While proceeding west on Flournoy Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Hugo Street. 
(138)  While proceeding east or west on Flournoy Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Morris Street. 
(139)  While proceeding east on Flournoy Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(140)  On the 1000 block of East Flournoy where it comes perpendicular to North Archer Street, controlling westbound traffic on Flournoy. 
(141)  While proceeding easterly or westerly on West Flourney Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(142)  While proceeding northward or southward on North Fowler Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Inez Street. 
(143)  On North Garfield Street where it comes perpendicular to West Hefferman Street, controlling traffic on North Garfield. 
(144)  On South Garner Drive, controlling north bound traffic on Garner where it comes perpendicular to the most-southern boundary of East Hancock Street. 
(145)  While proceeding west on Gramman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(146)  While proceeding east or west on Gramman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(147)  While proceeding east or west on Gramman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Berry Street. 
(148)  While proceeding east or west on Gramman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(149)  While proceeding east and west on East Gramman Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Tyler Street; and while proceeding north and south on North Tyler Street, shall immediately stop before entering the intersection of West Gramman Street. 
(150)  While proceeding north on Gulf Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(151)  While proceeding south on Gulf Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(152)  On Hackberry Street where it comes perpendicular to Fannin Street, controlling traffic on Hackberry Street. 
(153)  On Hackberry Street and Inez Street, controlling traffic on the southbound side of Hackberry Street. 
(154)  While proceeding north on Hackberry Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of East Inez Street. 
(155)  While proceeding north or south on North Hackberry Street, shall stop before entering the intersection of East Hutchinson Street. 
(156)  While proceeding north or south on South Hall Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(157)  On Hancock Street where it comes perpendicular to Lassen Street, controlling eastbound traffic on Hancock Street. 
(158)  While proceeding north or south on Harrison Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(159)  While proceeding either north or south on Harrison Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Flournoy Street. 
(160)  While proceeding north or south on Harrison Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(161)  While proceeding north or south on Harrison Street, shall stop at the intersection of Inez Street. 
(162)  While proceeding north or south on North Harrison Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Jones Street. 
(163)  While proceeding east on Harwood Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(164)  While proceeding east or west on Harwood Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(165)  At the intersection of West Harwood at Washington Street, controlling traffic on West Harwood Street. 
(166)  While proceeding east or west on Hayes Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(167)  While proceeding on Hayes Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(168)  On Hayes Street and Filmore Street, controlling traffic on the northbound side of Filmore Street. 
(169)  While proceeding east on Hayes Street, shall stop at the intersection of Harrison Street. 
(170)  While proceeding west on Hayes Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(171)  While proceeding west on Hayes Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(172)  For a four-way stop at the intersection of East Hayes and North Polk Streets. 
(173)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(174)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(175)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Jackson Street. 
(176)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Monroe Street. 
(177)  On Hefferman Street where it comes perpendicular to North Polk Street, controlling traffic on East Hefferman Street. 
(178)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(179)  While proceeding east on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(180)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(181)  On East Hefferman Street where it comes perpendicular to North Filmore Street, controlling traffic on East Hefferman Street. 
(182)  On East Hefferman Street where it comes perpendicular to North Polk Street, controlling traffic on East Hefferman Street. 
(183)  While proceeding east or west on East Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(184)  While proceeding east or west on West Hefferman Street, shall stop at the intersection of Farm to Market Road 673. 
(185)  While proceeding north on Hidalgo Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Hefferman Street. 
(186)  On exit from the Oak Hill Apartments at 500 South Hillside Drive where it comes perpendicular to South Hillside Drive, controlling traffic on said exit. 
(187)  While proceeding either east or west on Houston Street, shall stop at the intersection of Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(188)  While proceeding east or west on Houston Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(189)  On West Houston Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with South Comitas Street. 
(190)  On West Houston Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with South Minnesota Street. 
(191)  On West Houston Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with South Minneapolis Street. 
(192)  While proceeding south on Hugo Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(193)  While proceeding north on Hugosota Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(194)  While proceeding east or west on Huntington Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(195)  While proceeding east or west on Huntington Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(196)  On Huntington Street and Fowler Street, controlling traffic on Huntington Street. 
(197)  While proceeding west on Huntington Street, shall stop at the intersection of the railroad tracks. 
(198)  On Huntington Street and Retama Street, controlling traffic on Huntington Street. 
(199)  While proceeding east or west on Huntington Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(200)  While proceeding east or west on Huntington Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(201)  On East Huntington Street where it comes perpendicular to North Hackberry Street, controlling traffic on East Huntington Street. 
(202)  On East Huntington Street at its intersection with North Archer Street on both ends. 
(203)  While proceeding east and west on West Huntington Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Avenue D; and while proceeding north and south on North Avenue D, shall immediately stop before entering the intersection of West Huntington Street. 
(204)  On West Huntington Street and Chittim Street, controlling traffic on Chittim Street. 
(205)  On West Huntington Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with Madison Street. 
(206)  On West Huntington Street at its intersection with North San Antonio Avenue, controlling traffic on North San Antonio Avenue. 
(207)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(208)  On Hutchinson Street where it comes perpendicular to Kingfisher Lane, controlling traffic on Hutchinson Street. 
(209)  While proceeding west on Hutchinson Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Live Oak Street. 
(210)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Polk Street. 
(211)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(212)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Washington Street. 
(213)  On East Hutchinson Street where it becomes perpendicular to North Archer Street on its eastern side. 
(214)  At the intersection of East Hutchinson at North Polk Street, controlling traffic on East Hutchinson. 
(215)  On West Hutchinson Street at its intersection with North San Antonio Avenue, controlling traffic on North San Antonio Avenue. 
(216)  On Inez Street and Avenue E, controlling traffic on Inez Street. 
(217)  While proceeding east or west on Inez Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street, four-way. 
(218)  While proceeding east or west on Inez Street, shall stop at the intersection of Northeast Washington Street. 
(219)  While proceeding east or west on East Inez Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Archer Street. 
(220)  While proceeding west on East Inez Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(221)  While proceeding eastward on West Inez Street, shall stop immediately before entering North Avenue D. 
(222)  On West Inez Street where it comes perpendicular to North Fenner Street, controlling westbound traffic on West Inez. 
(223)  On West Inez Street at its intersection with North San Antonio Avenue, controlling traffic on North San Antonio Avenue. 
(224)  On West Inez Street at its intersection with North Washington Street, controlling traffic on West Inez Street. 
(225)  While proceeding east or west on Ireland Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D, four-way. 
(226)  While proceeding north or south on Jackson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(227)  While proceeding north or south on Jackson Street, shall stop at the intersection of First Street, four-way. 
(228)  While proceeding north or south on Jackson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Stamper Street. 
(229)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Bowie Street. 
(230)  On Jefferson Street and Carter Street, controlling traffic on Jefferson Street. 
(231)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Clare Street. 
(232)  On Jefferson Street and Cleveland Street, controlling traffic on Jefferson Street. 
(233)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(234)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Hefferman Street. 
(235)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(236)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall stop at the intersection of Jones Street. 
(237)  On Jefferson Street and Kennedy Street, controlling traffic on Jefferson Street. 
(238)  While proceeding north and south on Jefferson Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of East Milam Street. 
(239)  On North Jefferson Street where it comes perpendicular to East Carter Street, controlling traffic on North Jefferson Street. 
(240)  At the intersection of North Jefferson Street with East Cleveland Street, controlling traffic on North Jefferson Street. 
(241)  On South Jefferson Street where it comes perpendicular to East Crockett Street, controlling traffic on Jefferson. 
(242)  While proceeding north or south on South Jefferson Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of East Dolan Street. 
(243)  While proceeding east or west on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(244)  While proceeding east or west on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(245)  While proceeding east on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(246)  On Jones Street and Hugo Street, controlling traffic on Jones Street. 
(247)  While proceeding west on Jones Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Hugo Street. 
(248)  While proceeding east or west on Jones Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Morris Street. 
(249)  While proceeding east or west on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of Polk Street. 
(250)  While proceeding east or west on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(251)  While proceeding west on Jones Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Washington Street. 
(252)  While proceeding south on Juarez Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(253)  While proceeding north or south on Kathleen Street, shall stop at the intersection of Bowie Street. 
(254)  While proceeding north or south on Kathleen Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(255)  While proceeding north or south on Kathleen Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(256)  While proceeding east or west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(257)  While proceeding east or west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(258)  While proceeding west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of Filmore Street. 
(259)  While proceeding east or west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Harrison Street. 
(260)  While proceeding east or west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(261)  While proceeding west on Kennedy Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Washington Street. 
(262)  While proceeding north on King Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(263)  On East Landa Drive, controlling east bound traffic on Landa Drive where it comes perpendicular to the most western-boundary of South Garner. 
(264)  On South Lassen Drive, controlling north bound traffic on Lassen Drive where it comes perpendicular to the most-southern boundary of Hancock Street. 
(265)  On Leland Circle where it comes perpendicular to Hancock Street and where it comes perpendicular to Stephenson Street, controlling traffic on Leland Circle. 
(266)  While proceeding north or south on Leverman Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(267)  While proceeding either north or south on Lightburne Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(268)  While proceeding north or south on Live Oak Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(269)  While proceeding north on Live Oak Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Huntington Street. 
(270)  While proceeding west on Lott Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(271)  While proceeding east on Lott Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(272)  While proceeding east or west on Lott Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(273)  While proceeding west on Lucy Lane, shall stop at the intersection of South Washington Street. 
(274)  On Madison Street and West Hutchinson Street, controlling traffic on West Hutchinson Street. 
(275)  North Madison Street and West Bowie Street, controlling traffic on North Madison. 
(276)  North Madison Street and West Cleveland Street, controlling traffic on North Madison. 
(277)  North Madison Street and West Corpus Christi Street, controlling traffic on North Madison. 
(278)  North Madison Street and West Hefferman Street, controlling traffic on North Madison. 
(279)  On North Madison Street at its intersection with West Huntington Street, controlling traffic only south bound on Madison. 
(280)  At the intersection of North Madison Street at West Huntington Street, controlling northbound traffic on North Madison. 
(281)  At the intersection of South Madison Street with West Stamper Street, controlling northbound traffic on South Madison. 
(282)  On North McKinley Street where it comes perpendicular to Bell Street, controlling traffic on North McKinley. 
(283)  While proceeding north or south on North Mesquite Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Hefferman Street. 
(284)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall stop at the intersection of Alta Vista Street. 
(285)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(286)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(287)  While proceeding west on Milam Street, shall stop at the intersection of South Washington Street. 
(288)  While proceeding east or west on East Milam Street, shall stop at the intersection of South Adams Street. 
(289)  On East Milam Street at its intersection with South Hall Street, controlling traffic on East Milam Street. 
(290)  On East Milam Street at intersection with South Kathleen street, controlling traffic on East Milam Street. 
(291)  On East Milam and South Filmore, controlling traffic on East Milam. 
(292)  On East Milam Street at its intersection with South Polk Street, controlling traffic on South Polk Street. 
(293)  Where West Milam Street comes perpendicular to South Lightburn Street, controlling traffic on West Milam Street. 
(294)  While proceeding south on Minnesota Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(295)  While proceeding north or south on Minneapolis Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(296)  While proceeding north or south on Minneapolis Street, shall stop at the intersection of Stamper Street. 
(297)  On Mockingbird Lane where it comes perpendicular to Kingfisher Lane, controlling traffic on Mockingbird Lane. 
(298)  On Mockingbird Lane where it comes perpendicular to Whitewing Lane, controlling traffic on Mockingbird Lane. 
(299)  While proceeding south on Monroe Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(300)  While proceeding north on Monroe Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of Ireland Street. 
(301)  While proceeding north or south on Monroe Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(302)  At the intersection of South Monroe Street at West Youst Street, controlling north and southbound traffic on South Monroe. 
(303)  While proceeding north or south on Morris Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(304)  On Newhall and Archer Street, controlling traffic on the southbound side of Archer Street. 
(305)  While proceeding east on Orange Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Adams Street. 
(306)  While proceeding west on Orange Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(307)  On Oriole Lane where it comes perpendicular to Kingfisher Lane, controlling traffic on Oriole Lane. 
(308)  On Oriole Lane where it comes perpendicular to Whitewing Lane, controlling traffic on Oriole Lane. 
(309)  On Paul Place at its intersection with South Emily Drive, controlling traffic on South Emily Drive. 
(310)  While proceeding north or south on Polk Street, shall stop at the intersection of Bowie Street. 
(311)  While proceeding north or south on Polk Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(312)  While proceeding north or south on Polk Street, shall stop at the intersection of Hayes Street. 
(313)  While proceeding south on Polk Street, shall stop at the intersection of Kennedy Street. 
(314)  On Powell at Madison. 
(315)  While proceeding west on Powell Road, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(316)  While proceeding east or west on Powell Road, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(317)  While proceeding north or south on Quinn Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(318)  While proceeding north or south on Quinn Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(319)  While proceeding north or south on South Quinn Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Sylvia Street. 
(320)  While proceeding west on Rachal Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(321)  On Rachal Street and Tyler Street, controlling traffic on Rachal Street. 
(322)  While proceeding east or west on Randall Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(323)  While proceeding east or west on Randall Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(324)  While proceeding east on Randall Street, shall stop at the intersection of Fowler Street. 
(325)  On Randall Street and Retama Street, controlling traffic on Randall Street. 
(326)  On Randall Street where it comes perpendicular to Retama Street, controlling traffic on Randall Street. 
(327)  While proceeding west on Randall Street, shall stop at the intersection of North St. Mary's Street. 
(328)  On East Randall Street where it becomes perpendicular to North Archer Street on its eastern side. 
(329)  On West Randall Street at its intersection with North San Antonio Avenue, controlling traffic on North San Antonio Avenue. 
(330)  On Rainier Drive, controlling north bound traffic on Rainier Drive where it comes perpendicular to the most-southern boundary of Galloway Street. 
(331)  On Retama Street where it comes perpendicular to Hutchinson Street, controlling traffic on Retama Street. 
(332)  On Retama Street where it comes perpendicular to Widhelm Street, controlling traffic on Retama Street. 
(333)  While proceeding east or west on Roberts Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(334)  While proceeding east on Roberts Street, shall stop at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(335)  While proceeding west on Roberts Street, shall stop at the intersection of South Washington Street. 
(336)  On Robin Lane where it comes perpendicular to Whitewing Lane, controlling traffic on Robin Lane. 
(337)  On East Rosewood Street where it comes perpendicular to North Laurel Street, controlling traffic on East Rosewood Street. 
(338)  On East Rosewood Street where it dead ends on North Wolfshol Street, controlling traffic on East Rosewood Street. 
(339)  While proceeding north or south on St. Mary's Street, shall stop at the intersection of Northeast Washington Street. 
(340)  On San Antonio Avenue and Fannin Street, controlling traffic on San Antonio Avenue. 
(341)  While proceeding north or south on San Antonio Avenue, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of West Fannin Street. 
(342)  While proceeding west on Sarah Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(343)  While proceeding north on Scott Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street. 
(344)  While proceeding east or west on Second Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(345)  While proceeding east on Second Street, shall stop at the intersection of Monroe Street. 
(346)  While proceeding east or west on Springer Street, shall stop at the intersection of Jackson Street. 
(347)  Where West Springer Street comes perpendicular to South Lightburn Street, controlling traffic on West Springer Street. 
(348)  While proceeding east on Stamper Street, shall stop at the intersection of Minneapolis Street. 
(349)  While proceeding east on Stamper Street, shall stop at the intersection of South St. Mary's Street. 
(350)  While proceeding east on Stamper Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(351)  While proceeding west on Steiner Street, shall stop at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(352)  While proceeding east or west on Steiner Street, shall stop at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(353)  While proceeding east or west on Steiner Street, shall stop at the intersection of Berry Street. 
(354)  While proceeding west on East Steiner Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Filmore Street. 
(355)  A four-way intersection at East Steiner Street at North Tyler Street. 
(356)  On Sylvia at Madison. 
(357)  While proceeding east or west on Sylvia Street, shall stop at the intersection of Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(358)  On T. J. Phiel where it comes perpendicular to Mussett Street, controlling traffic on T. J. Phiel. 
(359)  On T. J. Phiel where it comes perpendicular to South St. Mary's Street, controlling traffic on T. J. Phiel. 
(360)  On Third Street and Jackson Street, controlling traffic on Third Street. 
(361)  On Third Street at its intersection with North Jackson Street, controlling east and westbound traffic on Third Street. 
(362)  On Third Street and Monroe Street, controlling traffic on Third Street. 
(363)  On Third Street at its intersection with North Monroe Street, controlling east and westbound traffic on Third Street. 
(364)  While proceeding north or south on Thompson Street, shall stop at the intersection of West Stamper Street. 
(365)  On East Toledo Street where it comes perpendicular to South Cook Road, controlling traffic on East Toledo Street. 
(366)  At the intersection of East Toledo at South Hillside Drive, controlling traffic on East Toledo Street. 
(367)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(368)  While proceeding south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Flourney Street. 
(369)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(370)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of East Huntington Street. 
(371)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Inez Street. 
(372)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Moore Street. 
(373)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Steiner Street. 
(374)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Washington Street. 
(375)  While proceeding south on South Tyler Street, shall stop at the intersection of Reagan Road. 
(376)  While proceeding west on Walton Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue B. 
(377)  While proceeding east or west on Walton Street, shall stop at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(378)  On Walton Street and Fenner Street, controlling traffic on Fenner Street. 
(379)  While proceeding east or west on Walton Street, shall stop immediately before entering the intersection of North Morris Street. 
(380)  While proceeding east on Walton Street, shall stop at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(381)  While proceeding east or west on Walton Street, shall stop at the intersection of North Washington Street. 
(382)  While proceeding west on West Walton Street, shall stop at the intersection of Farm to Market Road 673. 
(383)  On Washington Street where it comes perpendicular to Bell Street, controlling traffic on Washington Street. 
(384)  While proceeding south on Washington Street, shall stop at the intersection of Northeast Washington Street. 
(385)  On East Widhelm Street where it becomes perpendicular to North Archer Street on its eastern side. 
(386)  On Wren Lane where it comes perpendicular to Whitewing Lane, controlling traffic on Wren Lane. 
(387)  On East Yellowstone Drive, controlling west bound traffic where it come perpendicular to South Garner Street. 
(388)  At the uncontrolled intersection of East Yosemite and South Rainer, controlling traffic on East Yosemite. 
(389)  Where West Youst Street comes perpendicular to South Lightburn Street, controlling traffic on West Youst Street. 
(390)  On West Youth Street, controlling east and west bound traffic at its intersection with South Minneapolis Street. 
(Code 1973, § 17-11; Ord. No. 316, 12-8-1952; Ord. No. 344, 6-8-1954; Ord. No. 350, 9-28-1954; Ord. No. 356, 3-8-1955; Ord. No. 439, 7-8-1955; Ord. No. 440, 7-8-1955; Ord. No. 391, 1-9-1956; Ord. No. 377, 3-13-1956; Ord. No. 397, 2-12-1957; Ord. No. 432, 4-22-1958; Ord. No. 445, 7-22-1958; Ord. No. 456, 11-11-1958; Ord. No. 458, 11-11-1958; Ord. No. 470, 1-27-1959; Ord. No. 483, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 485, 4-14-1959; Ord. No. 489, 5-12-1959; Ord. No. 533, 5-10-1960; Ord. No. 540, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 594, 1-10-1961; Ord. No. 578, 4-25-1961; Ord. No. 777, 4-25-1961; Ord. No. 588, 8-22-1961; Ord. No. 593, 9-26-1961; Ord. No. 597, 11-28-1961; Ord. No. 602, 2-13-1962; Ord. No. 621, 9-11-1962; Ord. No. 635, 1-22-1963; Ord. No. 645, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 672, 8-27-1963; Ord. No. 680, 9-24-1963; Ord. No. 687, 12-12-1963; Ord. No. 703, 5-12-1964; Ord. No. 711, 7-14-1964; Ord. No. 726, 11-10-1964; Ord. No. 737, 1-12-1965; Ord. No. 739, 1-26-1965; Ord. No. 740, 1-26-1965; Ord. No. 748, 3-23-1965; Ord. No. 755, 5-27-1965; Ord. No. 774, 11-9-1965; Ord. No. 783, 1-25-1966; Ord. No. 807, 6-14-1966; Ord. No. 822, 11-8-1966; Ord. No. 843A, 5-9-1967; Ord. No. 857, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 872, 11-28-1967; Ord. No. 874, 12-12-1967; Ord. No. 879, 1-9-1968; Ord. No. 951, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 953, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 964, 5-27-1969; Ord. No. 970, 6-24-1969; Ord. No. 1004, 4-28-1970; Ord. No. 1024, 12-8-1970; Ord. No. 1027, 12-22-1970; Ord. No. 1034, 2-23-1971; Ord. No. 1038, 5-25-1971; Ord. No. 1040, 5-25-1971; Ord. No. 1044, 6-22-1971; Ord. No. 1055, 10-26-1971; Ord. No. 1075, 2-22-1972; Ord. No. 1082, 3-28-1972; Ord. No. 1160, 4-23-1974; Ord. No. 1200, 3-25-1975; Ord. No. 1206, 5-27-1975; Ord. No. 1215, 8-26-1975; Ord. No. 1218, 10-28-1975; Ord. No. 1220, 11-25-1975; Ord. No. 1229, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 1429, 10-12-1989; Ord. No. 1530, 7-23-1985; Ord. No. 1589, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1591, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1617, 10-10-1988; Ord. No. 1633, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 1696, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1736, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1738, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 1754, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1775, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1794, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 1811, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1862, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1878, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 1924, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 1844, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 1995, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2006, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2024, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 2049, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 2050, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 2104, 6-26-2007; Ord. No. 2124, 3-25-2008; Ord. No. 2156, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 2148, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 2172, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2175, 8-24-2010) 
Sec. 52-23. - Yield intersections. 
    All vehicles proceeding along the following streets, in the directions respectively stated, shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the other street or streets as set forth in this article: 
(1)  While proceeding north on Adams, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of St. Mary's Street. 
(2)  While proceeding east or west on Anderson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(3)  While proceeding north or south on Archer Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Cook Road. 
(4)  While proceeding south on Archer Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Inez Street. 
(5)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue B, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Clare Street. 
(6)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue B, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(7)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue B, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Jones Street. 
(8)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Clare Street. 
(9)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(10)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Hutchinson Street. 
(11)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Jones Street. 
(12)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue C, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Walton Street. 
(13)  While proceeding north or south on Avenue E, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Jones Street. 
(14)  On Avenue E and Randall Street, controlling traffic on Randall Street. 
(15)  While proceeding north or south on Berry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(16)  While proceeding north or south on Berry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(17)  While proceeding north or south on Berry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hayes Street. 
(18)  While proceeding north or south on Berry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Jones Street. 
(19)  While proceeding east or west on Big Bend Drive, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(20)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Clare Street. 
(21)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Corpus Christi Street. 
(22)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(23)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(24)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(25)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hutchinson Street. 
(26)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Inez Street. 
(27)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Jones Street. 
(28)  While proceeding north or south on Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Milam Street. 
(29)  While proceeding north or south on North Buchanan Street, shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of East Randall Street. 
(30)  While proceeding north or south on Burke Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Crockett Street. 
(31)  While proceeding north or south on Burke Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Milam Street. 
(32)  While proceeding south on South Canyon Drive, shall yield right-of-way before entering East Yellowstone Drive. 
(33)  While proceeding east or west on Carter Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Morris Street. 
(34)  On Chittim Street and Hutchinson Street, controlling traffic on Chittim Street. 
(35)  While proceeding north or south on Claiborne Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Bowie Street. 
(36)  While proceeding north or south on Claiborne Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Corpus Christi Street. 
(37)  While proceeding north or south on Claiborne Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hefferman Street. 
(38)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Avenue E. 
(39)  While proceeding east or west on Clare Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of North Tyler Street. 
(40)  On East Clare Street and North Berry Street, controlling traffic on Berry Street. 
(41)  While proceeding north or south on Clay Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Bowie Street. 
(42)  While proceeding north or south on Comitas Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(43)  While proceeding west on Cook Road, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(44)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(45)  While proceeding east or west on Crockett Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(46)  While proceeding east or west on West Diaz Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of North Juarez Street. 
(47)  On Everett Circle and Tyler Street, controlling traffic on Everett Circle. 
(48)  While proceeding east or west on Everglade Drive, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(49)  While proceeding east on Fannin Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Fowler Street. 
(50)  While proceeding north and south on Fenner Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(51)  While proceeding either north or south on Filmore Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(52)  While proceeding north on Filmore Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Gramman Street. 
(53)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(54)  While proceeding north or south on Filmore Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Randall Street. 
(55)  On First Street and Avenue C, controlling traffic on Avenue C. 
(56)  While proceeding east or west on Flournoy Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hugo Street. 
(57)  On West Flournoy Street and Avenue E, controlling traffic on Flournoy Street. 
(58)  While proceeding either north or south on Fowler Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hutchinson Street. 
(59)  While proceeding east or west on Gramman Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Berry Street. 
(60)  While proceeding north or south on Hackberry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hutchinson Street. 
(61)  While proceeding either north or south on Hackberry Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Widhelm Street. 
(62)  At the intersection of Hall Street with East Bowie Street, controlling traffic on Hall Street. 
(63)  At the intersection of Hall Street with East Corpus Christi Street, controlling traffic on Hall Street. 
(64)  While proceeding north or south on Hall Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hefferman Street. 
(65)  While proceeding east or west on Hancock Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(66)  While proceeding north or south on Harrison Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Bowie Street. 
(67)  While proceeding north or south on North Harrison Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Gramman Street. 
(68)  While proceeding north or south on North Harrison Street, shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of East Hefferman Street and East Steiner Street, respectively. 
(69)  While proceeding north or south on North Harrison Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Randall Street. 
(70)  While proceeding east or west on Hayes Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Buchanan Street. 
(71)  While proceeding east or west on Hayes Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Jefferson Street. 
(72)  While proceeding east or west on Hefferman Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hugosota Street. 
(73)  On Hidalgo and Diaz Street, controlling traffic on Diaz Street. 
(74)  While proceeding north or south on Hugo Street, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Walton Street. 
(75)  While proceeding east or west on Huntington Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(76)  While proceeding east on Huntington Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Madison Street. 
(77)  While proceeding west on Huntington Street, shall yield right-of-way at Madison Street before crossing railroad tracks. 
(78)  On West Huntington Street and Comitas Street, controlling traffic on Comitas Street. 
(79)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(80)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Avenue D. 
(81)  On Hutchinson Street and Berry Street, controlling traffic on Berry Street. 
(82)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Polk Street. 
(83)  On Hutchinson Street and Retama Street, controlling traffic on Retama Street. 
(84)  While proceeding east or west on Hutchinson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(85)  While proceeding east or west on West Hutchinson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of North Avenue E. 
(86)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Clare Street. 
(87)  While proceeding north on south on Jefferson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(88)  While proceeding north or south on Jefferson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(89)  While proceeding north or south on North Jefferson Street, shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of East Hutchinson Street. 
(90)  On Juarez Street and Reyes, controlling traffic on Juarez Street. 
(91)  While proceeding north or south on Kathleen Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street. 
(92)  While proceeding north or south on Kathleen Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hefferman Street. 
(93)  While proceeding east or west on Kennedy Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Polk Street. 
(94)  On Kennedy Street and Polk Street, controlling traffic on southbound side of Polk Street. 
(95)  While proceeding south on King Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(96)  While proceeding east or west on Landa Drive, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(97)  While proceeding east on Landry Streets at its intersection with Fairway Street. 
(98)  While proceeding south on South Lassen Drive, shall yield right-of-way before entering East Yosemite Drive. 
(99)  While proceeding north or south on Levermann Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Crockett Street. 
(100)  While proceeding west on Lilly Street at its intersection with Fairway Street. 
(101)  While proceeding north or south on Live Oak Street, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Clare Street. 
(102)  While proceeding north and south on Live Oak Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Flournoy Street. 
(103)  While proceeding north or south on Live Oak Street, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Jones Street. 
(104)  While proceeding north or south on Live Oak Street, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Walton Street. 
(105)  On Lott Street and Berry Street, controlling traffic on northbound side of Berry Street. 
(106)  While proceeding east or west on Lott Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Polk Street. 
(107)  While proceeding west on Lucy Lane, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(108)  While proceeding east on Lucy Lane, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Gulf Street. 
(109)  While proceeding north or south on Madison Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Fannin Street. 
(110)  While proceeding north or south on Madison Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Stamper Street. 
(111)  While proceeding north or south on North Madison Street, shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Walton Street. 
(112)  While proceeding north and south on North McKinley Street, vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of West Harwood Street. 
(113)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Adams Street. 
(114)  On Milam Street and Filmore Street, controlling traffic on Filmore Street. 
(115)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Harrison Street. 
(116)  While proceeding east or west on Milam Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Quinn Street. 
(117)  While proceeding north or south on Minneapolis Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Springer Street. 
(118)  While proceeding north or south on Monroe Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Springer Street. 
(119)  While proceeding east or west on Morales Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Juarez Street. 
(120)  On Morales Street and Mesquite, controlling traffic on Mesquite. 
(121)  On Paul Place and South Emily Drive, controlling traffic on Paul Place. 
(122)  While proceeding east or west on Paul Place, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(123)  While proceeding north or south on Polk Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Clare Street. 
(124)  While proceeding north or south on Polk Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of East Corpus Christi Street. 
(125)  On Polk Street and Hefferman Street, controlling traffic on Hefferman Street. 
(126)  While proceeding north on Polk Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(127)  While proceeding north or south on Quinn Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Springer Street. 
(128)  While proceeding north or south on South Quinn Street, shall yield right-of-way before entering the intersection of West Springer Street. 
(129)  While proceeding east or west on Randall Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(130)  While proceeding east or west on Randall Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Tyler Street. 
(131)  On San Antonio and Huntington Street, controlling traffic on San Antonio. 
(132)  While proceeding south on Scott Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Houston Street. 
(133)  On Second Street and Avenue B, controlling traffic on Avenue B. 
(134)  While proceeding east and west on East Steiner Street, shall yield right of way before entering the intersection of North Harrison Street. 
(135)  While proceeding north or south on Stephenson Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Toledo Street. 
(136)  While proceeding east or west on Toledo Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of South Archer Street. 
(137)  While proceeding north or south on Tyler Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Huntington Street. 
(138)  While proceeding east or west on Widhelm Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Archer Street. 
(139)  On Widhelm Street and Fowler Street, controlling traffic on Widhelm Street. 
(140)  On Widhelm Street and Retama Street, controlling traffic on Retama Street. 
(141)  While proceeding north or south on Wolfshol Street, shall yield right-of-way at the intersection of Hefferman Street. 
(Code 1973, § 17-12; Ord. No. 440, 7-8-1955; Ord. No. 457, 11-11-1955; Ord. No. 398, 2-12-1957; Ord. No. 416, 9-24-1957; Ord. No. 446, 9-22-1958; Ord. No. 484, 4-14-1959; Ord. No. 490, 5-12-1959; Ord. No. 492, 5-26-1959; Ord. No. 514, 11-10-1959; Ord. No. 546, 8-9-1960; Ord. No. 550, 9-27-1960; Ord. No. 553, 11-8-1960; Ord. No. 557, 1-10-1961; Ord. No. 595, 1-10-1961; Ord. No. 577, 4-25-1961; Ord. No. 728, 10-10-1961; Ord. No. 603, 2-13-1962; Ord. No. 646, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 655, 6-11-1963; Ord. No. 665, 8-13-1963; Ord. No. 671, 8-27-1963; Ord. No. 677, 9-10-1963; Ord. No. 682, 10-8-1963; Ord. No. 681, 10-17-1963; Ord. No. 686, 11-12-1963; Ord. No. 695, 2-25-1964; Ord. No. 699, 3-24-1964; Ord. No. 702, 5-12-1964; Ord. No. 712, 7-14-1964; Ord. No. 808, 6-14-1966; Ord. No. 828, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 873, 12-12-1967; Ord. No. 894, 4-23-1968; Ord. No. 907, 6-11-1968; Ord. No. 932, 9-24-1968; Ord. No. 952, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 1012, 5-26-1970; Ord. No. 1027, 12-22-1970; Ord. No. 1034, 2-23-1971; Ord. No. 1037, 5-11-1971; Ord. No. 1038, 5-25-1971; Ord. No. 1047, 7-27-1971; Ord. No. 1076, 2-22-1972; Ord. No. 1081, 3-28-1972; Ord. No. 1093, 9-26-1972; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 3-26-1974; Ord. No. 1160, §§ 2, 3, 4-23-1974; Ord. No. 1212, 8-26-1975; Ord. No. 1218, 10-28-1975; Ord. No. 1220, 11-25-1975; Ord. No. 1280, 1-10-1978; Ord. No. 1389, 7-14-1981; Ord. No. 1531, § I, 7-23-1985; Ord. No. 1590, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1696, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1697, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1794, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 1844, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 1995, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2104, 6-26-2007; Ord. No. 2172, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 52-24. - Pedestrian crossings. 
(a)  All vehicles shall come to a stop at an established pedestrian crossing in the city when pedestrians are present in such crosswalk and remain stopped until the crosswalk is free and clear of pedestrians. It is the duty of vehicle drivers to keep a proper look out for pedestrians in the vicinity of the crosswalk. 
(b)  The city has established the following ten-foot-wide pedestrian crossings: 
(1)  In the 1100 block of West Stamper Street at 400 South Minnesota Street. 
(2)  In the 600 Block of North St. Mary's Street between the present First Baptist Church Auditorium and its parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 1647-A, 12-12-1989; Ord. No. 1647-B, 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 52-25. - One-way streets and roadways. 
    The following streets and roadways are designated one-way, on which vehicular traffic shall travel only in the direction specified: 
(1)  North Avenue E southbound from the intersection of West Carter Street to its intersection with West Ireland Street. 
(2)  Alley running north and south across block two, Jones Addition, northbound between West Hefferman Street and West Cleveland Street. 
(3)  Alley running north and south across block 36, Original Townsite, northbound between West Bowie Street and West Hefferman Street. 
(4)  Doc Street, from its intersection with Buchanan Street to its intersection with Adams Street. 
(5)  Doc Street eastbound from its intersection with Adams Street to its intersection with Buchanan Street. 
(6)  East Flournoy Street westbound from its intersection with North Harrison Street to its intersection with North Tyler Street. 
(7)  North Harrison Street northbound from its intersection with Kennedy Street to its intersection with Flournoy Street. 
(8)  North Harrison from East Lott Street to East Flournoy Street northbound between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(9)  East Kennedy Street westbound from its intersection with North Tyler Street to its intersection with North Harrison Street. 
(10)  Mussett Street southbound from South Washington Street to Fadden Street. 
(11)  All of South Mussett Street southbound only from Highway 202 to FM 351 on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(12)  North Tyler Street southbound from its intersection with Flournoy Street to its intersection with Lott Street. 
(13)  The 800 and 900 blocks of North Polk Street from East Jones Street to East Hayes Street is hereby designated a one-way southbound street for all vehicular traffic between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(14)  The 700 block of North Filmore Street is hereby designated a one-way allowing only southward bound vehicular traffic on all school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(15)  That portion of Mussett Street adjacent to the F.M.C. school campus is hereby designated a one-way allowing only southward bound vehicular traffic toward FM 351 on all school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(16)  The 200 block of East Stamper Street allowing only eastward bound vehicular traffic at all times. 
(17)  The 400 block of South Jefferson Street allowing only southward bound vehicular traffic at all times. 
(18)  Establishing one-way traffic between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 pm during school days limiting traffic to a southward direction of travel on the 300 block of North Jackson Street and eastward on 500 and 600 blocks of West First Street in efforts to alleviate the acknowledged heavy traffic congestion around the Jackson Elementary School during the time when the students are left in the morning and picked up in the afternoon. 
(Code 1973, § 17-17; Ord. No. 498, 8-11-1959; Ord. No. 531, 4-26-1960; Ord. No. 662, 8-13-1963; Ord. No. 699, 3-24-1964; Ord. No. 772, 10-28-1965; Ord. No. 793, 3-8-1966; Ord. No. 906, 6-11-1968; Ord. No. 916, § 1, 7-23-1968; Ord. No. 1060, 11-23-1971; Ord. No. 1431, 10-12-1982; Ord. No. 1476, 10-11-1983; Ord. No. 1593, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1847, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 1880, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 2020, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 2035, 8-10-2004) 
Sec. 52-26. - Restricted or assisted turn designations. 
(a)  A designated right-turn lane only is hereby established on the most northern 200 feet of the 2300 block of North Adams Street where it comes perpendicular to FM 351 so as to facilitate eastbound traffic unto FM 351 from North Adams Street. 
(b)  Tractor trailer vehicles proceeding westward on the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street are hereby prohibited from making right-hand turns onto the 100 block of North Washington Street. 
(Ord. No. 1847, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 1947, 11-13-2001) 
Sec. 52-27. - Traffic control lights. 
(a)  Flashing lights for school zones. The city has established the following school zones controlled by mechanically flashing lights, which shall be utilized between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on each day that school is in session: 
(1)  On the 700-900 blocks of North Adams Street. 
(2)  On the 400-500 blocks of W. Corpus Christi Street. 
(3)  On the 800-1100 blocks of West Fannin Street. 
(4)  On FM-673 between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(5)  On the 400-600 blocks of East Houston Street. 
(6)  On the 1500-1600 blocks of South Washington Street. 
(7)  On the 1900 block of South Washington Street. 
(b)  Blinker-type lights. At the intersection of Minnesota Street and West Corpus Christi Street, there shall be installed a blinker-type traffic control light, the ember lamp to be facing West Corpus Christi Street and the red lamp to be facing Minnesota Street. All vehicular traffic on Minnesota Street shall stop at such intersections before entering West Corpus Christi Street, the traffic on West Corpus Christi Street shall therefore have the right-of-way over traffic entering from Minnesota Street. 
(Ord. No. 1298, 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1594, 10-27-1987; Ord. No. 1755, 10-12-1993) 
Secs. 52-28-52-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.301; parking, towing and storage of vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-50. - Laying out spaces. 
(a)  In the parking meter zones and parking lots operated by the city, the city manager is authorized to cause parking spaces and loading zones to be designated and maintained in and on such parts of such parking meter zones and parking lots operated by the city which may be authorized by the city council from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All spaces for parking vehicles shall be laid out parallel to the curb, with the exception of the west half of St. Mary's Street which lies between Corpus Christi Street and Bowie Street, in which area parking spaces shall be laid out at a 45-degree angle to the curb, and shall be designated by the yellow lines or marks painted on the surface of the streets and curb, and shall be laid out so there shall be one parking space for and at or near each installed parking meter. 
(c)  Loading zones for handling of passengers and heavy or bulky merchandise, supplies and materials shall be laid out and designated by red colored lines or marks on the surface of street or curb, with the words "Loading Zone" painted thereon. No parking meter shall be installed in or adjacent to a loading zone. 
(Code 1973, § 17-41; Ord. No. 252, § 4, 5-29-1946; Ord. No. 509, § IV, 10-13-1959) 
Secs. 52-51-52-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS 

Sec. 52-74. - No parking areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the following designated areas in the city, except as otherwise provided herein: 
(1)  From 8:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on the east side of the 100 block of North Adams Street commencing at the northeast corner of North Adams Street with East Corpus Christi Street and extending northward 113 feet to a point. 
(2)  In the 600 block of North Adams Street extending from the intersection of North Adams Street with Kennedy Street northward along the west side of the 600 block of North Adams Street to the intersection of North Adams Street with East Carter Street. 
(3)  On the east side of the 1200 block of North Adams Street. 
(4)  On the west side of the 1900 block of North Adams Street. 
(5)  In two lanes of the west half of the 1600 block of North Adams Street on the west side of the 1600 block of Adams Street commencing at the northwest corner of the intersection and running northward along the west curbline of North Adams Street for a distance of 300 feet. 
(6)  On the east side of the 1600 block of North Adams Street commencing at the northeast corner of its intersection with East Inez Street and continuing northward 50 feet to a point. 
(7)  On the west side of the 400 block of South Adams Street, commencing at the northwest corner of the intersection of South Adams Street and Doc Street and extending northward along the western boundary of the 400 block of South Adams Street to a point 51 feet from the intersection. 
(8)  On the east side of the 600 block of Alta Vista Boulevard, 361 feet long, at the northeast intersection of Springer Street and Alta Vista Boulevard and extending along the eastern boundary of the 600 block of Alta Vista Boulevard northward for a distance of 361 feet to the southeast intersection of Youst Street and Alta Vista Boulevard. 
(9)  The whole of the west side of the 700 block of North Avenue D, commencing at the northwest intersection of North Avenue D and West Ireland Street and extending to the southwest intersection of North Avenue D and Carter Street. 
(10)  The whole of the east side of the 700 block of North Avenue D, commencing at the intersection of the east boundary of North Avenue D and the north boundary of West Ireland Street and extending to the intersection of the east boundary of North Avenue D and the south boundary of Alcalde Street. 
(11)  Within the east half of the alley in block 36, between Bowie Street and Hefferman Street. 
(12)  In an alley running between the 200 block of West Bowie Street and the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, commencing on the northern curbline of the 100 block of West Bowie Street and proceeding 44 feet northward to a point in the alley. 
(13)  On the west half of an alley extending 30 feet, six inches from the West Bowie Street entrance of the alley lying between the 100 block of West Bowie Street and West Hefferman Street. 
(14)  On the south side of the 100 block of East Bowie Street, 21 feet long, commencing 137 feet of the southeast intersection of South St. Mary's Street and East Bowie Street and extending along the southern boundary of the 100 block of East Bowie Street for a distance of 21 feet to a point in the southern boundary. 
(15)  On the south side of the 100 block of East Bowie Street from the southeast intersection of East Bowie Street and North St. Mary's Street to a point 108 feet east of the intersection. 
(16)  On the north side of the curbline of the 200 block of West Bowie Street, commencing on the curbline 155 feet west of the intersection of the northern curbline of Bowie Street and the western curbline of North Washington Street, and proceeding westward a distance of 145 feet to a point in the northern curbline of West Bowie Street. 
(17)  On the west side of the 500 block of South Buchanan Street, commencing 102 feet south of the southwest corner of the intersection of South Buchanan Street and East Stamper Street and extending southward along the western boundary of the 500 block of South Buchanan Street for a distance of 87 feet. 
(18)  On the east side of the 200 block of South Buchanan Street, commencing at a point where the north line of East Houston Street intersects the east line of the 200 block of South Buchanan Street and extending northward along the east line 131 feet. 
(19)  On the north and south sides of West Carter Street, particularly located as follows: Beginning at the west curbline of North Washington Street and West Carter Street; thence along the north and south line of West Carter Street along the curbline and continuing westward for a distance of 60 feet. 
(20)  On both sides of the street of West Carter Street particularly located as follows: Beginning at the curblines at the northwest and southwest intersections of North Washington Street and West Carter Street; thence along the north and south lines on West Carter Street and continuing westward along both curblines for a distance of 120 feet. 
(21)  On the south side of the 300 block of East Carter Street. 
(22)  On both sides of the 100 block of West Cato Street between South St. Mary's Street and South Washington Street. 
(23)  On Charco Road by Coastal Bend College. 
(24)  Extending 20 feet to the north and south of each of the driveways on the east side of the 3800, 3900, and 4000 blocks of Charco Road serving the Bee County College parking lots. 
(25)  On the north side of the 900 block of West Clare Street, commencing at the northwest corner of the intersection of West Clare Street and North Fenner Street and extending westward along the northern boundary of the 900 block of West Clare Street to a point 81 feet from said intersection. 
(26)  On the south side of the 900 block of West Clare Street, commencing at the southwest corner of the intersection of West Clare Street and North Fenner Street and extending westward along the southern boundary of the 900 block of West Clare Street to a point 81 feet from said intersection. 
(27)  On the most western 150 feet of the south side of the 200 block of West Cleveland Street. 
(28)  On the north side of the 200 block of East Corpus Christi Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the intersection of East Corpus Christi Street eastward to the northwest corner of the intersection of East Corpus Christi Street with North Adams Street. 
(29)  On the south side of the 400 block of East Corpus Christi Street commencing at its intersection with the east boundary of North Adams Street eastward a distance of 142 feet. 
(30)  On the south side of West Corpus Christi Street beginning at its intersection with Washington Street and extending westward 130 feet. 
(31)  On the north side of the 100 Block of West Corpus Christi Street directly in front of the Post Office outgoing mail boxes. 
(32)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing at the northeast intersection of North Washington Street and West Corpus Christi Street and extending eastward 17 feet. 
(33)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing six feet east of the northeast intersection of North Washington Street and West Corpus Christi Street and extending eastward 16 feet. 
(34)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing 105 feet east of the northeast intersection of North Washington Street and West Corpus Christi Street and extending eastward six feet. 
(35)  Part-time, on the north side of the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street at the entrance to the Rio Theater within which no vehicle of any character may be parked or left standing during the times hereinafter set out. This zone covers all of the north side of the street for the full width of the theater building from the east wall thereof westward to the partition between the theater auditorium and that portion of the building used for office space, a distance of 27 feet. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle of whatever character within such part-time no-parking zone between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays and Sundays and at all other times while such theater is open to the public for any purpose. At all times, except those specified above, vehicles may be parked at the meter within such zone in accordance with the city's parking meter regulations. An appropriate sign shall be affixed to the parking meter or placed on a pipe standard within the zone to give reasonable notice of the provisions hereof. 
(36)  On the south side of the 200 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing at a point 93 feet west of the intersection of the present curbing of West Corpus Christi Street and South Washington Street and continue along the south curb of West Corpus Christi Street for a distance of 20 feet to a point in the southern curbing. 
(37)  On the north side of the 200 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing at the northwest intersection of North Washington Street and West Corpus Christi Street and extending along the northern boundary of the 200 block of West Corpus Christi Street for a distance of 137.5 feet to a point in the northern boundary. 
(38)  On the north side of the 300 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing at the northeast intersection of West Corpus Christi Street and North Monroe Street and extending along the northern boundary of the 300 block of West Corpus Christi Street eastward for a distance of 39 feet to a point in the northern boundary. 
(39)  On the north side of the 900 block of West Corpus Christi Street, commencing at the northwest intersection of West Corpus Christi Street and North Burke Street, and extending along the northern boundary of the 900 block of West Corpus Christi Street, westward, for a distance of 120 feet to a point in the northern boundary. 
(40)  On the south side of the 400 Block of East Fannin Street. 
(41)  On the entire south side of the 400 block of East Fannin Street between North Adams Street and North Harrison Street. 
(42)  For all of the east side of the 300 block of North Filmore Street during all regular and special church services of St. Joseph's Catholic Church. 
(43)  For all of the north side of the 600 and 700 blocks of East Gramman Street during all regular and special church services of St. Joseph's Catholic Church. 
(44)  On the south side of Gramman Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and extending eastward 241 feet from the intersection. 
(45)  On the north side of Gramman Street, commencing 289 feet from the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and continuing eastward 149 feet to a point. 
(46)  On the north side of the 500 block of East Gramman Street, commencing at the northwest corner of the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and extending westward to a point 134.5 feet west of the intersection. 
(47)  On the north side of the 600 block of East Gramman Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and extending eastward to a point 20 feet east of the intersection. 
(48)  On the most southern half of the east side of the 100 block of South Hall Street, full-time. 
(49)  On the most northern half of the west side of the 100 block of South Hall Street, Monday through Friday. 
(50)  On Highway 59 from Hall Street westward to Business 181 and from the west end of the bridge on the Poesta Creek on West Corpus Christi westward to F.M. Highway 351. 
(51)  On the east side of the 700 block of North Harrison Street, commencing at a point 155 feet from the extended intersection of the east boundary of East Lott Street and extending 85 feet northward along the curbline. 
(52)  On the east side of the 700 block of North Harrison Street commencing at a point 44 feet south of the northeast corner of its intersection with East Lott Street and continuing southward 44 feet to the corner of the intersection. 
(53)  On the west side of the 800 block of North Harrison Street commencing at a point 44 feet south of the southeast corner of its intersection with East Flournoy Street and continuing northward 44 feet to the corner of the intersection. 
(54)  On the west half of the alley in block two between Hefferman Street and Cleveland Street. 
(55)  On the south side of the 400 block of East Hefferman Street, in front of the Klipstein Park, and directly across the street of the driveway at 409 East Hefferman. 
(56)  On the south side of the 100 block of West Hefferman Street commencing at the southwest corner of the intersection of West Hefferman Street and North St. Mary's Street and extending westward along the southern boundary of the 100 block of West Hefferman Street for a distance of 121 feet. 
(57)  On the most eastern half of the north side of the 100 Block of East Hefferman and on the most southern 300 feet of the west side of the 300 block of North Jefferson Street. 
(58)  On the north side of the 100 block of East Hefferman Street commencing at its intersection with North St. Mary's Street and extending eastward 184 feet to a point. 
(59)  On Jackson Street between West Hefferman Street and First Street, for the entire west side of the block on Jackson Street, and 90 feet of the east side of the block of the street commencing at the northeast corner of Jackson Street and West Hefferman Street and proceeding northerly along the east boundary of the Jackson Street to a point 90 feet in the boundary. 
(60)  On the south side of West Hefferman Street beginning at its intersection with North Washington Street and extending eastward 130 feet to the alley. 
(61)  On the south side of the 100 block of West Hefferman Street from the southeast intersection of West Hefferman Street with an alley running between North Washington Street and North St. Mary's Street to a point 31 feet east of the intersection. 
(62)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Hefferman Street from the northeast intersection of West Hefferman Street and North Washington Street to a point 139 feet east of the intersection. 
(63)  On the south curbline of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, commencing at the intersection of the western curbline of North Washington Street and the southern curbline of West Hefferman Street and proceeding the entire length of the curbline of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street. 
(64)  On the northern curbline of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, commencing at the intersection of the western curbline of North Washington Street and the northern curbline of West Hefferman Street, and proceeding 195 feet to a point in the northern curbline of the West Hefferman Street. 
(65)  On the north side of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, commencing at the northwest intersection of North Washington Street and West Hefferman Street, and extending along the northern boundary of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street westward for a distance of 52 feet to a point in the northern boundary. 
(66)  On the south side of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, commencing at the southwest intersection of North Washington Street and West Hefferman Street, and extending along the southern boundary of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street westward for a distance of 39 feet to a point in the southern boundary. 
(67)  On the 200 Block of East Houston Street. 
(68)  On the north side of the 800 block of East Houston Street commencing at its intersection with the east boundary curb of north Polk Street and continuing a distance of 100 feet. 
(69)  On the north side of the 500 and 600 blocks of East Houston Street. 
(70)  On the north and south sides of East Houston Street from its intersection with the west boundary of South Archer Street, westward a distance of 360 feet. 
(71)  On the north and south side of East Houston Street between the east boundary of South Archer Street and the west boundary of South Claiborne Street. 
(72)  On the south side of the 500 block of East Houston Street, commencing at the southwest intersection of East Houston Street and South Tyler Street and extending westward along the southern boundary of the 500 block of East Houston Street a distance of 50 feet to a point. 
(73)  On the north side of the 600 block of East Houston Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the intersection of East Houston Street and North Tyler Street continuing eastward 150 feet to a point. 
(74)  On the south side of the 600 block of East Houston Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the intersection of East Houston Street and North Tyler Street and continuing eastward 150 feet to a point. 
(75)  On the north side of the 400 block of East Inez Street, commencing at a point 50 feet form the northeast corner of its intersection with North Adams Street and continuing westward 50 feet to the corner of the intersection. 
(76)  On both sides of the 100 block of West Inez Street, commencing at the eastern intersection of West Inez Street and Northeast Washington Street extending along both sides of the 100 block of West Inez Street eastward to the western boundary of West Inez Street and North St. Mary's Street. 
(77)  On the east side of the 100 block of North Jefferson Street commencing at the northeast corner of the intersection of East Bowie Street and North Jefferson Street and continuing northward to the southeast corner of the intersection of East Hefferman Street and North Jefferson Street. 
(78)  On the east side of the 300 block of North Jefferson Street, commencing at its intersection with East Cleveland Street and extending southward along the east curbline 150 feet to a point. 
(79)  On both sides of the most southern 60 feet of the 400 block of South Jefferson Street. 
(80)  On the west side of the 100 block of South Jefferson Street, except for emergency personnel (ambulance attendants responding to an actual emergency ambulance call). 
(81)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Jones Street, commencing at the northwest corner of the intersection of West Jones Street and North Washington Street and extending eastward along the northern boundary of the 100 block of West Jones Street a distance of 135 feet, seven inches. 
(82)  On the western side of the 200 block of South Kathleen Street commencing from the most-southern boundary of East Houston Street southward a distance of 45 feet to the most northern boundary of a drive-through for the Trinity Christian Center. 
(83)  On the south side of the 300 block of East Moore Street just west of driveway of the La Esperanza Adult Activity Center. 
(84)  On the entire most eastern side of Mussett Street from its intersection with South Washington Street southward to its intersection with Reagan Road. 
(85)  On the east side of the 700 block of North Polk Street extending southward 150 feet from the southeast corner of the intersection of Polk Street and Hayes Street. 
(86)  On the east side of the 800 and 900 blocks of North Polk Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during school hours. 
(87)  On the west side of the 100 and 200 blocks of South Quinn Street. 
(88)  On North St. Mary's Street on the west side of the IBC Motor Bank per diagram in the office of the city manager. 
(89)  On the west side of the 200 block of North St. Mary's Street commencing at the southwest corner of the intersection of North St. Mary's Street and West Hefferman Street and extending southward along the western boundary of the 200 block of North St. Mary's Street for a distance of 91 feet. 
(90)  On the east half of the alley located between North St. Mary's Street and North Washington Street, and West Bowie Street and West Corpus Christi Street, 226 feet long, commencing 32 feet south of the southern boundary of West Bowie Street, for a distance of 226 feet, to a point in the southerly direction. 
(91)  On the east side of the 100 block of North St. Mary's Street commencing at a point 152 feet from the northeast corner of its intersection with Corpus Christi Street and continuing northward 22 feet to a point. 
(92)  On the east side of the 800 block of North St. Mary's Street commencing at the southeast corner of the North St. Mary's Street and Jones Street intersection and continuing southward 55 feet to a point; and commencing at a point 98 feet from the southeast corner of the North St. Mary's Street and Jones Street intersection and continuing southward to a point 160 feet from the intersection. 
(93)  On the east side of the 1700 block of North St. Mary's Street, commencing at the northeast intersection of North St. Mary's Street and East Bates Street and extending 75 feet to a point. 
(94)  On the east side of St. Mary's Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the intersection of South St. Mary's Street and South Washington Street extending along the eastern boundary of South St. Mary's Street to the northeast corner of the intersection of South St. Mary's Street and Reagan Road. 
(95)  On the west side of North St. Mary's Street, commencing at the north curbline of East Kennedy Street and North St. Mary's Street and continuing north along the west side of North St. Mary's Street to the south curbline of East Huntington Street and North St. Mary's Street. 
(96)  On all of the east side of North St. Mary's Street from Bowie Street northward to Inez Street. 
(97)  On both sides of North St. Mary's Street from FM 351 north to the city limits. 
(98)  On the east side of the 300 block of North St. Mary's Street commencing at the northern boundary of the west driveway of the State Bank and Trust drive-in banking parking lot and extending northward along the eastern boundary of the 300 block of North St. Mary's Street for a distance of 18 feet. 
(99)  Rescinding the "No Parking Zone" in front of 1500 North St. Mary's Street and therefore allowing parking on said area. 
(100)  On the west side of South St. Mary's Street, commencing at the southwest curbline of West Houston Street and South St. Mary's Street, and continuing southward along the west side of South St. Mary's Street to the south property line of lot 38, Victoria Land and Improvement Company Addition to the city. 
(101)  On the east and west sides of South St. Mary's Street along the east curbline and continuing northward for a distance of 750 feet, and beginning at the north curbline of East Reagan Road and South St. Mary's Street along the west curbline and continuing northward for a distance of 750 feet. 
(102)  On the west side of the 100 block of South St. Mary's Street, commencing at the northwest intersection of West Houston Street and South St. Mary's Street and extending along South St. Mary's Street northward for a distance of 44 feet to a point in the western boundary. 
(103)  On the east side of the 200 block of South St. Mary's Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the South St. Mary's Street and East Milam Street intersection and continuing northward 20 feet to a point. 
(104)  On the west side of the 200 block of South St. Mary's Street, commencing at the southwest intersection of South St. Mary's Street and East Houston Street and running southward along the western boundary of South St. Mary's Street to the northwest intersection of South St. Mary's Street and Milam Street. 
(105)  On the south side of the 200 block between South St. Mary's Street and Jefferson Street. 
(106)  On the east side of the 300 block of South St. Mary's Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the South St. Mary's Street and East Milam Street intersection and continuing southward 20 feet to a point. 
(107)  On both sides of the 200 block of East Stamper Street. 
(108)  On the north side of the 400 block of West Stamper Street, commencing at the northeast intersection of West Stamper Street and Jackson Street and extending along the northern boundary of the 400 block of West Stamper Street and Jackson Street a distance of 414 feet to a point in the eastern boundary. 
(109)  On the north side of the 600 block of East Steiner Street, commencing at its intersection with North Tyler Street and extending eastward 300 feet to its intersection with North Filmore Street. 
(110)  On the south side of the 600 block of East Steiner Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the Tyler Street and Steiner Street intersection and extending eastward to a point 20 feet east of the intersection. 
(111)  On the north and south sides of the 400, 500, and 600 blocks of Trojan Drive, during school hours and during those days when regular school is in session. 
(112)  On the east side of Tyler Street extending from the northeast corner of the Tyler Street and Hayes Street intersection to the southeast corner of the Tyler Street and Jones Street intersection. 
(113)  On the east side of the 400 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the Tyler Street and Steiner Street intersection and extending southward to a point 20 feet south of the intersection. 
(114)  On the east side of the 400 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and extending northward to a point 20 feet north of the intersection. 
(115)  On the east side of the 600 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at a point 200 feet south of the southeast corner of its intersection with East Lott Street and continuing northward along the east curbline 200 feet. 
(116)  On the west side of the 300 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at the southwest corner of the Tyler Street and Gramman Street intersection and extending southward to a point 170 feet south of the intersection. 
(117)  On the west side of the 400 block of North Tyler Street extending from East Steiner Street to East Gramman Street; the no-parking zone shall not apply during funeral services. 
(118)  On the west side of the 700 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at a point 44 feet north from the northwest corner of its intersection with East Lott Street and continuing westward 44 feet to the corner of the intersection. 
(119)  On the west side of the 800 block of North Tyler Street, commencing at a point 44 feet south from the southwest corner of its intersection with East Flournoy Street and continuing northward 44 feet to the corner of the intersection. 
(120)  On the west side of South Tyler Street, commencing at the southwest corner of the intersection of Oak Drive and Tyler Street and extending southward along the west curbline of South Tyler Street to the northwest corner of the intersection of Tyler Street and Moore Street. 
(121)  On the east side of the 200 block of South Tyler Street, extending from the intersection of South Tyler Street with Milam Street along the east curbline of the 200 block of South Tyler Street northward to the intersection of South Tyler Street with East Houston Street. 
(122)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Walton Street, commencing on the northeast corner of the intersection of North Washington Street and West Walton Street and extending eastward along the northern boundary of the 100 block of West Walton Street to a point 60 feet from the intersection. 
(123)  On Northeast Washington Street from the north boundary of West Huntington Street to the west boundary of North St. Mary's Street. 
(124)  On both sides of North Washington Street between the Texas and New Orleans Railroad Tracks and the intersection of North Washington Street and Huntington Street, being a portion of U.S. Highway 181. 
(125)  On both sides of Washington Street from Corpus Christi Street north 100 feet. 
(126)  On the most western boundary of the 1400 block of North Washington Street commencing from its intersection with the most northern boundary of West Huntington Street thence in a northerly direction along said most western boundary of North Washington Street a distance of 130 feet which point is 25 feet south of the most southern boundary of a paved private parking area serving the private business located at 1405 North Washington Street. 
(127)  On the east side of the 400 block of North Washington Street, from the northeast intersection of North Washington Street and West Cleveland Street and along the eastern boundary of the 400 block of North Washington Street northward for a distance of 33 feet. 
(128)  On the east side of the 100 block of North Washington Street from the northeast intersection of North Washington Street and West Corpus Christi Street to a point 124 feet north of the intersection. 
(129)  On the west side of South Washington Street, commencing at the intersection of the present curbing of Milam Street and South Washington Street and continuing north along the west curb or South Washington Street 90 feet to a point in the western curbing. 
(130)  On the west side of South Washington Street, commencing at a point 197 feet from the intersection of the present curbing of Milam Street and South Washington Street and continuing along the west curb of South Washington Street for a distance of 23 feet. 
(131)  On the west side of the 200 block of South Washington Street, commencing on the southwest corner of the intersection of South Washington Street and West Houston Street and extending along the western boundary of the 200 block of South Washington Street, southward to a point 309.27 feet from the intersection. 
(132)  On the west side of the 200 block of South Washington Street, commencing at the southwest corner of its intersection with West Houston Street and continuing southward a distance of 61 feet. 
(133)  In the 200 block of South Washington Street, commencing at the southeast corner of the intersection of South Washington Street and West Houston Street and extending along the eastern boundary of the 200 block of South Washington Street southward to a point 220 feet from the intersection. 
(134)  On the east side of the 200 block of South Washington Street, commencing at the northeast corner of the intersection of South Washington Street and West Milam Street and extending along the eastern boundary of the 200 block of South Washington Street, northward to a point 40 feet from the intersection. 
(135)  On the west side of the 200 block of South Washington Street, commencing at a point 90 feet, five inches from the southwest corner of the intersection of South Washington Street and West Houston Street and extending southward along the western boundary of the 200 block of South Washington Street 83 feet, ten inches to a point. 
(136)  On the west side of the 300 block of South Washington Street, commencing on the southwest corner of the intersection of South Washington Street and West Milam Street and extending along the western boundary of the 300 block of South Washington Street, southward to a point 93.33 feet from the intersection. 
(137)  On the east side of the 300 block of South Washington Street, commencing at the southeast curbline of South Washington Street and Houston Street and continuing southward along the east side of South Washington Street to the Poesta Creek bridge, a distance of 94 feet, nine inches. 
(138)  On the south side of the 1000, 1100 and 1200 blocks of South Washington Street, commencing 161 feet from the southeast intersection of Cato Street and South Washington Street, and extending southward along the eastern boundary of South Washington Street a distance of 486 feet to a point. 
(139)  All of the east side of the 200 block of South Washington Street from its intersection with the south boundary of West Houston Street to its intersection with the north boundary of West Milam Street is hereby designated a no-parking zone. 
(Code 1973, § 17-30; Ord. No. 243, 10-28-1943; Ord. No. 310, 9-8-1952; Ord. No. 313, 10-13-1952; Ord. No. 366, 12-13-1955; Ord. No. 403, 4-9-1957; Ord. No. 423, 3-11-1958; Ord. No. 426, 3-25-1958; Ord. No. 447, 8-26-1958; Ord. No. 450, 10-14-1958; Ord. No. 462, 12-19-1959; Ord. No. 469, 1-27-1959; Ord. No. 475, 2-24-1959; Ord. No. 497, 8-11-1959; Ord. No. 506, 9-8-1959; Ord. No. 510, 10-13-1959; Ord. No. 516, 11-10-1959; Ord. No. 518, 12-8-1959; Ord. No. 521, 2-9-1960; Ord. No. 531, 4-26-1960; Ord. No. 532, 5-10-1960; Ord. No. 555, 11-8-1960; Ord. No. 564, 2-14-1961; Ord. No. 572, 3-21-1961; Ord. No. 574, 3-28-1961; Ord. No. 581, 5-9-1961; Ord. No. 589, 9-12-1961; Ord. No. 596, 1-24-1961; Ord. No. 607, 3-13-1962; Ord. No. 626, 11-13-1962; Ord. No. 631, 5-8-1962; Ord. No. 647, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 653, 6-11-1963; Ord. No. 657, 6-25-1963; Ord. No. 701, 4-14-1964; Ord. No. 706, 5-12-1964; Ord. No. 710, 6-9-1964; Ord. No. 721, 10-12-1964; Ord. No. 722, 10-13-1964; Ord. No. 724, 10-13-1964; Ord. No. 725, 11-10-1964; Ord. No. 771, 10-26-1965; Ord. No. 776, 11-23-1965; Ord. No. 782, 2-3-1966; Ord. No. 792, 3-8-1966; Ord. No. 794, 3-8-1966; Ord. No. 800, 4-26-1966; Ord. No. 810, 6-14-1966; Ord. No. 823, 11-22-1966; Ord. No. 849, 6-13-1967; Ord. No. 860, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 861, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 875, 12-12-1967; Ord. No. 877, 12-12-1967; Ord. No. 892, 4-23-1968; Ord. No. 898, 5-14-1968; Ord. No. 905, 6-11-1968; Ord. No. 908, 6-11-1968; Ord. No. 919, 7-23-1968; Ord. No. 933, 9-30-1968; Ord. No. 949, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 950, 2-25-1969; Ord. No. 979, 8-26-1969; Ord. No. 1005, 4-28-1970; Ord. No. 1058, 10-23-1971; Ord. No. 1059, 10-23-1971; Ord. No. 1092, 9-26-1972; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-28-1974; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 9-24-1974; Ord. No. 1210, §§ I, II, 8-26-1975; Ord. No. 1214, §§ I, II, 8-26-1975; Ord. No. 1244, § I, 8-24-1976; Ord. No. 1270, 9-27-1978; Ord. No. 1292, 6-13-1978; Ord. No. 1294, 7-25-1978; Ord. No. 1382, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 1452, 3-15-1983; Ord. No. 1466, 7-26-1983; Ord. No. 1471, 9-27-1983; Ord. No. 1474, 10-11-1983; Ord. No. 1583, 4-28-1987; Ord. No. 1592, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1643, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 1646, 2-13-1990; Ord. No. 1658, 7-24-1990; Ord. No. 1699, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1710, 11-26-1991; Ord. No. 1729, 7-14-1992; Ord. No. 1732, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 1739, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 1811, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1845, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 1850, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1863, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1993, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2005, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2054, 7-26-2005; Ord. No. 2122, 3-25-2008; Ord. No. 2199, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2204, 11-30-2011; Ord. No. 2292, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 52-75. - Limited parking areas. 
    Parking is limited in certain areas as follows: 
(1)  On most-western 140 feet of the south side of the 100 block of W. Bowie, 30 minutes. 
(2)  Along the west side and the southernmost 150 feet on the east side of the 100 block of North Buchanan Street, two hours within any period of 24 consecutive hours. 
(3)  On the west side of the 200 block of South Buchanan Street, one hour between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(4)  On the south side of the 200 block of East Corpus Christi Street, one hour between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(5)  On the south side of the 300 block of East Corpus Christi Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(6)  Along the north side of the 400 block of East Corpus Christi Street commencing from its intersection and continuing eastward a distance of 160 feet, two hours parking within any period of 24 consecutive hours. 
(7)  On the most southern boundary of the 100 block of West Corpus Christi Street in front of the Bee County Courthouse, two spaces reserved exclusively for use by city police department vehicles during their regular course of business at the courthouse. 
(8)  On the south side of the 100 block of East Hefferman Street, one hour between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(9)  On the south side of the 100 block of East Hefferman Street, one hour. 
(10)  On the west side of the 100 block of North St. Mary's Street from the southwest corner of West Bowie Street and North St. Mary's Street to the south boundary of the U.S. post office property, ten minutes. 
(11)  On the east side of the 100 block of South St. Mary's Street, 30 minutes. 
(Code 1973, § 17-31; Ord. No. 341, 3-9-1954; Ord. No. 701, 4-14-1964; Ord. No. 787, 2-22-1966; Ord. No. 835, 2-14-1967; Ord. No. 1275, § I, 11-22-1977; Ord. No. 1295, 7-25-1978; Ord. No. 1655, 7-3-1990; Ord. No. 1700, 6-11- 1991; Ord. No. 2147, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 2205, 11-30-2011) 
Sec. 52-76. - Parking for disabled persons. 
    The following areas shall be marked and reserved for parking only by disabled persons qualified by state law to use parking spaces so designated: 
(1)  On the most western parking space of the most southern side of the 100 block of West Bowie Street. 
(2)  On the most western parking space of the most northern side of the 100 block of West Bowie Street. 
(3)  On the 200 block of West Hefferman Street. 
(4)  On the eastside of the 100 block of South St. Mary's Street. 
(5)  A 27-foot "Handicap Parking Only" zone on the east side of the 300 block of South Thompson Street commencing from a point 56 feet north of the most northern boundary of West Crockett Street northerly 27 feet. 
(6)  A 27-foot "Handicap Loading/Unloading" zone on the east side of the 300 block of South Thompson Street commencing from a point 83 feet north of the most northern boundary of West Crockett Street northerly 27 feet. 
(7)  On 108 North Washington Street. 
(8)  Directly in front of 306 North Washington Street. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 1560, 6-24-1986; Ord. No. 1560, 6-24-1986; Ord. No. 1774, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1863, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1864, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 2151, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 52-77. - [Commercial delivery trucks.] 
(a)  There is hereby established a "no parking for commercial delivery trucks" on the north and south end of the Rialto Theater. 
(b)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any persons, firm or corporation to park or cause to park a commercial delivery truck in said area. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be assessed a fine not to exceed the maximum limit established by the most current state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2331, §§ 1-3, 12-12-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2331, §§ 1-3, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 52-77 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 52-78-52-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERED PARKING AND PARKING LOT 

Sec. 52-94. - Use of parking space for loading and unloading. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or park the same in a parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading of merchandise, supplies or materials, except where the place of business, where such merchandise, etc., is to be loaded or unloaded, does not have either a usable entrance from an adjoining alley or an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business; and where there is neither a usable entrance to a place of business from an alley, nor an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business, for the length of time necessary to expeditiously load or unload such merchandise, etc., and give or secure delivery receipt therefor; but it shall be unlawful for any operator to use more than two parking spaces for such loading or unloading for a longer time than necessary to expeditiously load or unload such merchandise, etc., and give or secure a delivery receipt therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 17-51; Ord. No. 252, § 16, 5-29-1946; Ord. No. 509, § XVI, 10-13-1959) 
Sec. 52-95. - Parking by United States post office. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop or park any vehicle in his possession or under his control on that half of St. Mary's Street adjacent to the lot on which the United States post office is located, same being lot 150 by 150 feet of block 37 of the Original Townsite, for a longer period of time than that established therefor between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1973, § 17-53; Ord. No. 252, § 22, 5-29-1946) 
Sec. 52-96. - Impounding vehicles. 
    In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked in violation of and contrary to any of the provisions of this division, the same shall be a nuisance per se, and shall be removed by any police officer and taken to some place designated by the chief of police for such purpose, and there kept by such officer until application for its redemption shall be made by the owner or his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the city of a sum as provided on the city fee schedule , together with all other reasonable costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or his agent, within 30 days, such vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with state law and this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 17-55; Ord. No. 252, § 17, 5-29-1946; Ord. No. 509, § XVII, 10-13-1959; Ord. No. 558, § 1, 1-10-1961) 
Secs. 52-97-52-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 52-136. - Established. 
    The following loading and unloading zones are established and shall be complied with by all vehicular traffic as indicated herein: 
(1)  A truck loading and unloading zone in the west half of an alley in block 36, Original Townsite of Beeville. 
(2)  A truck loading and unloading zone in the east half of an alley in block two, Original Townsite of Beeville. 
(3)  A loading and unloading zone 235 feet long in the alley running between the 200 block of West Bowie Street and the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, the loading zone commencing at a point in the alley 44 feet north of its southern boundary and proceeding northward to the southern boundary of West Hefferman Street. 
(4)  On the south side of West Bowie Street, a loading and unloading zone 65 feet long. The loading and unloading zone shall commence at the southwest intersection of West Bowie Street and North Washington Street and shall extend along the southern boundary of the 200 block of West Bowie Street for a distance of 65 feet to a point in the southern boundary. 
(5)  On the south side of the 100 block of West Bowie Street, a loading and unloading zone 25 feet long. The loading and unloading zone shall commence at a point 148 feet east of the southeast curb of the intersection of West Bowie Street and North Washington street and shall extend eastward along the south curbline of the 100 block of West Bowie Street a distance of 25 feet to a point in the curbing. 
(6)  On the north side of the 100 block of West Bowie Street, a "freight only" loading and unloading zone 23 feet, eight inches long. The "freight only" loading and unloading zone shall commence at a point 116 feet east of the northeast curb at the intersection of West Bowie Street and North Washington Street and shall extend westward along the north curbline of the 100 block of West Bowie Street a distance of 23 feet, eight inches to a point in the curbing. 
(7)  On the south side of the 200 block of West Bowie Street, a freight loading and unloading zone, commencing at a point 175 feet of the present west curbline of West Bowie Street and North Washington Street, along the south curbline of West Bowie Street for a distance of 21 feet to a point in the southern boundary. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than for authorized loading or unloading of freight in such freight loading and unloading zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday. 
(8)  A loading and unloading zone on the south side of the 100 block of West Bowie Street between the alley north of North Washington Street and the U.S. post office driveway, to be used only for the purpose of drive-in mailing service. 
(9)  A loading zone on the most eastern 46.5 feet on the south side of the 200 block of West Bowie Street beside the Dog and Bee Restaurant. 
(10)  A loading and unloading zone, 20 feet in length on the south side of West Cleveland Street, abutting block two of Jones Addition to the city, commencing at a point ten feet from the intersection of the present curbline of North Washington Street and West Cleveland Street, and continuing along the curbline for a distance of 20 feet. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle except for authorized loading or unloading in such loading and unloading zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday. 
(11)  A loading and unloading zone on the north side of the 800 Block of East Gramman Street. 
(12)  On the east side of the 700 and 800 blocks of North Harrison Street, a loading and unloading zone, commencing at a point 44 feet south of the south curb of Flournoy Street with its intersection of North Harrison Street and extending southward along the east curb to a point 44 feet north of the north curbline of East Lott Street with its intersection of North Harrison Street; except 85 feet on the curbline of the east side of the 700 block of North Harrison Street commencing 155 feet from the extended intersection of the east boundary of North Harrison Street and the north boundary of East Lott Street and extending 85 feet northward along the curbline. 
(13)  On the east side of the 600 block of North Harrison Street, a loading and unloading zone, commencing at the southeast curbline at the intersection of Lott Street and North Harrison Street and extending southward to the northeast curbline of East Kennedy Street and North Harrison Street. 
(14)  On the north side of West Hefferman Street, a loading and unloading zone commencing at a point 82 feet west of the north curbline of West Hefferman Street and extending west 11 feet. 
(15)  On the north side of the 200 block of West Hefferman Street, a freight loading and unloading zone commencing 73 feet west of the northwest curb of the intersection of North Washington Street and West Hefferman Street and continuing westward along the north curbline of West Hefferman Street for a distance of 22 feet to a point in the curbing. 
(16)  On the west side of the 800 block of North Polk Street, a bus loading and unloading zone beginning 27 feet from the northwest corner of its intersection with East Hayes Street and continuing northward along the west curb to a point 237 feet. 
(17)  On the west side of North St. Mary's Street, a loading and unloading zone ten feet long, commencing at a point 114 feet north of the west curbline of North St. Mary's Street's intersection with the north curbline of West Hefferman Street and extending northward ten feet. 
(18)  On the west side of the 300 block of North St. Mary's Street, a loading and unloading zone seven feet, three inches wide by 26 feet long, commencing at a point on the east boundary of a six-foot sidewalk 26 feet, five inches west of the west gutterline of the 300 block of North St. Mary's Street, which point is 160 feet north of a point on the north gutterline of the 100 block of West Hefferman Street, which latter point is 26 feet, five inches westward of the west gutterline of North St. Mary's Street; thence north along the sidewalk boundary seven feet, three inches; thence eastward parallel with the north line of West Hefferman Street 26 feet, five inches; thence southward along the St. Mary's Street gutterline seven feet, three inches; thence westward parallel with the north line of West Hefferman Street 26 feet, five inches to the place of beginning. 
(19)  On the east side of the 100 block of South St. Mary's Street, a freight loading and unloading zone 26 feet long commencing at a point 66 feet south from the southeast curbline at the intersection of Corpus Christi Street and St. Mary's Street and extending southward for a distance of 26 feet to a point in the curbing. 
(20)  On the west side of the 700 and 800 blocks of North Tyler Street, a loading and unloading zone, commencing at a point 44 feet south of the south curb of Flournoy Street with its intersection of North Tyler Street and extending southward along the west curb to a point 44 feet north of the north curbline of East Lott Street with its intersection of North Tyler Street. 
(21)  On the east side of the 100 block of North Washington Street, a loading and unloading zone, commencing 130 feet north of the northeast corner of the intersection of West Corpus Christi Street and Washington Street and continuing northward 26 feet to a point. 
(22)  A loading and unloading zone in the alley at the rear of the property fronting the 400 block of North Washington Street, extending the width and length of the alley. 
(Code 1973, § 17-64; Ord. No. 341, 3-9-1954; Ord. No. 373, 2-14-1956; Ord. No. 510, 10-13-1959; Ord. No. 519, 1-12-1960; Ord. No. 531, § IV, 4-26-1960; Ord. No. 615, 6-26-1962; Ord. No. 632, 1-8-1963; Ord. No. 637, 2-12-1963; Ord. No. 668, 8-27-1963; Ord. No. 673, 8-27-1963; Ord. No. 802, 4-26-1966; Ord. No. 819, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 821, 11-8-1966; Ord. No. 839, 3-14-1967; Ord. No. 858, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 859, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 862, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 877, 12-12-1967; Ord. No. 893, 4-23-1968; Ord. No. 912, 6-25-1968; Ord. No. 941, 11-26-1968; Ord. No. 1138, § 1, 9-25-1973; Ord. No. 1299, § 1, 10-10-1978; Ord. No. 1658, 7-24-1990; Ord. No. 2174, 8-24-2010) 
Sec. 52-137. - Regulations of use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to stand or park a vehicle in a loading zone for the purpose of loading passengers for a period in excess of two minutes, except, however, motor buses or motor coaches operated by bus lines over designated roads in and through the city may remain for a period of time necessary to expeditiously load or unload passengers. 
(b)  In loading zones for the loading and unloading of merchandise, supplies or materials, all such loading and unloading must be performed in an expeditious manner and no vehicle may remain in a loading zone for a period of time longer than necessary to expeditiously load or unload the same, or while the operator thereof is soliciting or engaged otherwise than the loading or unloading of the vehicle, except that a reasonable time shall be allowed for giving or securing a delivery receipt. 
(c)  The provisions of this section apply on all days and hours, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1973, § 17-65; Ord. No. 252, § 15, 5-29-1946; Ord. No. 509, § XV, 10-13-1959) 
Secs. 52-138-52-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 52-158. - Speed limits; general. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets, alleys and ways in the city in excess of the following speeds: 
(1)  30 miles per hour within the city limits, except when a lower rate of speed is required or when a greater speed is permitted as set out and prescribed in this chapter. 
(2)  15 miles per hour in all alleys. For the purposes of this section, an alley shall be defined as the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel having no legal or official name and of 20 feet or less in width. 
(3)  20 miles per hour on South Tyler Street north and south 600 feet from where Everett Circle meets said South Tyler Street. 
(Code 1973, § 17-15; Ord. No. 999, 3-10-1970; Ord. No. 1630, 7-11-1989; Ord. No. 1772, 6-14-1994) 
Sec. 52-159. - Schedule on specific highways. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon the following streets, alleys and ways in the city in excess of the following speeds: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 59. 
a.  From a point 42 feet east of Burke Street to a point 88 feet west of FM 673 (Minnesota Street), 40 miles per hour, except when signed as a school zone at 20 miles per hour. 
b.  Beginning at the northeast city limit to a point 0.311 mile southwest of the northeast city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 0.311 mile southwest of the northeast city limit to a point 0.747 mile southwest of the northeast city limit, 45 miles per hour. 
d.  From a point 0.747 mile southwest of the northeast city limit to a point 1.022 mile southwest of the northeast city limit, 40 miles per hour. 
e.  From a point 1.025 miles southwest of the northeast city limit to the intersection of U.S. 181, 35 miles per hour. 
f.  From the intersection of U.S. 181 southwest to a point 0.330 mile southwest of the intersection, 30 miles per hour. 
g.  From a point 0.330 mile southwest of the intersection to a point 0.756 mile southwest of the intersection, 40 miles per hour. 
h.  From a point 0.756 mile southwest of the intersection to a point 0.957 mile southwest of the intersection, 45 miles per hour. 
i.  From a point 0.957 mile southwest of the intersection to the southwest city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
j.  Beginning at the east city limit to a point 0.311 mile west of the east city limit, 45 miles per hour. 
k.  From a point 0.311 mile west of the east city limit to a point 0.747 mile west of the east city limit, 40 miles per hour. 
l.  From a point 0.747 mile west of the east city limit to Loop 516, 30 miles per hour except for that portion of U.S. 181 Business signed for school zone at 20 miles per hour when flashing. 
m.  From Loop 516 to a point 0.330 mile west of Loop 516, 30 miles per hour. 
n.  From a point 0.330 mile west of Loop 516 to a point 0.756 mile west of Loop 516, 35 miles per hour except that portion signed for school zone at 20 miles per hour when flashing. 
o.  From a point 0.756 mile west of Loop 516 to a point 0.957 mile west of Loop 516, 40 miles per hour. 
p.  From a point 0.957 mile west of Loop 516 to the west city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
q.  Beginning at the west city limit to a point 0.584 mile east of the west city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
r.  From a point 0.584 mile east of the west city limit to a point 0.785 mile east of the west city limit, 40 miles per hour. 
s.  From a point 0.785 mile east of the west city limit to a point 1.211 mile east of the west city limit, 35 miles per hour, except that portion signed for school zone when flashing at 20 miles per hour. 
t.  From a point 1.211 miles East of the west city limit to the intersection of U.S. 181 Business in Beeville, 30 miles per hour. 
(2)  U.S. Highway 181. 
a.  Beginning at the north city limit to a point 0.086 mile south of the north city limit, 55 miles per hour. 
b.  From a point 0.086 mile south of the north city limit to a point 0.287 mile south of the north city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 0.287 mile south of the north city limit to a point 0.504 mile south of the north city limit, 40 miles per hour. 
d.  From a point 0.504 mile south of the north city limit to a point 1.296 miles south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
e.  From a point 1.296 miles south of the north city limit to a point 2.062 miles south of the north city limit, 30 miles per hour. 
f.  From a point 2.062 miles south of the north city limit to a point 2.490 miles south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
g.  From a point 2.490 miles south of the north city limit to the south city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
(3)  SH Highway 202. 
a.  Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 181 to a point 0.237 mile east of the intersection, 35 miles per hour. 
b.  From a point 0.237 mile east of the intersection to a point 0.705 mile east of the intersection, 45 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 0.705 mile east of the intersection to the east city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
d.  Beginning at Loop 516 to a point 0.237 mile east of Loop 516, 35 miles per hour. 
e.  From a point 0.237 mile east of Loop 516 to include the most southeastern section from a point 1.093 miles east of Loop 516 to the east city limits of Beeville, 50 miles per hour except the portions signed for school zones at 20 miles per hour when flashing. 
(4)  FM Highway 351. 
a.  Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 181 to the intersection of SH 202, 35 miles per hour, except that portion signed for school zone, when flashing, at 20 miles per hour. 
b.  Beginning at the west city limit to the east city limit, 45 miles per hour. 
(5)  FM Highway 673. 
a.  Beginning at the west city limit to a point 0.230 mile east of the west city limit, 55 miles per hour. 
b.  From a point 0.230 mile east of the west city limit to a point 0.438 mile east of the west city limit, 45 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 0.438 mile east of the west city limit to the intersection of U.S. 59, 35 miles per hour, except when signed as a school zone to be in effect between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., and 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on days when school is in session. 
d.  In the Northwest Area Park, commonly called the "200-Acre Park," bounded partly on the east by FM highway 673, partly on the north by Viggo Road and partly on the west by FM highway 315, 15 miles per hour. 
e.  Beginning at the north city limit to a point 0.411 mile south of the north city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
f.  From a point 0.411 mile south of the north city limit to the intersection of U.S. 59, 40 miles per hour, except when signed for school zone at 20 miles per hour when flashing. 
(6)  North Adams Street. Beginning at the southernmost point of the intersection of North St. Mary's Street and North Adams Street and continuing along North Adams Street for a distance of 1,389 feet in a southerly direction, both ways, 40 miles per hour. 
(7)  FM Highway 3355. From U.S. 181 Business to the most northern entrance to the Coastal Bend College, 35 miles per hour. A crosswalk is provided for across said portion of Charco Road. 
(8)  Loop Highway 516. 
a.  Beginning at the north city limit, southward to its intersection with FM Highway 351, 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Beginning at the north city limit to a point 0.852 mile south of the north city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 0.852 mile south of the north city limit to a point 1.448 mile south of the north city limit, 40 miles per hour except that portion signed for school at 25 miles per hour when flashing. 
d.  From a point 1.448 miles South of the north city limit to a point 2.240 mile south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
e.  From a point 2.240 mile south of the north city limit to a point 3.006 mile south of the north city limit, 30 miles per hour. 
f.  From a point 3.006 mile south of the north city limit to a point 3.434 mile south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
g.  From a point 3.434 mile south of the north city limit to the south city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
(9)  St. Mary's Street (U.S. 181 Business). The speed prescribed for all motor vehicles in and along St. Mary's Street (U.S. 181 Business), shall henceforth be as follows: 
a.  Beginning at the north city limit to a point 1.030 miles south of the north city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
b.  From a point 1.030 miles south of the north city limit to a point 1.448 miles south of the north city limit, 40 miles per hour. 
c.  From a point 1.448 miles south of the north city limit to a point 2.240 miles south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
d.  From a point 2.240 miles south of the north city limit to a point 3.006 miles south of the north city limit, 30 miles per hour. 
e.  From a point 3.006 miles south of the north city limit to a point 3.434 miles south of the north city limit, 35 miles per hour. 
f.  From a point 3.434 miles south of the north city limit to the south city limit, 50 miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 17-16; Ord. No. 587, 7-25-1961; Ord. No. 689, 11-12-1963; Ord. No. 698, 3-24-1964; Ord. No. 989, 11-13-1969; Ord. No. 999, 3-10-1970; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 7-23-1974; Ord. No. 1278, 12-13-1977; Ord. No. 1381, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 1478, 10-25-1983; Ord. No. 1481, 12-13-1983; Ord. No. 1486, 2-28-1984; Ord. No. 1501, 7-24-1984; Ord. No. 1520-A, 11-13-1984; Ord. No. 1539, 11-12-1985; Ord. No. 1556, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1772, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1994, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2016, 10-14-2003) 
Sec. 52-160. - Church zones. 
(a)  Vehicles proceeding through marked church zones within the city shall travel at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. on Sundays. It is the duty of vehicle drivers to keep a proper lookout for pedestrians in the vicinity of the crosswalk. 
(b)  The city has established the following church zones: 
(1)  North St. Mary's Street commencing from the 400 block through and including the 1100 block between Cleveland Street and Fanning Street. 
(2)  In the 400 block of South Alta Vista Boulevard; in the 600 block of South Alta Vista Boulevard. All motor vehicles and other conveyances proceeding north and south on South Alta Vista Boulevard at such church zones shall reduce the speed of their vehicle to 20 miles per hour on the 400 block and 500 block of South Alta Vista Boulevard from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays in the 400 block of South Alta Vista Boulevard and all Sunday mornings in the 600 block of South Alta Vista Boulevard. It shall be the duty of all drivers of such vehicles to keep a proper look out for pedestrians within the vicinity of said church zones. 
(3)  On the 100 block of North Burke Street in front of the Bethlehem Missionary Baptist Church. All motor vehicles and other conveyances proceeding north and south on the 100 block of North Burke Street shall reduce the speed of their vehicles to 20 miles per hour between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on all Sundays. It shall be the duty of all drivers of such vehicles to keep a proper look out for pedestrians within the vicinity of said church zone. 
(4)  On the 1100 block and the north half of the 1000 block of North Madison Street in front of the Full Gospel Church. All motor vehicles and other conveyances proceeding north and south on the 1100 block and the north half of the 1000 block of North Madison Street shall reduce the speed of their vehicles to 20 miles per hour between the hours of 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays and between 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Wednesdays. It shall be the duty of all drivers to such vehicles to keep a proper look out for pedestrians within the vicinity of said church zone. 
(5)  On the 400 block of South Jackson Street from 6:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. on all Wednesdays and from 9:30 a.m. through 12:30 p.m. and from 5:30 p.m. through 8:30 p.m. on all Sundays. 
(6)  On the 300 block of South Tyler Street from 6:30 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on all Wednesdays and from 9:00 a.m. through 12:30 p.m. and from 6:30 p.m. through 9:00 p.m. on all Sundays. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in said zone in excess of 20 miles per hour during the applicable days and time zones. 
(7)  On all of the 700 block and the southern half of the 800 block of North Avenue D: 
a.  On Wednesdays from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
b.  On all Saturdays from 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. 
c.  On all Sundays from 7:30 am. to 9:30 a.m. and from 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. 
(c)  There is hereby established a church crosswalk on the 700 block of North Avenue D commencing at its intersection with the most southern boundary of West Carter Street southward along North Avenue D a distance of 30 feet, with signs designating the crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 1647, 12-12-1989; Ord. No. 1656, 7-3-1990; Ord. No. 1705, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 1784B, 10-23-1994; Ord. No. 1948, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2019, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 2067, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 2068, 2-9-2010) 
Secs. 52-161-52-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SCHOOL ZONES 

Sec. 52-190. - Operation of vehicles when approaching. 
    All motor vehicles, wagons and other conveyances proceeding at school crosswalks shall, whenever children are in, or are about to enter, a crosswalk, come to and immediately halt and shall remain stopped until the crosswalk is free and clear of all children. It shall be the duty of all drivers of such vehicles to keep a proper lookout for children within the vicinity of and in school crosswalks. 
(Code 1973, § 17-74; Ord. No. 994, 2-24-1970) 
Sec. 52-191. - Parking prohibited in school bus loading and unloading areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a school bus loading and unloading zone, except that it shall be lawful to park school buses therein temporarily for the purpose of loading or unloading schoolchildren. 
(Code 1973, § 17-77; Ord. No. 515, 10-10-1959) 
Sec. 52-192. - Restricted zones and hours enumerated. 
(a)  Street closure. The following streets shall be closed to traffic during the hours indicated: 
(1)  That portion of the 500 block of East Lott Street lying between a line 36 feet east of its intersection with North Harrison Street and 36 feet west of its intersection with North Tyler Street is closed to motor vehicle traffic between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all days when school classes and other school activities are in session and taking place at the adjacent school. 
(2)  The entire 600 Block of East Hayes Street shall be closed to all through traffic on all school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. by the physical placement of traffic barricades where it comes perpendicular to North Tyler Street. 
(3)  School zone effectiveness for the St. Philip's Episcopal School is in effect between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. 
(b)  Directional use restrictions. Directional traffic control shall be applicable on the following streets as indicated during the times indicated: 
(1)  The 700 Block of East Hayes Street is hereby designated a one-way allowing only westward bound vehicular traffic on all school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(2)  The 700 Block of North Filmore Street is hereby designated a one-way allowing only southward bound vehicular traffic on all school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(c)  Speed restricted. Vehicle speed in the following school zones shall not exceed 20 miles per hour on the days schools are in session during the times stated or, if no time is stated, when school is actually in session: 
(1)  All that portion of North Adams Street between the intersection of North Adams Street and the north boundary of East Inez Street, for the south boundary of the school zone, and a line perpendicular to the east and west boundaries of North Adams Street and 100 feet north on the west boundary of Adams Street from its intersection with East Orange Street, for the north boundary of such school zone; between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(2)  All that portion of North Adams Street from the south boundary of Hayes Street at the intersection of Adams Street to 85 feet north of the North Adams Street and Flournoy Street intersection; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(3)  All that portion of North Adams Street from the south boundary of Hayes Street and North Adams Street and extending southward along on North Adams Street to the north boundary of Kennedy Street. 
(4)  All that portion of North Adams Street from the north boundary of Orange Street to the south boundary of Bates Street, from 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(5)  All that portion of North Adams Street from the north boundary of East Corpus Christi Street to the south boundary of East Bowie Street; from 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(6)  On North Adams Street beginning at the southernmost boundary of its intersection with East Kennedy Street and extending northward to the northernmost boundary of East Flournoy Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(7)  On North Adams Street beginning at the southernmost boundary of its intersection with East Kennedy Street and extending northward to the northernmost boundary of East Flournoy Street and providing for the erection of electrically operated school zone flasher signals at the beginning and end of such school zones, 20 miles per hour between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:45 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. when the flashing lights are operating. 
(8)  On North Adams Street from East Inez Street to Trojan Drive, 20 miles per hour from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(9)  On the most-southern 75 feet of the 500 block of South Adams Street, 25 miles per hour on school attendance days until the hour of 4:00 p.m. 
(10)  On the most-northern 75 feet of the 600 block of South Adams Street, 25 miles per hour on school attendance days until the hour of 4:00 p.m. 
(11)  All that portion of Avenue D, being 26 feet on the northeast corner of Avenue D in the quadrangle formed by Avenue D, Ireland Street, Avenue E and Lutts Drive; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(12)  All that portion of Avenue E at intersection with Lutts Drive southward to the south boundary of Ireland Street; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(13)  On the 600 block and the west half of the 700 block of East Bowie Street and on the 100 block and the south half of the 200 block of North Filmore Street. 
(14)  On all of the 500 Block of South Buchanan Street. 
(15)  On all of the 300 Block of East Doc Street. 
(16)  Extend the present school zone on FM 351 (Reagan Road) to a point 300 feet west of FM 351's intersection with South St. Mary's Street; the school zone, when applicable will be 25 miles per hour. 
(17)  All that portion of Fadden Street from the east boundary of South St. Mary's Street to the west boundary of Mussett Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(18)  The 800, 900, 1000 and 1100 blocks of West Fannin Street, beginning at a point 88 feet east of its easternmost intersection with Live Oak Street and continuing westward to a point 112 feet west of its westernmost intersection with Hugo Street, a distance of 964 feet; between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the 800 and 1100 blocks, and from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on the 900 and 1000 blocks. 
(19)  On North Filmore Street from a point 150 feet South of North Filmore/East Lott intersection north on Filmore to its intersection with East Hayes Street. 
(20)  On FM-673 serving the Moreno Junior High School from 55 feet north of Bowie Street to 364 feet south of Walton Street from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(21)  On the most-eastern half of the 500 block of East Gramman Street. 
(22)  All that portion of Hayes Street from the west boundary of North Tyler Street to the east boundary of North Polk Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(23)  All that portion of the south boundary of Hayes Street and North Adams Street and to the north boundary of Kennedy Street at its intersection with North Adams Street; while the flasher sign light is flashing. 
(24)  On all of West Hefferman Street from FM 673 eastward to a point where North Minneapolis comes perpendicular to West. Hefferman Street. 
(25)  All that portion of Hugosota Street between the intersection of the south boundary of West Fannin Street with the west boundary of Hugosota Street and the north boundary of West Huntington Street; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(26)  All that portion of East Houston Street from the southwest corner of the intersection of East Houston Street and South Harrison Street eastward along East Houston Street for a distance of 585 feet. 
(27)  On East Inez Street from North Adams Street to North Filmore Street establishing school zone hours hereto set from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(28)  All that portion of Ireland Street from the west boundary of Avenue D to the east boundary of Avenue E; between 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(29)  All that portion of North Jefferson Street between the intersection of the north boundary of East Kennedy Street with the west boundary of Jefferson Street and the north boundary of East Carter Street with the west boundary of North Jefferson Street; between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(30)  In the 100 block of the west side of North Jefferson Street beginning 20 feet from the southern boundary of East Bowie Street at its intersection with North Jefferson Street and extending southward a distance of 42.5 feet. 
(31)  All that portion of East Jones Street between the intersection of the west boundary of North Harrison Street and the south boundary of East Jones Street and the east boundary of Polk Street with the north boundary of East Jones Street; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(32)  All that portion of East Kennedy Street between the intersection of the west boundary of North St. Mary's Street with the south boundary of East Kennedy Street to the railroad property right-of-way and the east boundary of North Jefferson Street with the north boundary of East Kennedy Street; between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(33)  All that certain portion of North Monroe Street lying between a point 80 feet south of its intersection with the south boundary of East Bowie Street and 20 feet north of its intersection with the north boundary of Cleveland Street; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(34)  All that portion of North Monroe Street between the south boundary and the north boundary of the 500 block of North Monroe Street; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(35)  All that portion of South St. Mary's Street between a point 50 feet north of the Crockett Street intersection and the southern boundary of Stamper Street intersection, a distance of 489 feet; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(36)  All that portion of the 800 block of South St. Mary's Street, commencing 150 feet, six inches south from the center line of the intersection of South St. Mary's Street and Dolan Street and continuing along South St. Mary's Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 311 feet to a point. 
(37)  All that portion of South St. Mary's Street from a point 60 feet on the street from its intersection with the north boundary of Reagan Road to a point 1,200 feet north thereof, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(38)  On all of the 200 Block of East Stamper Street. 
(39)  East Steiner Street; between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(40)  On the 500, 600 and 700 block of East Steiner Street, 20 miles per hour on school attendance days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(41)  On Trojan Drive beginning at the intersection with North Adams Street and extending eastward and continuing south on Filmore Street to its intersection with East Inez Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(42)  All that portion of North Tyler Street between the southern boundary of East Hefferman Street intersection and the northern boundary of East Steiner Street intersection, a distance of 420 feet; between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(43)  All that portion of North Tyler Street from the north boundary of Flournoy Street to the south boundary of Kennedy Street; from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(44)  All that portion of North Tyler Street from the north boundary of East Steiner Street to the south boundary of East Gramman Street; from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(45)  All that certain portion of North Tyler Street lying between the southern boundary of East Gramman Street intersection and the northern boundary of East Steiner Street intersection, a distance of 420 feet, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(46)  To extend the existing school zone on both sides and ends of the 500 Block of North Tyler Street (the "GAP" between East Steiner and East Kennedy) toward each other to cover entire block. 
(47)  On U.S. Highway 59 (See section 52-159), 25 miles per hour. 
(48)  All that portion of South Washington Street from a point 122.6 feet north on the street from the center line of its intersection with St. Mary's Street to a point 1,239.6 feet south thereof. 
(49)  All that portion of South Washington Street from a point 300 feet on the street from its intersection with the west boundary of South Adams Street to a point 300 feet from its intersection with the east boundary of Mussett Street; from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(50)  To extend the school zone to eliminate the "GAP" between two existing school zones on South Washington Street. 
(51)  On South Washington Street, beginning at a point 90 feet east on said street from its intersection with the east boundary of Emily Drive to a point 510 feet west thereof, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(52)  R.A. Hall Elementary School on W. Huntington Street from Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (school days only). 
(Code 1973, § 17-72; Ord. No. 434, 4-22-1958; Ord. No. 503, 8-30-1959; Ord. No. 511, 10-13-1959; Ord. No. 520, 1-12-1960; Ord. No. 592, 9-26-1961; Ord. No. 634, 1-22-1963; Ord. No. 723, 10-13-1964; Ord. No. 784, 1-25-1966; Ord. No. 789, 7-8-1966; Ord. No. 841, 4-11-1967; Ord. No. 863, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 923, 8-27-1968; Ord. No. 980, 8-26-1969; Ord. No. 984, 9-23-1969; Ord. No. 987, 10-28-1969; Ord. No. 988, 10-28-1969; Ord. No. 989, 11-13-1969; Ord. No. 1041, 5-25-1971; Ord. No. 1062, 11-23-1971; Ord. No. 1071, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 2-27-1973; Ord. No. 1150, § 1, 2-12-1974; Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 9-24-1974; Ord. No. 1184, 9-24-1974; Ord. No. 1279, 12-13-1977; Ord. No. 1281, 1-10-1978; Ord. No. 1468, 9-13-1983; Ord. No. 1475, 10-11-1983; Ord. No. 1540, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 1607, 8-9-1988; Ord. No. 1740, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 1766, 3-22-1994; Ord. No. 1811, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1846, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 1880, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 1925, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 1949, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2017, 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 2102, 6-26-2007; Ord. No. 2125, 3-25-2008; Ord. No. 2149, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 2160, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 2330, § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 52-193. - Crosswalks established. 
    There are established the following school crosswalks: 
(1)  On North Adams Street, ten feet wide from the southwest corner of the Adams Street and Flournoy Street intersection to the southeast corner of the intersection. 
(2)  On North Archer Street, ten feet wide from the northeast corner of the Clare Street and Archer Street intersection to the northwest corner of the intersection. 
(3)  On North Archer Street, ten feet wide from the southwest corner of the Kennedy Street and Archer Street intersection to the southeast corner of the intersection. 
(4)  On North Avenue D in the 700 block, six feet wide and its southernmost boundary being 142 feet from the intersection of West Ireland Street and North Avenue D. 
(5)  On the 300 block of East Bowie Street between the St. Philip's Episcopal School and their playground. 
(6)  On the 100 block of East Cleveland Street to accommodate the First United Methodist Church and its parking lot across the street being placed approximately 60 feet west of the large oak tree located at the east entrance of the sanctuary. 
(7)  On West Fannin Street, ten feet wide from the southwest corner of the Fannin Street and Hugosota Street intersection to the northwest corner of the intersection. 
(8)  Across North Filmore Street where it comes perpendicular to East Hayes Street. 
(9)  Two crosswalks ten feet wide on the 1900 block of North Filmore Street, proceeding north or south on North Filmore Street between the A. C. Jones High School and the football field and stadium. 
(10)  On East Flournoy Street, ten feet wide from the southeast corner of the Adams Street and Flournoy Street intersection to the northeast corner of the intersection. 
(11)  Across East Hayes Street on the north side and parallel to an imaginary line extension of the north boundary of North Filmore Street across said Hayes Street. 
(12)  On Jackson Street between First Street and West Hefferman Street, the south line thereof 85 feet from the intersection of West Hefferman Street and Jackson Street and the north line thereof 12 feet north of the south line of the crosswalk. 
(13)  At the intersection of East Jones Street and South Tyler Street, four-way; the crosswalk is ten feet wide and its four lanes are located as follows: 
a.  On East Jones Street westward ten feet from the northwest corner to the southwest corner of the intersection. 
b.  On East Jones Street eastward ten feet from the northeast corner to the southeast corner of the intersection. 
c.  On South Tyler Street northward ten feet from the northwest corner to the northeast corner of the intersection. 
d.  On South Tyler Street southward ten feet from the southwest corner to the southeast corner of the intersection. 
(14)  On Kennedy Street in the 700 block, the west line thereof seven feet from the intersection of Kennedy Street and Filmore Street and the east line thereof ten feet east of the west line of the crosswalk. 
(15)  Establishing the following school crosswalks to serve the new Moreno Junior High School: 
a.  Across FM-673 in front of the most southern exit of front drive-through, across FM-673 adjacent to the most-northern boundary of East Hefferman Street; 
b.  Improve the existing crosswalk across FM-673 adjacent to the most northern boundary of West Corpus Christi Street; 
c.  Elimination of existing crosswalk across FM-673 North of the School grounds by the Veterans Memorial Park; 
d.  Across West Hefferman Street at the most-southeastern corner of the school property; 
e.  Across West Bowie Street at the most-eastern boundary of the 1200 block and adjacent to FM-673; and 
f.  Across West Corpus Christi St. with adequate advance notice for U.S. 59 travelers and appropriate flashing signals. 
(16)  On North St. Mary's Street approximately 100 feet northward from its intersection with the northern boundary of Huntington Street. 
(17)  At the corner of East Steiner Street and North Filmore Street, with signs designating the crosswalk. 
(18)  On South Tyler Street and East Jones Street (See East Jones Street). 
(Code 1973, § 17-73; Ord. No. 423, 3-11-1958; Ord. No. 520, 1-12-1960; Ord. No. 589, 9-12-1961; Ord. No. 727, 11-10-1964; Ord. No. 780, 12-14-1965; Ord. No. 864, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 963, 5-27-1969; Ord. No. 991, 11-25-1969; Ord. No. 994, 2-24-1970; Ord. No. 1698, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1728, 7-14-1992; Ord. No. 1745, 3-9-1993; Ord. No. 1751, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1753, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1879, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 2123, 3-25-2008) 
Sec. 52-194. - Loading and unloading zones established. 
(a)  There is established a school bus loading and unloading zone on the west curbline of North Tyler Street, commencing at the intersection of the western curbline of North Tyler Street and the southern curbline of Flournoy Street, and proceeding a distance of 660 feet to the intersection of the western curbline of North Tyler Street and the northern curbline of Lott Street. 
(b)  There is hereby established a loading and unloading zone on the east side of North Adams Street beginning at the southern boundary of East Orange Street at its intersection with North Adams Street and extending southward a distance of 723 feet. So much of the loading and unloading zone wherein there lies a raised curb shall be appropriately painted and there shall be erected appropriate signs as required. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind or character in the loading and unloading zone referred to herein on Mondays through Fridays when school is in session, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except for the express purpose of loading and unloading children. 
(c)  There is hereby established a school bus loading zone on the west side of the 300 block of North Jackson Street beginning at the northwest intersection of First Street and extending southward to the southwest intersection of West Hefferman Street, a distance of 231 feet. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind or character except a school bus in the loading and unloading zone referred to herein between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(d)  There is hereby established a loading and unloading zone on the 100 block of the west side of North Jefferson Street beginning 20 feet from the southern boundary of East Bowie Street at its intersection with North Jefferson Street and extending southward a distance of 42.5 feet. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind or character in said loading and unloading zone referred to herein, except for the express purpose of loading and unloading passengers and freight from commercial bus lines. 
(Code 1973, § 17-76; Ord. No. 515, 10-10-1959; Ord. No. 1070, 1-25-1972; Ord. No. 1149, § 2, 2-12-1974; Ord. No. 1186, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-1974; Ord. No. 1221, 11-25-1975; Ord. No. 1607, 8-9-1988) 
Secs. 52-195-52-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HEAVY TRUCKS AND VEHICLES HAULING VOLATILE SUBSTANCES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for municipal regulation of loads and equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 621.303. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Extremely hazardous materials means acrolein, acrylonitrile, ammonia solution of not less than 44 percent, boron trifluoride, bromine, carbon bisulfide, chlorine, dimethyl surfate, dimethylamine, anhydrous, epichlorohydrin, ethylene imine, ethylene oxide, Fluorine, liquid, hydrochloric acid, anhydrous, hydrochloric acid, hydrogen cyanide, anhydrous, hydrogen fluoride, anhydrous, hydrogen sulfide, methylamine, anhydrous, methyl bromide (bromomethane), methyl chloride, methyl mercaptan, methyl sulfate, nitric acid, nitric oxide, nitrogen tetroxide mixture, nitrogen tetroxide, and dioxide, oleum (sulfuric acid, fuming), perchloromethyl-mercaptan, phosphorus trichloride, sulfur dioxide, sulfuric anhydride, titanium tetrachloride and trimethylamine, anhydrous. 
    Hazardous materials means those materials and substances listed and identified in the federal Department of Transportation's publication DOT-5800.2, as amended from time to time. 
    Heavy vehicle or large vehicle means vehicles not designed or used primarily for transportation of property and only incidentally operated or moved over a street. 
    Light truck means any truck with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of 2,000 or less including pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks and carry-all trucks. Light trucks are not "trucks" as defined in this section. 
    Through truck means a truck, as defined in this section, traveling through the city only to reach another ultimate destination and having no related business to be conducted in the city. 
    Through truck route means a way over certain streets, highways, and inter-connecting loops, as designated in this division, over and along which through trucks traveling through the city must operate. 
    Trailer means any vehicle drawn by a truck and designed for the transportation of property, including semi-trailers. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity that exceeds 2,000 pounds and is designed, use or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, specifically excluding "light trucks" as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § I, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § I, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § I, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 52-207. - Determining gross vehicle weight. 
    For purposes of this article, gross vehicle weight may be determined by any city police officer by visual inspection of the manufacturer's rating or by the vehicle registration receipt that is required by state law to be carried at all times on any such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § I, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § I, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § I, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 52-208. - Parking, weight and time limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked, or allow to remain any motor truck, motor vehicle, trailer or any other vehicle having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 18,000 pounds on any street or alley in the city. 
(b)  No truck, as defined in this article, shall park on a residential street for a continuous period exceeding eight hours or on any street in the city during the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
(c)  There shall be erected "No Thru Trucks" signs on East Inez Street at its intersection with North Adams Street and at its intersection with Wofford Lane. 
(Code 1973, § 17-89; Ord. No. 549, § III, 9-24-1960; Ord. No. 619, § I, 8-7-1962; Ord. No. 1213, 8-26-1975; Ord. No. 1533, § II, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § II, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § II, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 52-209. - Petroleum carriers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked on any street or alley within the city any motor vehicle, motor truck, trailer or other vehicle having thereon, or attached thereto, a tank or other receptacle used for the carrying of petroleum products as are described in this article, whether loaded, partially loaded or empty, except for the purpose of making domestic delivery of such products, and in such case, such truck, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance shall proceed from the highway by the most direct route to the point of delivery and from such point of delivery by the most direct return route to the highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any vehicles stopping on any such street in the city due to breakdown of such vehicle, or due to causes beyond the actual control of the driver thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 17-90; Ord. No. 549, § II, 9-24-1960) 
Sec. 52-210. - Explosive-carrying vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked at any place within the city any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle or conveyance, which at the time of such parking is fully loaded or partially loaded with dynamite, TNT or any other form of explosive. 
(Code 1973, § 17-91; Ord. No. 549, § IV, 9-24-1960) 
Sec. 52-211. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply under the following conditions and circumstances: 
(1)  When any truck, motor vehicle or trailer is carrying gasoline to filling stations, commercial customers or bulk stations located within the city. 
(2)  When any truck, motor vehicle or trailer is carrying such products to be used exclusively for its own propulsion. 
(3)  When any truck, motor vehicle or trailer, loaded or partially loaded, has stopped on any street or alley in the city for the purpose of discharging its products, cargo and contents, or when it is stopped for the purpose of making necessary repairs, or when caused to be stopped under circumstances beyond the control of the driver. 
(4)  When any truck, motor vehicle or trailer needs immediate repairs and is not loaded or partially loaded with such petroleum products and is on a direct route to a garage, or to the private property or place of business of the owner of the truck, motor vehicle or trailer; provided, however, this subsection shall not authorize the repair, nor the parking thereof for the purpose of repair, in any zone designated by the zoning ordinance as a residential zone. 
(5)  When any truck, motor vehicle or trailer, whether loaded, partially loaded or empty, has broken down and is out of repair to the extent that same cannot be repaired within two hours, and the police authorities have been notified, and the same is being removed from such place of storage or breakdown to a garage or to some other place within the city under the direction of the police department. 
(b)  In all cases where a truck, motor vehicle or trailer shall be broken down and unable to proceed under its own propulsion, or shall have a flat tire, the driver thereof shall immediately give notice of the location and condition of the vehicle to the police department; and the chief of police is directed, upon receipt of such notice, to cause a member of the police department to proceed to the location of such vehicle, and there assist the driver in making arrangements to have such vehicle removed to a suitable place for repair; and providing further, in the event such repairs can reasonably be made at the point where such vehicle has stopped, and within a reasonable time, the driver shall be authorized to do so under instructions from the chief of police, and the police officer so designated to proceed to such point shall either remain thereat, or shall designate some other person to remain thereat to warn other persons using the street of the location of such vehicle. 
(c)  When any person is engaged in the use of his trucks, motor vehicles and trailers in the city in hauling liquefied petroleum products, merchandise and contents, and has his place of business within the city, such person shall have a right to convey such truck, motor vehicle or trailer to such place of business without police protection, provided such vehicle, if it is one used for the purpose of hauling such petroleum products, is empty and free of all such petroleum products. 
(Code 1973, § 17-92; Ord. No. 549, § V, 9-24-1960) 
Sec. 52-212. - Major thoroughfares designated. 
    The following streets are designated as major thoroughfares within the city: 
(1)  North and South Washington Street. 
(2)  North and South St. Mary's Street. 
(3)  North and South Archer Street. 
(4)  North and South Minnesota Street. 
(5)  West Corpus Christi Street. 
(6)  West Fannin Street. 
(7)  East Houston Street. 
(8)  Reagan Road. 
(9)  Charco Road. 
(10)  Cook Road. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § IV, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1575, 2-10-1987; Ord. No. 1533-A, § IV, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § IV, 1-12-2016) 
Secs. 52-213-52-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 52-223. - Certain truck traffic restricted; exceptions. 
    The operator of any through truck or trailer shall drive or operate such vehicle only over and along the through truck routes established in this division; provided, however, that the truck route restriction shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Pickups and deliveries. The operation of a truck upon any street where necessary to make a pickup or delivery at a destination point on a residential street so long as main city thoroughfares are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, and any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour if the truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § II, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § II, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § II, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 52-224. - Through truck routes established. 
(a)  Generally. The following truck routes are designated for through truck traffic, except truck transporting hazardous and extremely hazardous materials, within the city: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 59 . FM 351 on the city's most northern and northwest perimeter to its intersection with U.S. Highway 59 on the city's most western city limits and that portion of U.S. Highway 181 by-pass between its intersection with FM 351, on the city's most northeastern corner, to its intersection with U.S. Highway 59 on the city's most eastern city limits. 
(2)  U.S. Highway 181 . U.S. Highway 181 by-pass on the city's eastern perimeter. 
(3)  Business U.S. Highway 181, southbound . FM 351 on the city's most northern and western perimeter to its intersection with Business U.S. Highway 181. 
(4)  Business U.S. Highway 181, northbound . FM 351 on the city's most southern and western perimeter to its intersection with Business U.S. Highway 181. 
(5)  State Highway 202, northbound to east U.S. Highway 59 . U.S. Highway 181 by-pass. 
(6)  State Highway 202, northbound to west U.S. Highway 59 . U.S. Highway 181 by-pass on the city's southeastern and southern perimeter to the exit for Business U.S. Highway 181, continue north on Business 181 to its intersection with FM 351 on the city's southwestern and western perimeter. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1973, § 17-88; Ord. No. 549, § I, 9-24-1960; Ord. No. 1533, § III, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § III, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § III, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 2322, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 52-225. - Maps and signs identifying truck routes. 
    The police chief shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out through truck routes upon which through truck traffic is permitted copies of which shall be kept on file in the city secretary's office and the police department and shall be available to the public. The police chief shall also cause signs to be posted within the city clearly designated the truck routes established in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § V, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § V, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § V, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 52-226. - Penalties. 
    Persons violating this division shall be subject to a fine of up to $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § V, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1533-A, § V, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1533-B, § V, 1-12-2016) 
Secs. 52-227-52-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TOWING AND STORAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-241. - Vehicle storage facilities. 
    The city adopts as though fully set forth in this section the Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2303.001 et seq., which shall be applicable within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 2-25-1986) 
Secs. 52-242-52-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq.; removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.305; removal of personal property from roadway or right-of-way, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.3051. 

Sec. 52-261. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. regarding abandoned vehicles are hereby adopted by reference as though completely set out herein. A copy of the adopted statutes is on file in the office of the city secretary and may be examined there during normal business hours. 
Sec. 52-262. - Impoundment authorized. 
    Any vehicle that remains standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley or other public place, may be removed by or upon order of the chief of police, and placed in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the city, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alleyway or public place and a report has been previously made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant issued thereon, charging that such vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of law. 
(2)  When any police officer of the city has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned. 
(3)  When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is or may be required by law to take the one arrested immediately before a magistrate, or if the arrested one is the sole occupant or the owner of the vehicle and is immediately placed in custody. 
(4)  When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found or are not in the immediate vicinity of such vehicle. 
(5)  When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended for more than 48 hours in violation of this article; provided however, that in the event such vehicle is parked or standing immediately in front of or immediately adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle, or property rented by such owner, before such vehicle shall be removed, the owner thereof shall be given written notice after the expiration of 48 hours and shall be given an additional 24 hours to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle. Such written notice may be given by placing same in the mail box of the owner or by depositing same in the United States mail, addressed to the owner at the address given on the registration receipt of the vehicle, or his last known address. 
(Code 1973, § 17-3; Ord. No. 883, § I, 2-27-1968) 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles declared public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071; authority to take abandoned motor vehicles into custody, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011. 
Sec. 52-263. - Notice of sale of motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to submit to the state highway department and similar agency of the proper state when the vehicle is from another state all information in his possession concerning the vehicle and to request that the department supply to him all information the records of the department contain on the vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by statute, immediately on receipt of such information, and not more than ten days from the date of impoundment, the chief of police shall notify the owner and lienholders as shown by the records of the department by registered mail with return receipt requested that the vehicle has been impounded and the provisions of this division in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property. The notice under this section shall include all information required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012. 
(c)  If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration has no address for the owner, or the determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible, notice shall be published, not more than ten days from the date of impoundment, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice under this section shall include all information required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012. 
(d)  In the event a motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 20 days from receipt of the return receipt of notice of non-delivery of the registered mail or 20 days from the date of publication of the notice, the chief of police shall prepare a notice of sale of such vehicle, in the manner prescribed in this division for other personal property, shall send a copy of the notice to owner and lienholders, as shown by the records of the highway department, by registered mail, and shall post and advertise the notices in the manner required in the preceding section. Notice by registered mail to the address shown on the records of the highway department shall constitute notice of the pending sale to such owner and lienholders. 
(Code 1973, § 17-4; Ord. No. 883, § II, 2-27-1968) 
State Law reference- Seizure and auction of motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014 et seq. 
Sec. 52-264. - Redemption. 
    The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of personal property impounded pursuant to this article may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying to the chief of police the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the chief of police. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; providing that the property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within 30 days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to the property shall become absolute in the auction buyer. 
(Code 1973, § 17-5; Ord. No. 883, § III, 2-27-1968) 
Sec. 52-265. - Scope of provisions. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to parts of such vehicles, as for example, auto frames, doors, wheels, body hulks, engines, seats and cushions and any and all other parts, however great or minute in size; provided, however, when in the opinion of any such officer a vehicle or vehicle parts are by reasons of their location in the public street, road or alley a hazard to the public or are so scattered, dismembered or otherwise separated as to make it doubtful whether they are from one or more vehicles or in such condition that in such officer's opinion the cost of their reassembly would reasonably exceed their market value, such vehicle or parts may be removed from the public right-of-way without any prior notice to the owner thereof. In such cases, the notice required by this division shall be given after such vehicle or parts are stored. 
(Code 1973, § 17-6; Ord. No. 883, § IV, 2-27-1968) 
Chapter 54 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal water and utilities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; agreement with conservation and reclamation districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.903; Texas Water Quality Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 21.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Extension of water and sewer mains. 
(a)  The city will extend its water and sewer mains without charge to the inside city limits customer, a maximum of 50 feet in order to serve individual lots. Where an extension of water or sewer mains is required in excess of 50 feet, in order to serve an individual lot, the owner will pay the entire cost of the extension beyond 50 feet. Outside city limits customers will be required to pay the total cost of extensions. 
(b)  Subdividers shall also be required to pay the entire cost of water and sewer mains required to serve a subdivision, provided that the city may participate in the cost of lines over and above the size required by a developer when the council determines such participation to be in the best interest of the city. 
(c)  If the city council determines that it is in the best interests of the community and improves the health and welfare of its citizens and thereby causes water or sewer lines to be extended, the property owners served by the line extension, having their property thereby improved, will be charged pro rata costs of the line extension. The charge will be based on the size of the line, not to exceed six inches, per foot of property served, plus cost of installation. If bond funds are used, pro rata will not be charged. 
(d)  All charges for water and sewer main extensions must be paid prior to installation of the line. 
(e)  All water and sewer mains extended become the property of the city, after acceptance of the installation by the city council, whose rules and regulations shall govern the use and maintenance thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 18-10; Ord. No. 983, §§ I-IV, 9-23-1969; Ord. No. 1101, § 7, 1-23-1973) 
Secs. 54-2-54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-21. - Fees and other charges provided in separate fee schedule. 
    All water and sewer deposits, installation, connection, and reconnection fees, and monthly service charges, as well as solid waste collection charges, shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 54-22. - Utility deposits and deposit refunds; no interest accrues on deposits. 
    Utility deposits in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be required upon application for service. Deposits will be credited to a deposit fund and used to defray the costs of unpaid charges to each account. When the customer terminates the service, any amount remaining after final billing is satisfied will be returned to the customer. No interest will accrue to such deposit charges as any such interest will be used to defray the administration of the accounts. 
(Code 1973, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1101, § 5, 1-23-1973) 
Sec. 54-23. - Grounds for disconnection of services. 
    Failure to pay monthly bills for water, garbage or sanitary sewer services when due, or failure to pay the established sewer charge for industrial wastes when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to the sanitary sewer, shall be sufficient cause to disconnect all services to the water or sanitary sewer mains of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-9; Ord. No. 1077, § 8(a), 2-14-1972; Ord. No. 1196, § 8, 1-14-1975) 
Sec. 54-24. - Nonpayment; disconnection of services; reconnection charge. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Day means a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
    Utility services means city water, wastewater (sewer) or solid waste collection service or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Billing procedure; when delinquent. Utility bills hall be rendered to customers on a 30 day billing cycle. The total balance due as shown on the bill shall be due 25 days after the billing date. If the due date should fall on a weekend or holiday, then the charges will be due on the next working day. Any portion of the balance due on an account not paid on or before the due date is considered delinquent. 
(c)  Payment. Payments as accepted by mail and in person at the city's utility administration office in city hall. City personnel working outside of that office in the field are not authorized to accept payments under any circumstances. 
(d)  Notice of intent to disconnect for delinquency; disconnection. Accounts that remain in a delinquent status for ten days will be mailed a disconnect notice that allows customers an additional ten days to make payment arrangements or resolve disputed charges, before service is disconnected. The notice will indicate the delinquent amount due and the scheduled disconnect date. If the account remains delinquent on the disconnect date, service shall be disconnected; provided, however, that disconnection work orders will not be done on a day immediately preceding a weekend or policy when city hall offices will be closed for business. 
(e)  Deferred payment plans. 
(1)  Generally. Customers will be given the opportunity for a face-to-face meeting with a city representative during regular business hours prior to the pending disconnection to discuss the status of their account, and work out a mutually acceptable agreement to resolve the problem. The city will take into consideration personal problems which may have contributed to the customer's account delinquency. Provided that the customer makes a good faith effort to pay the delinquent charges within a reasonable amount of time, disconnection of services will be postponed. 
(2)  Medically related. The city will not disconnect service to delinquent residential accounts if the customer permanently residing at the address can establish that disconnection services will cause, or worsen, a medical problem or illness of a person residing at the residence. Any customer who seeks to avoid disconnection of service under this policy must have physician contact the city and confirm in writing the potentially affect of the pending service disconnection. This written statement must be submitted prior to the scheduled disconnection. The customer and city will negotiate a "deferred payment schedule" for the account which will allow service to continue uninterrupted so long as the customer satisfies the conditions and obligation of the agreement. 
(f)  Reconnection. If a customer whose utility services have been disconnected, requests reconnection of services, all delinquent charges must be paid, and the amount deposit fee brought up to the full deposit amount if any portion of the deposit was applied to the customer's outstanding delinquent charges. Reconnection fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged to the customer's account. 
(g)  Water service delinquency penalties applicable to all utility charges. The same penalties and charges now or hereafter imposed by ordinance for failure to pay the bill for water service when due shall be applicable in like manner in the case of failure to pay charges for all other city services including, without limitation, the established surcharge for industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer mains. 
(Code 1973, § 18-8; Ord. No. 250, § III, 4-9-1946; Ord. No. 1101, § 8, 1-23-1973; Ord. No. 1690, §§ I-IX, 4-23-1991) 
Secs. 54-25-54-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS MASTER METER ACCOUNTS 

Sec. 54-52. - Purpose, intent and applicability. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish the method of calculating water and sewage utility charges for business customers whose accounts are considered multiple connection or master meter type utility accounts, i.e., the account served by the master meter is charged more than one minimum charge for either water, sewage, or both services depending on the number of service connections or outlets on the premises served by the meter. 
(b)  This division applies to utility accounts serving business customers only, and addresses the method of calculating total charges for water or sewage service based on rates in effect at the time the charge is calculated. This division does not alter or change the utility rates presently in effect, or the methods of calculating utility service charges for any other type of city utility customer. 
(Ord. No. 1627, §§ II, IV, 5-9-1989) 
Sec. 54-53. - Business customer defined; exceptions. 
    For purposes of this division, the term "business customer" means a commercial enterprise selling or providing goods or services, offering space for rent or lease for commercial purposes, storage or warehouse space, governmental offices, veterinary hospitals, schools and churches. The term "business customer" specifically does not include any customer location where the primary function of the premises is for dwelling or living purposes, either on a permanent or temporary basis, such as single or multifamily dwellings, apartments, duplexes, rent subsidized housing, motels, convalescent homes, hospitals for overnight and longer patient care, mobile home parks, and businesses conducted out of a person's dwelling (home occupation businesses). 
(Ord. No. 1627, § III, 5-9-1989) 
Sec. 54-54. - Method of calculating utility service charge. 
(a)  Component charges. A customer's utility bill usually consists of several itemized charges, among which are charges for water or sewage service. The total utility charge for either water or sewage service to a business customer under this division shall be the sum total of two component charges: 
(1)  Basic (minimum) charge. The basic charge shall be the current basic charge for the size of water meter serving the account, or in the case of sewage service, the current basic sewage charge. There shall be one basic charge only for each type of service, and no multiplication factor will be applied to the basic charge as a result of multiple connections. The present basic charge is $11.31 for water service, and $7.89 for sewage service. 
(2)  Consumption (volume) charge. The consumption charge shall be calculated as follows: 
Total Metered Consumption - Consumption Allowance Included in Basic Charge Consumption Net of Minimum Allowance x Consumption Charge per 1,000 gallons 
Consumption Charge  
(b)  Calculation of consumption factor. The total metered consumption factor upon which sewage charges are based is presently calculated for each account once a year based on average monthly water consumption during January and February. The consumption factor for an account then remains constant from month to month until a new consumption factor is calculated. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § V, 5-9-1989) 
Secs. 54-55-54-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE AND RESOURCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-82. - Water conservation policy and emergency plan adopted. 
    The city has adopted a water conservation policy and emergency plan, made a part of this article as though set forth in full herein, as an official policy of the city. A copy of the plan is available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2155, § 1, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 2237, 9-23-2014) 
Secs. 54-83-54-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WATER WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 54-108. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned means a water well that is not a producing well. A well is considered abandoned it has not actually produced water in substantial quantity for a period of 90 days or more. 
    Backflow preventers mean a device or means to prevent backflow into the city's potable water system. 
    Commercial means engaging in or pertaining to commerce or mercantile; as a commercial business of selling a product for profit; having a financial profit as an aim in the distribution or sale of water; to produce or to make producible in quantities sufficient to supply quantities of water for use in businesses, factories, industrial plants, warehouses, recreational areas, apartment houses, hotels, motels, multiple family rental dwellings; condominiums, hospitals, nursing homes, rest homes and all other accommodations for housing having more than one single family dwelling space as such space is defined in city zoning regulations. 
    Cross connection means a physical connection between city's potable water supply system and any other water system, including water from wells other than the city's wells. 
    Domestic means production of water from real property on which there is situated a single family dwelling as that term is defined city zoning regulations. 
    Existing work means a water well or water system installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
    Industrial means engaging in or pertaining to commerce or mercantile; as an industrial business selling a product for profit, having a financial profit as an aim in the distribution or sale of water; to produce or to make producible in quantities sufficient to supply water for use in connection with any form of machinery, device or devices, mechanical installations or other units of machines such as, for instance, in a factory, manufacturing plant, machine shop, warehouse, industrial development, refinery, and any and all other installations where water is employed for all purposes and uses having a financial profit as a motive and where water may be produced or is producible in substantial quantities for commerce or for an industrial or commercial venture of whatever character. 
    Plumbing inspector means any person licensed by the state board if plumbing examiners and employed by the city for the purpose of inspecting work and installations in connection with this division. 
    Public sewer means a common sewer directly controlled by a public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries wastewater and excludes stormwater, surface water and groundwater. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, which is designed and constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a drainfield or disposal or perforated piping. 
    Water main means a water-distribution pipe for public or community use. 
    Water well means a bored well and specifically excludes dug and driver wells which are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § IV, 2-22-1983; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 4-29-1986) 
Sec. 54-109. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division apply to the construction of water wells and water systems in the city and outside the city that are intended to be or are connected to either the city water or sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § III, 2-22-1983) 
Sec. 54-110. - Penalties. 
    Any person that violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalties as provided in section 1-14 unless a different penalty is required by state law or a higher penalty is permitted by state law in which event state law shall apply. If the violation is by a corporation, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of the corporation shall be subject to the penalty herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § IX, 2-22-1983) 
Sec. 54-111. - Permits and licenses required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to construct a water well or water system in the city without having first procured the licenses and required in this division and complying with this division such that all workmanship and materials used in construction meet the requirements of this division in regard to the drilling construction, location and operation of such wells and systems. 
Sec. 54-112. - Water well driller license required; display of license. 
    Construction of water wells shall be performed only by those holding a valid water well drillers license issued by the state. The license number shall be displayed during construction at the site of the work. The number shall be clearly readable from the nearest traveled public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1449, §§ II, V, 2-22-1983) 
Sec. 54-113. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Required; exceptions. It is unlawful to construct a water well or major overhaul of a water well without first securing a water well construction permit. Permits are not required for producing wells existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, provided that this exception is terminated upon abandonment of the well. Permits are not required for routine well maintenance. 
(b)  Application. All applications for permits shall give include: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and state license number of the well driller; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of property owner; 
(3)  A sketch of property that shows location of the water well, all buildings, septic tanks, drain fields and other significant structures. The sketch shall also show the location of structures on adjacent property if within ten feet of the property line. 
(c)  City to be indemnified against all liability. The water well driller who is to conduct the work specified in an application for permit under this division must provide to the city, prior to issuance of the permit, assigned indemnity of all liability upon the city, in a form provided or approved by the city, for any damages caused by the driller while engaged in any service connected with the drilling of the well. 
(d)  Effect of false statements in permit application. Any person who in making application for permit shall willfully make any false statement in order to obtain the permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provided herein. 
(e)  Limitation on issuance for wells to be used for commercial or industrial purposes. No permit for the drilling of any commercial or industrial water well shall be issued unless it is determined by the city council that the city cannot supply the required quantity of water within 18 months after the date of filing the application for such permit. If it is determined by the city council that the city cannot supply the water within the stated time period, the city council may issue a permit for the drilling of such commercial or industrial water well upon compliance with all applicable provisions of this division. 
(f)  Issuance by plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector or his designated representative shall issue all plumbing permits in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this division. 
(g)  Permits personal to permittee and non-transferrable. Permits issued under this division are personal to the permittee and shall not be assigned or transferred to another person. No person shall permit another person to obtain a permit in his name or permit any new well construction or major overhaul work to be performed under his permit by any person other than a person authorized to do the same. 
(h)  Suspension of permit for bad faith or unreasonable delay. Bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of work under this Code shall be deemed a sufficient reason for suspension of the permit of the well driller so offending, and no further permit shall be issued until such act of bad faith or unreasonable delay has been corrected. 
(i)  Duration; lapse from failure to timely being and complete construction. Every permit issued under this division shall expire 90 days from the date thereof unless the work authorized by such permit shall have been commenced within such time; and every permit shall expire if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for as long as 90 days after it has been commenced. In every case where a permit is permitted to expire, a new permit shall be obtained before any work is resumed. 
(j)  Fees. The permit and inspection fees applicable to permits and construction pursuant to this division shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(k)  Right of entry for inspection and testing. The plumbing inspector shall have the right to enter the property for the purpose of inspections to ensure compliance with this division and to ensure that there are no cross connections. 
(l)  Driller's log and water analysis to be provided by driller upon completion of construction. Upon completion of the well the well driller shall furnish the plumbing inspector a copy of the drillers log and a copy of the water analysis. 
(m)  Use of well must comply with permit purpose. Where a permit is granted by the city, for the commencement or drilling, working or reworking, and producing of water from a well for an express permitted purpose, the uses to which such water is employed shall be confined solely to the institution, installation or other application of the well not in contravention of this article, provided however, no such well or wells drilled and producing under a permit granted by the city shall be in any manner connected to the city's water distribution system which provides potable water to the inhabitants of the city and to other persons and places outside of the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § VI, 2-22-1983; Ord. No. 1498, § I, 7-24-1984; Ord. No. 1551, §§ 3, 4, 4-29-1986) 
Sec. 54-114. - Construction and use standards and specifications. 
(a)  Casing. A casing of steel or other approved material shall be provided to prevent caving of the formations penetrated and also to ensure protection of water supply from contamination by water from shallow strata. The well shall be cased from the bottom of the drilled hole to 18 inches above the finish grade or more if required to keep surface water from entering casing. 
(b)  Seal. The annular space between the drilled hole and the well casing shall be sealed with concrete or grout for a depth of at least ten feet below finished grade. the casing shall be covered at the ground with a concrete slab no less than 24 inches by 24 inches by 12 inches. The top of this slab shall protrude six inches above finished grade and shall be sloped away from the casing. The top of the casing shall be provided with a suitable well seal to prevent contamination of the well. If a vent is provided on the casing it shall be equipped with an elbow turned downward and screened with a 16-mesh screen. 
(c)  Disinfection of well and equipment. Upon completion of the well but before it is placed into service the well and equipment shall be disinfected by the use of chlorine (powdered, tablet or solution). 
(d)  Water samples. After the chlorine has been flushed a sample of water shall be analyzed for purity. The well shall not be placed into service until the water has been tested and found to be suitable for human consumption. 
(e)  Closing abandoned wells. Permanently abandoned wells shall be filled with cement grout or concrete. Abandoned wells shall not be used for the disposal of wastewater, septic tank effluent or other wastes. 
(f)  State regulations applicable. State law and regulations as they pertain to the construction of water wells are incorporated by reference in this section and shall apply to water well construction in the city. 
(g)  Domestic use well may serve only one household. No more than one household may be served by a single water well if the water is for use inside the house. 
(h)  Commercial well may not be used for domestic purposes. It is unlawful for a commercial water well to be used for domestic (household) use or for consumption by the public. 
(i)  Location restrictions. Permanent derricks and towers associated with water wells shall be located no closer than 40 feet to any property line. Water wells shall not be constructed and drilled: 
(1)  Within 25 feet of a front property line; 
(2)  Within four feet of a side property line; 
(3)  Within 25 feet of, or a distance of less than 25 percent of the property depth from, a rear property line; 
(4)  Within five feet of any structure; 
(5)  Within 20 feet of any power line; 
(6)  Within 150 feet of any septic tank or drain field; or 
(7)  Within 150 feet of any barn or animal pen. 
(j)  Cross connections prohibited. There shall be no physical connection between water from water wells and the city's water mains. The use of valves, check valves backflow preventers, etc., as a means of connecting the water systems is prohibited. There shall be a physical separation (air gap) of at least nine inches between systems. 
(k)  Debris and dirty water. There shall be no debris, dirty water, mud or other refuse dumped or discharged onto public rights-of-way. 
(l)  Domestic wells not to be used for commercial or industrial purposes. The connection of a well formerly used for domestic purposes to a commercial or industrial business or enterprise is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1449, §§ VII, VIII, 2-22-1983; Ord. No. 1498, § II, 7-24-1984; Ord. No. 1551, § 2, 4-29-1986) 
Sec. 54-115. - Sewer use charges. 
    The city is required to charge for water discharged into the public sewer on the basis of actual quantity of water discharge into the sanitary sewer. The method of determining this quantity is based on estimates made from the water meter readings therefore; when a water well is being used a wastewater meter must be installed and maintained by the city (at the expense of the user) or: 
(1)  If the well is used only for yard watering and other uses not connected with the sanitary sewer, then no change in sewer charges is required; 
(2)  If the well is used in such a manner that all or a portion of the well water enters the public sewer, then sewer charges shall be based on a minimum of 10,000 gallons per month discharged and entering the sanitary sewer; 
(3)  If the well is used for purposes other than residential use where all or a portion of the well water enters the public sewer, the water being discharged into the sanitary sewer will be estimated by the city based on each individual case. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § VIII, 2-22-1983; Ord. No. 1498, § II, 7-24-1984) 
Secs. 54-116-54-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VETERANS MEMORIAL PARK WELL 

Sec. 54-127. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Improperly constructed water well means a well that does not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water supply well. 
    Well means the groundwater well owned and operated by the city near the Beasley Golf Course in the Veterans Memorial Park. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 2, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 54-128. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the well that might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such well. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 1, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 54-129. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Within 500 feet of well. Application of sewage plant or septic tank sludge, irrigation by sewage plant effluent, and construction or operation of any sewage treatment plant, animal feed lot, or solid waste disposal site are prohibited upon or across any area of land within a 500 foot radius of the well. 
(b)  Within 300 feet of well. Construction or operation of any sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, and drainage ditch that contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems is specifically prohibited within, upon or across any area of land within a 300-foot radius of the well. 
(c)  Within 150 feet of well. The construction and operation of any of the following are prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells: 
(1)  New privy, cesspool, septic tank, or septic tank perforated drain field; 
(2)  Area irrigated by low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facility; 
(3)  Absorption or evapotranspiration bed; 
(4)  Underground petroleum or chemical storage tank; 
(5)  Liquid transmission pipeline; 
(6)  Landfills or dump grounds; 
(7)  Stock pens; 
(8)  Military, industrial, wood treatment or pesticide storage or mixing facility; 
(9)  Liquid petroleum and petrochemical production, storage, or transmission facility; 
(10)  Class 1, 2, 3, or 4 injection well; 
(11)  Improperly constructed water well of any depth; 
(12)  Abandoned well, inoperative well; and 
(13)  All other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition. 
(d)  Within 50 feet of well. Construction or operation of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries and presence of livestock is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land within a 50-foot radius of the wells. 
(e)  Permissible construction. Construction of homes or other structures within a 150-foot radius of the well is permitted provided that such construction complies with all other restrictions of this division. 
(f)  Farming and ranching operations permitted. Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this division; provided, however, livestock shall not be allowed within a 50-foot radius of the wells. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 3, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 54-130. - Right of entry. 
    City employees and other authorized city representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to immediately enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 4, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 54-131. - Removal of violating structures or activities required; penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be required to remove the prohibited construction or potential source of contamination within 30 days after notification of violation. In addition, any person violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2273, §§ 5, 6, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 54-132. - Conflict with state or federal laws or rules. 
    Whenever any applicable statute, regulation, or permit of any state, federal, or other agency, having jurisdiction over the subject matter of this division is in conflict with this division, the stricter requirement shall apply unless mandated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 7, 10-13-2015) 
Secs. 54-133-54-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NON-INDUSTRIAL SEWERAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-144. - Connection to public sewer. 
(a)  Required where sewer available. Every owner of a building, or part thereof, occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night, situated in the city, where a public sewer is laid and maintained within 150 feet of such building or any building on acreage tracts where any other building is within 150 feet of a public sewer, shall install and maintain within the building used as aforesaid, or upon the premises where the same is situated, an adequate number of water closets and have same connected with the sewer. The work done in connection therewith and all materials used shall comply strictly with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Water closet connection requirements. In all cases where water closets are connected with the public sewerage system, the owner controlling the same shall cause such closets to be supplied with water for flushing, which shall be delivered from a tank. The tank shall hold not less than four gallons of water at each flushing and shall refill with water at a pressure of not less than 15 pounds to the square inch. The water shall be conducted from the tank to the bowl of the closet through a circular metallic pipe not less than one and one-fourth inches in diameter. 
(c)  Standards applicable if public sewer is not available. If, on account of the distance from the sewerage system, any owner is not required to connect with the sewerage system as provided in this article, then privies shall be made to conform with state department of health standards governing sanitation and outdoor privies. 
(Code 1973, §§ 9-39, 9-42(b); Ord. No. 418, §§ 34, 35, 10-22-1957) 
Sec. 54-145. - Old drains. 
    Before any old private drains shall be connected with the sewerage system, the owner of the private drain shall prove to the satisfaction of the city engineer or other designated person that it is clean and conforms in every respect with the plumbing code and this article. 
(Code 1973, § 9-41; Ord. No. 418, § 14, 10-22-1957) 
Sec. 54-146. - Sewer service line must be sealed if structure is moved. 
    The sanitary sewer service line shall be sealed prior to the moving of any building or structure connected to the sanitary sewerage system. 
(Code 1973, § 9-42(c); Ord. No. 418, § 35, 10-22-1957) 
Sec. 54-147. - Garage and laundry waste water; discharge onto streets. 
    It is unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person to permit any waste water, grease, or greasy or sandy water to escape from any private premises onto any street, alley or sidewalk of the city; 
(2)  Any operator, manager, agent or employee of any gasoline service station, garage or laundry to permit any grease, or greasy or gritty water used in washing or cleaning any vehicle or machinery or laundry waste water to escape from any private premises onto any street, alley or sidewalk in the city; 
(3)  Any person operating any garage or service station and for any employee, agent or servant of any such operator or owner of such garage or service station to wash any vehicle on any street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-43; Ord. No. 328, § 1, 5-27-1953) 
Sec. 54-148. - Cesspools declared nuisances. 
    Every cesspool within the city is declared a nuisance and condemned as a menace to public health. 
(Code 1973, § 9-46; Ord. No. 51, § 2) 
Sec. 54-149. - Open gutters and similar structures prohibited. 
    No open gutter, cesspool or privy vault shall be connected with any sewer or drain. 
(Code 1973, § 9-40; Ord. No. 418, § 12, 10-22-1957) 
Sec. 54-150. - Burial of sewage. 
    It is unlawful for any person to bury within the city the contents or refuse matter from surface privies, septic tanks or cesspools. 
(Code 1973, § 9-49; Ord. No. 51, § 4A; Ord. No. 59, 4-6-1914) 
Sec. 54-151. - Powers and authority of enforcing agents. 
(a)  The approving authority bearing credentials and identification shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of violation of the service contract and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary sewer or water service. Such disconnection and reconnection would be at the total expense of the customer. 
(b)  Where acids and chemicals, damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures, or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 9-37; Ord. No. 1077, § 9(a), 2-14-1972; Ord. No. 1196, § 9, 1-14-1975) 
Sec. 54-152. - Protection from damage. 
    The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 9-44; Ord. No. 1077, § 5, 2-14-1972; Ord. No. 1196, § 5, 1-14-1975) 
Secs. 54-153-54-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES AND WATER CLOSETS 

Sec. 54-173. - Water closet required for occupants or employees; exception. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building where people reside or are regularly employed, within reach of the sewerage system as provided by this article, to fail to have at least one water closet connected with the city sewerage system; except, where two adjoining buildings are owned and operated by the same person, only one connection is required. 
(Code 1973, § 9-42(a); Ord. No. 418, § 35, 10-22-1957) 
Sec. 54-174. - Surface privies; in sewer area declared nuisances. 
    All surface privies, and all water closets not connected to the public sewer, within accessible distance of the public sewer are declared to be a nuisance and condemned as a menace to public health. 
(Code 1973, § 9-47; Ord. No. 51, § 1) 
Sec. 54-175. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Every person within the city occupying a building more than 150 feet from any sanitary sewer or lateral thereof shall be permitted to have a septic tank; provided, in the construction of any such tank, the plans and specifications thereof shall be submitted to the city showing the size, location and giving the number of persons it is designed to serve, and a duplicate of the plans and specifications shall be kept on file. When the plans and specifications meet the approval of the city authority, a permit shall be issued under the same rules as is provided for sewer construction and connection. 
(b)  The septic tank shall be so constructed and maintained that its discharge shall at all times be practically free from bacteria and other animal and vegetable substances, and such septic tank shall be discontinued as soon as sewer connections are available; provided, should any septic tank become a nuisance through the negligence of the owner or lessee, same shall be remedied and in case of the failure on the part of the owner or lessee to remedy same, the city shall at the expense of the owner or lessee have such septic tank put in good condition; and the health officer is given authority to examine all such septic tanks and to discontinue their use if in the opinion of such health officer, it be for the benefit of the public health, and such septic tank shall be subject to discontinuance by the health officer. 
(Code 1973, § 9-45; Ord. No. 51, § 3) 
Sec. 54-176. - Specifications. 
(a)  All owners, or the agent of owners, of surface privies and water closets, within the city, and outside the public sewer accessibility distance, shall have the same so constructed, that the deposits will be protected from the invasion of flies and other insects and furnished with a receptacle, under the seat that will retain all solids, with handles or other devices so that the receptacle can be conveniently handled and shall have a door or trap in the rear opposite such receptacle, that shall be kept closed. 
(b)  There shall be constructed a ventilating pipe of wood or iron, placed in such closet extending from the underside of the seat upward, ten inches above the roof; the seat shall be closely fitted with a shutter so that the stoma or opening in the seat shall, when not in use be kept closed; all such privies and water closets shall have their contents removed and such receptacles thoroughly cleansed at least once in each month. 
(Code 1973, § 9-48; Ord. No. 51, § 4) 
Secs. 54-177-54-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-206. - Purpose, intent, objectives and applicability. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city, and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the federal general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § A, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-207. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Public Law 92-500, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the EPA Region VI regional administrator. 
    Approval authority means the regional administrator of EPA Region VI or, upon approval of a state pretreatment program within a delegated NPDES permit program, the director of the state natural resource conservation commission, or its successor agencies. 
    Authorized representative of the user : 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in the second quarter $1,980.00 dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/l. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys to the building sewer, which begins three-feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the sewer lateral at the property line or other lawful place of disposal (also called house lateral or house connection). 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the federal EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471. 
    CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
    City means the city, the city council, the city manager, or any other person authorized by the city council to represent the City of Beeville. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure of oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with BOD. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer point before the building sewer discharges into the public sewer. 
    Daily discharge means the discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents a calendar day for purposes of sampling. 
    Daily maximum means the highest allowable daily discharge during a calendar month. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semi-solid waste (i.e., grease trap, grit trap wastes, or septage) into or in any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including, but not limited to, groundwaters. 
    Domestic sewage means the waterborne wastes normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free of stormwater and industrial wastes. 
    Environmental officer means the city manager or his duly authorized representative, which may be any entity with which the city has contracted for operation of the POTW or a treatment plant or with which the city has entered into a multi-jurisdictional, or inter-jurisdictional, agreement providing for wastewater service, or a particular officer or employee thereof. 
    EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) means the federal Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized officials of EPA. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
    Flow-proportioned composite sample means a sample collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquot. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. 
    Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, or solid wastes into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grease trap waste means any greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, or solid wastes removed by a grease trap. 
    Grit trap or sand trap means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of sand, grit and other heavy solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grit trap waste means any sand, grit or other heavy solids removed from a grit trap. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance which, if disposed of otherwise than by discharge into the POTW, would be identified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user or user means any source of indirect discharge. 
    Industrial user wastewater surcharge means the additional charge made on those persons or industries who discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system which are amenable to treatment by the POTW treatment processes, but which exceed either the BOD or total suspended solids concentrations of normal domestic sewage. 
    Industrial waste means the waterborne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resources, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
    Industrial wastewater discharge permit or permit means a permit required of an industrial user to discharge waste into any sewer system under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Institutional wastewater means wastewater from institutions such as hospitals, sanitariums, prisons, or charitable institutions. 
    Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations; section 405 of the Act (Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 USC 1251 et. seq.); the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC ch. 82, including title II (commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or RCRA), 42 USC 6901 et seq.; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle IV (42 USC 6941 et seq.) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC ch. 82; the Clean Air Act, 42 USC ch. 85; the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq.; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (also know as the Ocean Dumping Act), 33 USC 1 et seq. (titles I and II) and 16 USC 1431 et seq. (title III). 
    Liquid waste means waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet or septic tanks and described as grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infections agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a weight to volume ratio; the milligrams per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Modification means construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (2) and (3) of the definition of the term "new source," but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to the existing process or production equipment. Construction of a new source is defined as commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Monthly average means the highest allowable average of daily discharge over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharge measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharge measured during that month. 
    New source means the building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no more source is located; 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same type of activity as the existing source will be considered. 
    Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Normal domestic sewage means the normal sewage for the city, for which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is no more than 250 mg/l. Industrial wastes and stormwater are excluded from this term. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered or design capacity. 
    Owner means any person who owns a facility or any portion of a facility. 
    Pass through means a discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentration which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen on concentration. 
    POTW (publicly owned treatment works) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes lift stations, sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
    PPM (parts per million) means a weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards (or standards) means pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Priority pollutant means a pollutant found in table II or table III of 40 CFR 122, appendix D. 
    Prohibited discharge standards (or prohibited discharges) means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in division 2 of this article. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    Responsible corporate officer means: 
(1)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in the second quarter of 1980), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters, groundwaters and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally passed. 
    Septage means wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Sewage service charge means the charge made on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage. 
    SIC (standard industrial classification) means a classification pursuant to the latest edition of the standard industrial classification manual issued by the federal office of management and budget. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU ) means: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the environmental officer on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirements in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6). Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirements, the environmental officer may at any time, on his own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Slug discharge means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, or a discharge which violates any prohibited discharge standard of this article, or could significantly disrupt the POTW or threaten human health and safety, or could potentially result in violations of the POTW's NPDES permit or sludge requirements. 
    Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of any waste or raw material. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by the city, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge means the charge, in addition to the sewage service charge, which is made on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension of water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
    Time composite sample means a sample composed of discrete sample aliquot collected in a single reservoir at constant time intervals irrespective of flow. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Natural Resources. 
    Toxic pollutant or toxic substance means any substance whether gaseous, liquid or solid which, when discharged to the POTW in sufficient concentrations, as determined by the environmental officer, may be hazardous to sewer maintenance and personnel, tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life, or to create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant, or any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or other acts. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove oil, grease, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant means that portion, or those portions, of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment of domestic sewage and industrial waste. 
    TSS means total suspended solids. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the control of the industrial user. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    USC means the United States Code. 
    User or industrial user means any source of indirect discharge. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized, or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial, institutional, or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial, or manufacturing facilities, and institutions, together with any stormwater which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial and institutional waste. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 1, 2-13-1996) 
Secs. 54-208-54-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-238. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may introduce into the POTW any pollutants that may cause pass through or interference. Also prohibited are any substances that have an adverse effect on the environment, or may endanger life, health or property, or constitute a public nuisance. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Substances specifically prohibited from being discharged into the POTW are as follows: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases, including but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, ethylene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or any other substances which are a fire or other hazard to the system, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fires, explosions, or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or operation of the POTW. 
(2)  Any substance which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0, greater than 9.0, or any wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the POTW or any person. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health or safety problems. 
(5)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius); or exhibiting heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in a treatment plant causing an interference; or, in any case, exhibiting heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(6)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (COD, etc.) and total dissolved solids, released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause pass through or interference at the POTW or which will cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with any federal or state sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations. 
(7)  Any free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or oils containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius); or any combination of free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or oils, if, in the opinion of the environmental officer, it appears probable that such wastes: 
a.  Can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewers in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
b.  Can overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
c.  Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving water without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; 
d.  Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(8)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(9)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment POTW facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, bulk solids or waste paper. In no case will solids greater than one-half inch or 1.3 centimeters in any dimension be accepted. 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other substances are sufficient to prevent entry into the sanitary sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(11)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding (COD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the environmental officer. 
(13)  Pollutant which causes: 
a.  Excessive discoloration; 
b.  High hydrogen sulfide content; 
c.  Unusual taste or odor-producing substances. 
(14)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(15)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. 
(16)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(17)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the environmental officer. 
(18)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(19)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the environmental officer in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(20)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(21)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; including MBAS surfactants, in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(22)  Total fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 75 mg/l will be subject to a surcharge up to an upper limit of 150 mg/l. 
(c)  In cases where, in the opinion of the environmental officer, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant building or institution or other premises is such that it will damage the system, or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system, the environmental officer shall have the right to require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the POTW. 
(d)  Unusual flow and concentration of any of the above shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city, if such wastes can: 
(1)  Cause damage to the POTW; 
(2)  Impair processes; 
(3)  Incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage; 
(4)  Render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use; 
(5)  Create a public nuisance. 
(e)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 2.1, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-239. - Local limits. 
(a)  Hazardous metals and chemical or toxic substances. 
(1)  It is unlawful to discharge into the POTW, any metals, chemicals or toxic substances in excess of the following concentration limits, which have been established to protect against pass through and interference: 
a.  The following heavy metals and toxic materials in the form of compounds or elements in solution or suspension in concentrations exceeding these limits: 
Parameter Monthly Average Limit in mg/l Ammonia nitrogen 40 Arsenic (total) 0.05 Barium 2.00 Benzene 0.005 Beryllium 0.004 Cadmium (total) 0.018 Chromium (total) 0.10 Copper (total) 1.30 Cyanide (total) 0.020 Fats, oil & grease 75 Fluorides 5 mg/l Lead (total) 0.015 Mercury (total) 0.002 Nickel (total) 0.10 Phenols 28 Phosphorous (as P) 15 mg/l Selenium 0.05 Silver (total) 0.10 Sulfites 400 mg/l Thallium 0.005 Zinc (total) 1.50  
b.  The above limits apply to the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal, unless indicated otherwise. The environmental officer may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
c.  All other priority pollutants found in the POTW influent at a concentration at or above 0.1 mg/l and all numerical aquatic life criteria as defined by the TCEQ including, but not limited to, the following, shall be excluded from the POTW unless a permit specifying the condition of pretreatment, concentration, volumes, etc., is obtained from the city: 
Aldrin Malathion Aluminum Methoxychlor Carbaryl Mire Chlordane PCB (total) Chlorpyrifos Parathion DDT Phenanthrene Demeton Pentachlorophenol Dieldrin Selenium Endosulfan Silver (free ion) Guthion Toxaphene Heptachlor Tributyltin Hexachlorocyclohexane 2-4-5-Trichlorophenol  
d.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes without prior written permission from the environmental officer. 
(2)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial or institutional user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation. The environmental officer may impose mass limitations on industrial and institutional users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(3)  Upon the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial or institutional category or sub-category, the categorical pretreatment standard, if more stringent than specific limitations imposed under this article for industrial or institutional users subject to that categorical standard, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this article. 
(4)  Where industrial or institutional users combine waste streams prior to treatment, compliance with an applicable categorical pretreatment standard will be determined either prior to combining the waste streams or following treatment of the combined wastestream (by applying the combined wastestream formula found in 40 CFR 403.6(e)). 
(b)  Garbage. 
(1)  No person shall discharge garbage into the POTW unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sanitary sewer. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(2)  The environmental officer is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater. 
(c)  Discharges requiring traps. 
(1)  Discharges requiring a trap include any non-residential establishment discharging: 
a.  Grease or water containing grease; 
b.  Oil; 
c.  Sand; 
d.  Flammable wastes; 
e.  Shredded garbage as defined in subsection (b) of this section; or 
f.  Other harmful substances. 
(2)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at their own expense and as required by the environmental officer: 
a.  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the environmental officer. 
b.  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
c.  Maintain the trap in effective and operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 2.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-240. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At any time, the environmental officer may evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The environmental officer may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the environmental officer may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the environmental officer of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 54-306; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or sludge discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 3.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-241. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the environmental officer, and at such times as are established by the environmental officer. Such waste shall not violate this division or any other requirements established by the city. The environmental officer may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The environmental officer shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The environmental officer may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The environmental officer also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the environmental officer. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the environmental officer. The environmental officer may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The environmental officer may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(e)  Commercial haulers and recreational vehicles shall also comply fully with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  In no instance will the city accept any grease trap wastes having a concentration exceeding 150 mg/l of fats, oils and greases as determined by U.S. EPA Methods 413.1 and 413.2. (Note: This provision shall become effective 60 days after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 3.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-242. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user location within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the environmental officer shall enter into an inter-municipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section the environmental officer shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the environmental officer may deem necessary. 
(c)  An inter-municipal agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 54-239. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the environmental officer; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the environmental officer; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the environmental officer with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the environmental officer's access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the environmental officer; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. In the event of any inter-municipal agreement, the city retains the right to take legal action to enforce the terms of this article or to impose and enforce pretreatment standards and requirements against non-compliant discharges in the event that the contributing jurisdiction is unwilling to take such action. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.8, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-243. - Bypass. 
(a)  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(b)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the environmental officer at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(d)  A user shall submit oral notice to the environmental officer of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass, and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The environmental officer may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis, if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(e)  Bypass is prohibited, and the environmental officer may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life or personal injury; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  The environmental officer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the environmental officer determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 13.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-244. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user, in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, which by operation of law include local limits. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of section 54-238 are met. 
(c)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset. 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-compliance. 
b.  The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to continue. 
c.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards. 
(f)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, is lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 13.1, 2-13-1996) 
Secs. 54-245-54-266. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 54-267. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the environmental officer may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the environmental officer may impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 2.2, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-268. - State pretreatment standards. 
    Any applicable pretreatment standards promulgated by the state that are more stringent than those shown in this article will supersede the limits listed herein. All applicable sections of V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26, Water Quality Control, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 2.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-269. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 54-238 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or environmental officer, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the environmental officer for review, and shall be acceptable to the environmental officer before such facilities are constructed. 
(b)  The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 3.1, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-270. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the environmental officer may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The environmental officer may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the environmental officer, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the environmental officer and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 3.2, 2-13-1996) 
Secs. 54-271-54-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 54-289. - Required. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the environmental officer, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 54-290 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The environmental officer may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 54-317 through 54-320. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(d)  The environmental officer may require that other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain industrial wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Reapplication. Once permitted, the industrial user has the duty to reapply if the permittee wishes to continue an activity regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit. The industrial user must submit an application for a new permit at least 90 days before the expiration of the permit in accordance with section 54-292. The application form may be obtained from the environmental officer. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.2, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-290. - Existing conditions. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after the date, apply to the environmental officer for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 54-292, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of this article, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the environmental officer. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-291. - New connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 54-292, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-292. - Application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The environmental officer may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 54-302; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Details to show all grease traps, sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge will be required. The environmental officer may require site plans, floor plans, and mechanical and plumbing plans. The location and size of all garbage grinders shall be noted; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the environmental officer to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.5, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-293. - Application signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.6, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-294. - Review procedure. 
    The environmental officer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the environmental officer will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The environmental officer may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 4.7, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-295. - Duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the environmental officer. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.1, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-296. - Permit contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the environmental officer to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-transferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 54-299, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amounts of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which will become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the environmental officer to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.2, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-297. - Appeals. 
    The environmental officer shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the environmental officer to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the environmental officer fails to act within 90 days after receipt of appeal, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the municipal court for the city within the this state (or whatever court has jurisdiction). 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-298. - Permit modification. 
    The environmental officer may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operation. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-299. - Transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the environmental officer, and the environmental officer approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the environmental officer must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner or operator has no intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.5, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-300. - Revocation. 
(a)  The environmental officer may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the environmental officer of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the environmental officer of changed conditions pursuant to section 54-305; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the environmental officer timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitation; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.6, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-301. - Reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 54-292, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. The user may, at his option, submit a letter certifying that no significant changes to the original permit are involved (along with a copy of the original application and permit). The environmental officer may then re-issue the original permit, at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 5.7, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-302. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the environmental officer a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the environmental officer a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Required information. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass, where required by the standard or by the environmental officer, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 54-310. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out section 54-311. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in this section. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 54-293. 
(c)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (b)(7) of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the environmental officer no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the environmental officer. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.2, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-303. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the environmental officer a report containing the information described in section 54-302(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 54-293. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-304. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the environmental officer, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 54-293. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the environmental officer, using the procedures prescribed in section 54-311, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-305. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the environmental officer of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 180 days before the change. 
(1)  The environmental officer may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 54-292. 
(2)  The environmental officer may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 54-294 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 54-298 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of ten percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.5, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-306. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the environmental officer of the accident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the environmental officer, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; or shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.6, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-307. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the environmental officer as the environmental officer may require. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.7, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-308. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the environmental officer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the environmental officer within seven days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if the environmental officer monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the environmental officer samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.8, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-309. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 54-305. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 54-302 through 54-304. 
(b)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(3), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of the RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the environmental officer, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.9, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-310. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques of the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.10, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-311. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the environmental officer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds may be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.11, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-312. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.12, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-313. - Record keeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. The records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the environmental officer. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 6.13, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-314. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry, inspection and sampling. The environmental officer shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the environmental officer ready access to all potential parts (for determining compliance) of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the environmental officer will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The environmental officer shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The environmental officer may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated yearly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the environmental officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the environmental officer access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the environmental officer has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article of any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the environmental officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court judge of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 7.2, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-315. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit application, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the environmental officer's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the environmental officer, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES Program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.301 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 8, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-316. - Publication of users in significant non-compliance. 
    The environmental officer shall publish annually, in the official newspaper of the city where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant non-compliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the environmental officer believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the environmental officer's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation which the environmental officer determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 9, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-317. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions shall be submitted by the user to the environmental officer. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the environmental officer to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, prior to issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The environmental officer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for non-compliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The environmental officer may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the environmental officer and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(2)  Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued or reduced unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. 
(1)  When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the environmental officer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge. 
(2)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may fine such user in an amount not more than $2,000.00 nor less than $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one-point-five percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the environmental officer to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the environmental officer may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The environmental officer may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The environmental officer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The environmental officer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the environmental officer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The environmental officer may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the environmental officer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(3)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the environmental officer prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (c) and (h) of this section. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination or reduction of discharge. 
(1)  In addition to the provisions in section 54-301, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination or reduction: 
a.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
b.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
c.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
d.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
e.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 3 of this article. 
(2)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the environmental officer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 10, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-318. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. 
(1)  When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may petition the municipal court (or any other court that has jurisdiction) through the city's attorney (or other attorney appointed by the city) for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. 
(2)  The environmental officer may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,000.00 but not less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The environmental officer may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 nor less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 per violation, per day. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statement, representations, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 nor less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(5)  Filing a suit for, or the collection of criminal penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(d)  Remedies non-exclusive. 
(1)  The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The environmental officer may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the environmental officer may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the environmental officer is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any non-compliant user. 
(2)  Also, any fines, fees, penalties, etc., assessed to the city due to the actions of a user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement will be the liability of the user along with any attorney's fees, court costs, etc., required to collect such fines, fees, penalties, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1822, §§ 11.1-11.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-319. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The environmental officer may decline to issue or re-issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by environmental officer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. Such bond must be made by a company licensed to do insurance business in this state, and possess at least an "A" rating in the current A.M. Best Company listings. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The environmental officer may decline to issue or re-issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance or reduction in service. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed or reduced. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 12.3, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-320. - Public nuisances. 
    A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the environmental officer. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this Code, governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 12.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-321. - Determining the character and concentration of wastewater. 
(a)  The wastewater discharged or deposited into the POTW shall be subject to periodic inspection and sampling as often as be deemed necessary by the environmental officer. Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the POTW and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. 
(b)  The examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be: 
(1)  Performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(h) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the environmental officer or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control points authorized by the environmental officer provided at the expense of the industry. 
(c)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to perform sampling and laboratory analyses. 
(d)  The determination of the character and concentration of industrial wastewater shall be made by the environmental officer at such times and on such schedules as he may establish. 
(e)  The environmental officer may require any industrial user to compensate the city for the costs of sampling, analyses of the discharges, and any additional administrative fees provided in section 54-325. The city will also be compensated for any testing done by the city at normal commercial rates. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 13.4, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 54-322. - Wastewater treatment fees. 
(a)  Abnormal wastewater surcharge. 
(1)  Any user generating wastewater which exhibits none of the characteristics of prohibited wastes as described in this article, but which has an average concentration of biochemical oxygen demand, has an average concentration of chemical oxygen demand, or contains total suspended solids or total fats, oils and grease, in excess of normal wastewater (as defined in this article), may be required to pretreat to meet the requirements of normal wastewater or such other more stringent parameters as the city may determine as necessary and appropriate to the particular treatment plant receiving such abnormal wastewater. Pretreated abnormal wastewater may be accepted by a POTW if all the following requirements are met: 
a.  The wastes will not cause damage to the collection system; 
b.  The wastes will not impair the treatment processes, or exceed 90-percent of the available treatment capacity of the POTW; 
c.  The user agrees to payment of a surcharge over and above published sewer rates, as provided herein; and 
d.  The waste is amenable to treatment such that when it leaves the treatment plant to be discharged, the waste does not exceed, or cause the total discharge to exceed, the standards set by federal and state agencies having jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prior to imposition of a surcharge, the user shall be notified in writing that his waste discharge exceeds the maximum limits as established in this article. 
(3)  Surcharges will be adjusted on billings for the month following submission of new data, but not more frequently than quarterly, unless authorized by the environmental officer. 
(4)  The volume of flow used in computing abnormal wastewater surcharges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city utilities department. In the event that a person discharging waste into the POTW produces evidence to the city demonstrating that a portion of the total amount of water used for all purposes does not reach the POTW, a separate meter or meters or other approved flow measuring device may be installed by user at the user's expense (subject to approval by the city), upon his request, to measure only that portion of the total flow being discharged into the POTW. Upon request by the user, credit may be allowed by the city for evaporation, product water exported from the user or other operational consumption through which such water is not discharged to the POTW. If it is impossible to show volume by metering, then recognized industry standards designated by the city shall apply. If a surcharge is assessed by the city, it shall be shown separately on the monthly billing. In no instance will the city accept a value less than 75 percent of the metered water amounts. 
(5)  Any person discharging industrial waste into the POTW who procures any part or all of his water supply from sources other than the city utilities department, all or part of which is discharged into the POTW, shall install and maintain at his expense water meters of the type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges. Such meters shall be read monthly and tested for accuracy when deemed necessary by the city. Where it can be shown that a portion of the water as measured by the aforesaid meter, or meters, does not enter the POTW of the city, then the user, if he elects, may install additional approved meters at the user's expense in such a manner as to measure the quantity of water actually entering the POTW system from the premises of such user, and the quantity of water used to determine the wastewater service charge and abnormal wastewater surcharge shall be the quantity of water actually entering the POTW as so determined. In no instance will the city accept a value less than 75 percent of the metered water amounts. 
(6)  Computations of each charge, as applicable, shall be based on the following: 
S = V × 8.34 × X × (COD-640) * 
S = V × 8.34 × Y × (BOD-250) 
S = V × 8.34 × Z × (TSS-250) 
S = V × 8.34 × ZZ × [FOG-75 (but not more than 150 mg/l)] * 
Where: 
S = Surcharge in dollars for the billing period. 
V = Water consumption in millions of gallons during the billing period. 
8.34 = Weight of water in pounds per gallon. 
X = Unit charge in dollars per pound for COD as established in the wastewater rate ordinance in effect at the time of the billing. 
Y = Unit charge in dollars per pound for BOD as established in the wastewater rate ordinance in effect at the time of the billing. 
Z = Unit charge in dollars per pound for TSS as established in the wastewater rate ordinance in effect at the time of the billing. 
ZZ = Unit charge in dollars per pound for FOG as established in the wastewater rate ordinance in effect at the time of the billing. 
COD = Chemical oxygen demand strength index in parts per million by weight, or mg/l. 
BOD = Five-day biochemical oxygen demand strength index in parts per million by weight, or mg/l. 
TSS = Total suspended solids strength index in parts per million by weight, or mg/l. 
250 ** = Normal BOD and TSS strength in parts per million by weight, or mg/l. 
640 = Normal COD strength in parts per million by weight, or mg/l. 
* The city reserves the right to refuse to treat any discharges from Industrial or Institutional sources with COD's exceeding 640 mg/l or total fats, oils and grease (FOG) exceeding 75 mg/l, but not more than 150 mg/l, unless the city has on-line capacity to treat such loadings. In no instance will fats, oils and grease (FOG) exceeding 150 mg/l be accepted by the city, even if on-line plant POTW capacity exists at the time a discharge is made. The city reserves the right to terminate or reduce service to an Industrial or Institutional user to protect the integrity of its POTW's ability to meet the POTW's permitted effluent quality standards. In no instance will any grease trap wastes be accepted by the city's POTW. 
** The numbers listed for BOD and TSS do not apply to subsection 14(c), which follows in this article. The loadings (mass) listed in subsection (a)(6) of this section apply to that particular institutional user. 
(7)  The city reserves the right to review and approve any waters or industrial waste entering the POTW or proposed to be discharged into the system having an average daily flow greater than five-percent of the design flow capacity of the plant which will treat the waste. 
In the event the city's measurement discloses such flow to be in excess of five-percent of the capacity, the city shall be under no obligation to receive such flow in excess of five-percent of design capacity and the city's published rates shall not apply to such excess. An owner affected hereby shall be promptly notified of such determination by the city. A special contract, at the city's option, may be made with the user to accommodate such excess flow. 
(8)  The city shall adopt abnormal wastewater surcharge fees based upon the foregoing formula, subject to limitations discussed in subsection (a)(6) of this section. The fees shall be on file with the city manager (environmental officer). 
(b)  Pretreatment charges and fees. The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications as set forth in the wastewater fee schedule. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collecting and analyzing an industrial user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the industrial user. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(c)  Existing Reserved Capacity for TDCJ. The city has the following capacities in existence at the effective date of this article (reserved for TDCJ): 
(1)  Waste stream discharged by the Texas Department of Criminal Justice Facilities (TDCJ): 
a.  These facilities are known as the following: 
1.  TDCJ Facilities - McConnell Unit. 
2.  TDCJ Facilities at Chase Field Unit. 
b.  In the city's proposal to the TDCJ requesting that prisons be located at or near Beeville, it was understood that the city would treat the "institutional wastes" generated by these prison facilities, which was recognized to have a higher strength than normal domestic wastes as outlined in this article. 
1.  The following plant POTW capacity has been reserved for the TDCJ (by the city): 
(i)  Average Daily Flow = 1,000,000 gallons per day. 
(ii)  BOD Loading = 3,430 lbs/day. 
(iii)  TSS Loading = 3,430 lbs/day. 
(iv)  Ammonia Nitrogen Loading (NH 3 -N) = 417 lbs/day 
2.  Note: These allowable loadings are the total for all prison flows that are served by the city (Moore Street) POTW. 
3.  The method for determining that TDCJ (prison) BOD 5 , TSS and NH 3 -N are within the reserved limits is calculated as follows: 
(i)  BOD 5 : 
[Chase Field - Avg. (MGD) × BOD 5 (mg/l) × 8.34] + 
[McConnell - Avg. (MGD) × BOD 5 (mg/l) × 8.34] 
Is less than or equal to 3,430 lbs/day. 
(ii)  TSS: 
[Chase Field - Avg. (MGD) × TSS (mg/l) × 8.34] + 
[McConnell - Avg. (MGD) × TSS (mg/l) × 8.34] 
Is less than or equal to 3,430 lbs/day. 
(iii)  Ammonia Nitrogen means NH 3 -N: 
[Chase Field - Avg. (MGD) × NH 3 -N (mg/l) × 8.34] + 
[McConnell - Avg. (MGD) × NH 3 -N (mg/l) × 8.34] 
Is less than or equal to 417 lbs/day. 
Note: The numbers listed for BOD and TSS do not apply to the TDCJ discharge(s) discussed in this subsection (c). Also, the requirements of sections 54-269 and 54-302 through 54-304 that are in conflict with subsection (c) will not apply to the specific discharge(s) for the TDCJ facilities. 
(2)  The penalty (extra charge) to the Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) for discharging a hydraulic load in excess of 1.0 MGD (if treatment capacity is available) will be $200.00 per MGD treated based on a 30-day average flow rate. Note: If treatment capacity is not available, then the flow rate will be limited to 1.0 MGD. 
(3)  If the TDCJ facilities discharge loads exceeding 3430 pounds per day of BOD 5 , or 3,430 pounds per day of TSS, or 75 mg/l of fats, oils and grease (FOG), but less than 150 mg/l of fats, oil and grease (FOG) based on a 30-day average, and the city has the capacity to treat such wastes, then the city will issue a surcharge to the TDCJ based on the following cost schedule: 
(1) COD: *** Limited to 640 mg/l maximum level (2) BOD 5 : $0.0126 per lb (above 3430 lbs/day) (3) TSS: $0.0271 per lb (above 3430 lbs/day) (4) Ammonia Nitrogen: *** Limited to 417 lbs/day maximum load (5) Fats, oils and grease (FOG): *** $0.122 per lb (above 75 mg/l, but less than 150 mg/l)  
*** In no instance will the city accept fats, oils and grease (FOG) from the TDCJ facilities having a grab sample concentration exceeding 150 mg/l, Ammonia Nitrogen loads exceeding 417 lbs/day, nor CODs exceeding 640 mg/l. 
(Ord. No. 1822, § 14, 2-13-1996) 
Chapter 56 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 56-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is ordained in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the community. It has been designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. It has been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 2; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The term "building" shall include the term "structure." The term "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive or directory. 
    Accessory buildings and uses means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the premises. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises. 
    Airport means Beeville Municipal Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
    Airport hazard means any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking-off at the airport. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Alley means a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling, or in a building in which more than one living unit is established above or on the same floor as nonresidential use, which room or suite is intended or designed for use as a residence by one family and which includes culinary accommodations. 
    Apartment house means a building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking in the building, including apartments and apartment hotels. 
    Assisted living center means a residential facility that provides direct and indirect physical assistance with, or the supervision of, activities of daily living, medications, rehabilitation services, health care, recreation and educational activities and other similar services. 
    Boardinghouse means a building, other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
    Building means any structure designed or intended for the support or enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property. 
    Clinic means an office or group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists engaged in treating the sick or injured, but not including rooms for the abiding of patients. 
    District means a section or sections of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by more than two families. 
    Dwelling, single family, means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family or duplex, means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by two families. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel as herein defined. 
    Filling station or service station means any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, or retail store, the premises are classified as a public garage, or retail store. 
    Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage or carport, private, means an accessory building or portion of the main use building, designed for or used for the housing of motor-driven vehicles which are the property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is located. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than 1 1/2 ton capacity. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for equipping, repairing, hiring, servicing, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Grade means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the streets. 
(3)  For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line shall be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by the city building inspector. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business and not including any occupation conducted on the premises excepting the building which is used by the occupant as his or her private dwelling. The term "home occupation" shall include in general, personal services such as furnished by an architect, lawyer, physician, dentist, musician, artist or seamstress, when performed by the person occupying the building as his private dwelling and not including a partnership or the employment of anyone not a member of the immediate family residing on the premises in the performance of such services. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or an apartment which are herein defined. 
    HUD-Code manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single entity ownership which has been placed and improved for the placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes, accessory uses, and service facilities, meeting all requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any applicable deed restrictions and state laws 
    Joint airport zoning board means a board consisting of five members, two members appointed by the city council and two members appointed by the county commissioners' court, the four members so appointed shall elect a fifth member, the chairman. 
    Landing area means the surface area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Lodginghouse means a building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped to provide lodging regularly) by pre-arrangement for definite periods, for compensation, for three or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this article, including one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this article, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Lot, through or double frontage, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Mobile homes shall not be allowed in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    Motel means a group of attached, semi-detached, or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by tourists, or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit and offering to the public daily, as well as other longer term rental rates, and maintaining a register of guests or their vehicles. 
    Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this article or amendment thereto, which does not conform after the passage of this article or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Parking space means an area enclosed or unenclosed to be not less than nine feet by 20 feet in area exclusive of driveways connecting the place with a street or ally. The parking space and connecting driveway shall be durably surfaced (all parking spaces and connecting driveways are to be surfaced with asphalt or concrete) and so arranged to permit ingress and egress of each automobile independently. 
    Place means an open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as a principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Runway means the paved surface of an airport landing strip. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including but without limiting the general inclusiveness of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, poster boards, pergolas, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines. 
    Travel trailer, camper or motor home means any structure which can be used for temporary living, sleeping or storage purposes, used primarily for vacations and weekends, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, skirtings, and which is, has been or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place whether by motive or other means or mounted on a motor driven vehicle or self-propelled motor home. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projection of the usual steps, unenclosed balconies, or open porch. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of a lot from the front yard. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard line. 
    Townhouse. The terms "townhouse" and "row house" shall be used interchangeably and shall mean a structure which is one of a series of individually owned dwelling units, designed for single-family occupancy, which dwelling units are structurally connected or immediately adjacent to each other without side yards between individual units. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 3; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 3, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1304, § 2, 1-4-1979; Ord. No. 1796, § 1, 11-22-1994; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2307, § I, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 56-3. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with ordinance nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreements between parties, except that, if this chapter imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 24; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 24, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-4. - Applicability; extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    This chapter is applicable within the city limits and within one mile therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1201, 3-25-1975) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. 
Sec. 56-5. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Use of land. The nonconforming use of land where no building is involved existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued for a period of not more than two years therefrom, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property, and that if such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with regulations of the district in which it lies. 
(b)  Use of buildings. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the nonconforming use of a building existing at the time this chapter becomes effective may be continued, and the use of a nonconforming building may be changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification, but where such use is changed to a more restricted classification, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a use of a less restricted classification. 
(c)  Uses invalid after one continuous year of non-use. A nonconforming building which is or may hereafter become vacant and which shall remain unoccupied or its nonconforming use discarded for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  Building maintenance. A nonconforming building may be maintained or kept in good repair except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(e)  Building alteration. No existing nonconforming building may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or altered unless its use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building is located except in the event such enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration is required by court decision, law or ordinance. 
(f)  Building moving. No nonconforming building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of such building is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(g)  Substandard and nonconforming buildings. No substandard or nonconforming building shall be moved into the city limits without first complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  Those desiring to upgrade, rehabilitate or improve a substandard or nonconforming building shall provide to the building official a detailed set of plans, including photographs of all building elevations, showing all phases of construction necessary to bring the building into compliance with city construction and zoning standards. 
(2)  To the greatest degree practicable, as much work as possible shall be completed prior to moving the building into the city. 
(3)  Upon approval of the plans by the building official, a permit may be issued. 
(4)  After completion of all off-site improvements in accordance with the approved plan, the building official may approve the building to be moved into the city. 
(5)  Compliance with all applicable standards and regulations shall be completed within six months from the date the permit is issued. 
(h)  Building restoration. A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the extent of 50 percent or more of its reasonable value may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(i)  Building prohibitions. The following uses now in existence and not in strict conformity with the provisions of the district in which they are located are hereby prohibited and such uses not in existence in the city shall be altered, replaced or removed to conform to the provisions of this article on or before the date shown in the following schedule: 
(1)  Billboards and poster boards, January 1, 1958. 
(2)  Junkyards and automotive wrecking yards, January 1, 1958. 
(3)  Building supply and storage yards, construction supply and storage yards, and any and all machinery, equipment and other storage areas of every kind and character, January 1, 1958. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 16; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 16, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2257, § 2, 4-14-2015) 
Secs. 56-6-56-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 56-29. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  A board of adjustment is hereby established. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall reside in the city, each to be appointed for a term of two years and removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Terms of current members shall expire at the end of terms for which they were appointed, either as full term members, or as replacement members where vacancies had occurred. 
(c)  There shall be four alternate members of the board, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or the city manager. Such alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. 
(d)  The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. Any four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business before the board. The concurring vote of a majority of the members (four) of the board shall be necessary for the determination of any question or matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in such ordinance. 
(e)  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule to the tax collector of the city, at the time the notice is filed, which shall be credited to the general fund of the city. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(f)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(g)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(h)  The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(i)  In exercising the above mentioned powers such board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(j)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any manner upon which it is required to pass under such ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance. 
(k)  Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(l)  Upon presentation of such petition the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board of adjustment to review such decision of the board of adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the realtor's attorney, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(m)  The board of adjustment shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(n)  If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(o)  Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(p)  All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 21; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 21, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1255, § I, 3-8-1977; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-30. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established. The city council shall not receive nor consider, nor submit to the planning commission of the city, any request or petition for a change of zone of any property, the use of which is controlled by this chapter, unless and until there shall be paid to the tax collector of the city, by the petitioner or proponent of such change a filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule, which filing fee shall not be refunded to the payor thereof. 
(b)  Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the city council shall submit the same to the city planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(c)  A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed supplement, amendment or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication one time in the official paper or a paper of general circulation of the city, stating the date, time, and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the first day of such publication. 
(d)  Unless such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the city planning commission or if a protest against such amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the building inspector, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or those immediately opposite thereto, extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment, supplement, or change shall not become effective except by a vote of three-fourths of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 22; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 22, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1255, § II, 3-8-1977; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-31. - Building permits. 
    No permit for the erection, alteration, or enlargement of any building shall be issued by the building inspector unless there first be filed in his office by the applicant therefor, a plat, drawn to scale, and in such form as may be prescribed by the building inspector, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the building to be erected, altered and enlarged, together with a true statement in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building is arranged, intended or designed, and furnishing such other information as the building inspector may require in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and any failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit by the building inspector. A record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 17; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 17, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-32. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural uses, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
(b)  No premises shall be used and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use, until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector, stating that the building or proposed use of a building or premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these regulations. 
(c)  Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of such buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certification shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. No fees shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses. Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed within 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, with the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 19; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 19, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-33. - Community unit plan. 
(a)  The owner or owners of any tract of land in city comprising an area of not less than ten acres may submit to the city building inspector a plan for the use and development of all of the tract of land for residential purposes. The development plan shall be referred to the city planning commission for study, public hearing and report. The commission's recommendations and report together with the plans shall be submitted to the city council within 30 days for consideration and action. 
(b)  The recommendations and report by the planning commission shall contain specific evidence and facts showing whether or not the proposed project meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected. 
(2)  The plan is consistent with the intent and purposes of this article to promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. 
(3)  The buildings will be used only for purposes provided for in the "R-1," "R-2" and "R-3" districts. 
(4)  The average lot area per family contained in the site, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will be not less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located. 
(c)  If the city council approves the plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of the land and the location of the buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulation of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 18; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 18, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-34. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Application; plans. An applicant for a special use permit shall provide to the city building inspector plans sufficient in detail as to show the specific proposed use of the buildings, structures and premises and the provisions for sufficient off-street parking facilities, screening walls or fences, landscaping and open space. 
(b)  Review by planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may, after hearing, recommend to the city council that the special use permit be granted, if the commission finds that the proposed use and the effect upon surrounding property would not adversely affect the public health, safety morals, and general welfare, that there is sufficient off-street parking facilities, that any safeguards required by the commission have been agreed to be provided by the applicant for the protection of surrounding property, persons and neighborhood values, and that the proposal is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Review by city council. After receiving the recommendation from the commission, the council may, after public hearing, grant or deny the permit or grant the permit subject to additional conditions; provided, however, that when the action taken by the council is less restrictive as to use or as to density than the recommendation of the commission, the council action shall not be effective except by an affirmative vote of a majority plus one of the members present and voting. The city council may grant a special use permit for a limited period of time and may impose conditions that shall be complied with by the applicant before certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for such use of the buildings and improvements. 
(d)  Spot zoning prohibited. To prevent the arbitrary and unreasonable devotion of a small area within a zoning district to a use that is inconsistent with the use of the rest of the district, which could be considered spot zoning (a change merely for private gain), special use permits shall not be approved when the proposed use of the property or improvements upon the property would normally require a zone less restrictive than the next zone or district. 
(e)  Portable signs. A special use permit shall not be issued to allow the placement of portable signs where prohibited by this chapter. 
(f)  Certificate of occupancy required. The special use permit shall not be issued until all conditions have been completed by the applicant and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(g)  Duration of permit. Unless otherwise provided by the city council, the permitted use shall be authorized for as long as the permitted use continues uninterrupted. The permit may be assigned or transferred by rent, lease, sale, or other transfer of title to the property or premises to another party so long as the specific permitted use only continues without change in nature nor scale. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. Any special permit issued under this section shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless the premises are actually being used under the permit; provided that additional time may be granted on motion by the council or provided in the permit at the time of the granting of the same. In addition, if the use for which the permit is granted ceases for any reason for a period of two months or more, the permit shall expire unless the discontinuance of use is necessary for repairs due to natural catastrophes, fire or other reasons specifically acknowledged and authorized by the building inspector. 
(i)  Permit deemed chapter amendment. Every special use permit authorized by the council shall be considered as an amendment to this chapter as applicable to such property. 
(Ord. No. 1937, §§ 2-4, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 56-35. - Enforcement and penalty for violation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to refuse to issue any permit for any building, or for the use of any premises which would violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or converted or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building inspector is authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to any such violation. 
(c)  Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 23; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 23, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 56-36-56-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 56-59. - Established. 
(a)  For the purpose of regulating and restricting the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other purpose, the city, is hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be ten classes in number, and which shall be known as: 
(1)  "R-1" First One-Family Dwelling District. 
(2)  "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District. 
(3)  "R-3" Duplex and Apartment District. 
(4)  "R-4" Townhouse District. 
(5)  "R-5" Patio/Garden One-Family Dwelling District. 
(6)  "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
(7)  "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District. 
(8)  "B-3" Central Business District. 
(9)  "CF" Community Facilities District. 
(10)  "I-1" Light Industrial District. 
(11)  "I-2" Industrial District. 
(12)  "M/H" Mobile Home Parks/Mobile Home Subdivision District. 
(b)  The boundaries of the districts, described above, are shown on the map dated April 24, 1973, attached hereto, which map is designated as the "zoning district map," the district map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are made a part of this article and shall have the same force and effect as if the map and data thereon were fully set forth or described herein. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 4; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 4, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-60. - Extended districts into vacated areas. 
    Whenever any city street, alley or other public way is lawfully vacated by the council of the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated area and thereafter all land included in the vacated area shall be subject to applicable regulations of the extended districts. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 4; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 4, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-61. - Annexed territory. 
    All territory which may hereafter come within the city limits by virtue of annexations to the city, shall be immediately placed and continued in the "R-1" First One-Family Dwelling District until otherwise changed by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 4; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 4, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-62. - Building and yard restrictions. 
    Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, and no building or land shall be used for any purpose that is not permitted in the district in which the building or land is situated. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the building is situated. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in conformity with the area and parking regulations of the district in which the building is situated. 
(4)  The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this article for each and every building existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance, or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other buildings, nor shall any lot area be reduced to an area less than the district requirements of this article. 
(5)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 4; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 4, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-63. - Determining district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this article, the following rules apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this article are bounded approximately by a street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this article are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(3)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this article shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 20; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 20, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-64. - Use, height, area and other regulations applicable to all districts. 
(a)  Use regulations. 
(1)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main use building has been actually commenced. No accessory building shall be used unless the main use building on the lot is also being used. 
(2)  A mobile homes park shall be permitted only in a mobile home district under this article and shall comply in every detail with the city Mobile Home Ordinance as adopted by the city council on June 30, 1998 (chapter 28) and such amendments as may be effected at a later date. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain for residential purposes any such mobile home in any place in the city other than a lawful mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
(b)  Height regulations. 
(1)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools when permitted in a district may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located. 
(2)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk heads, fire towers, grain elevators, flour mills, monuments, stacks or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spired church steeples, radio or television towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city, provided that in the absence of any such ordinance there shall be no height limitation of these structures. 
(c)  Area and density regulations. 
(1)  No side yards required in commercial districts. In a district in which commercial buildings are built with one or more stories for residential purposes above the commercial uses, no side yards shall be required for the residential portions of the buildings provided that the part of the building intended for residential use is not more than two rooms deep from front to rear. 
(2)  No compliance yard to be used for another building. No yard or open space provided about any building for the purposes of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be used as a yard or an open space for another building. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed by buildings except for accessory buildings in the rear yard and except the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features which may project into such yards a distance of not more than two feet. 
(3)  Unroofed platforms and landings. Open unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into the front yard for a distance not to exceed six feet. 
(4)  Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, and ornamental features. Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into a required side yard, provided these projections be distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line. 
(5)  Front yard. 
a.  Where 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed (with a variation of five feet or less) a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall be erected closer to the street than the front yard so established by the existing buildings. 
b.  Where 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not observed a front yard as described above, then: 
1.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closed front corners of the adjacent buildings on the two sides. 
2.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 
3.  In determining such front yard depth, buildings located entirely on the rear one-half of a lot shall not be counted. 
c.  Vision clearance. On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign or other structure, or any plant growth shall be permitted or maintained higher than two feet above the curb level within 15 feet of the intersection of the property lines. 
(6)  Side yards. 
a.  The minimum width of a required side yard of a corner lot in the "R-1," "R-2" and "R-3" districts shall be not less than ten feet provided that if the street side line of a corner lot is in the same block frontage with a lot or lots, whose street line is a front line of such lot or lots, the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of the buildings along the same side of the street back from the street line, in which case the side yard need not be more than 25 feet. 
b.  A side yard of not less than 25 feet on the side of the lot adjoining an "R-1," "R-2" or "R-3" district shall be provided for all schools, libraries, churches, community houses, and other public or semi-public buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
c.  Garages or carports, detached or attached to the main use building entering on the side street of a corner lot, shall maintain a side yard of 20 feet in front of the garage. 
(7)  Rear yard. 
a.  In the "R-1," "R-2" or "R-3" districts accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the required minimum rear yard area. Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet from the main use buildings. In the "R-1," "R-2" and "R-3" districts no accessory buildings shall be more than one story in height. 
b.  In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into an alley, one-half of the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required rear yard. 
c.  For single-family dwellings in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, the depth of the rear yard must be at least 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 15 feet. 
(d)  Railroad right-of-way. On all existing rights-of-way of railroad companies, regardless of zoning district, in which such right-of-way is located, railroad trackage and actual accessories to railroad movement may be constructed or maintained, including also, buildings and structures, provided they conform to the zoning regulations of the zone in which located, except however, such provision shall not apply to buildings and structures in areas zoned as residential districts. When a railroad right-of-way lies within any residential district, accessories necessary to the operation of the railroad may be constructed. Not to be included, and there shall be specifically excluded therefrom, all and every building, structure, warehouse, loading facility and other similar improvement of every kind and character not permitted in districts zoned as residential districts; provided, however, the planning commission may for good cause shown after a public hearing, recommend to the city council that the permit be granted for the construction, erection and establishment of such building, structure, warehouse, loading facility and other similar improvements. The city council may then instruct the building inspector to issue the permit for construction. 
(e)  Alleys and easements. When any property shall come before the city council for a zone change to any of the business districts designated in this article, alleyways or utility easements may be required at the discretion of the city council. 
(f)  Parking regulations. When any property shall come before the city council for a change in zone classification, parking regulations shall be complied with as required in the district to which the property was reclassified. Where no required parking spaces have previously been provided whenever an existing structure is converted or structurally altered the parking spaces as required in the zone for such uses normally allowed shall be provided and maintained. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 15; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 15, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 56-65-56-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 56-116. - "R-1" First One-Family Dwelling District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-1" First One-Family Dwelling District. 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Travel trailer, camper and self-propelled motor homes; provided it is placed on an improved surface (i.e., asphalt, concrete, and caliche) and is not used for living or business purposes. 
c.  Church (except temporary revival). 
d.  School, public or private, having a curriculum equal to a public elementary, high school, or institution of higher learning. 
e.  Public parks, playgrounds, golf courses, public recreation and community buildings. 
f.  Municipal buildings, nonprofit libraries or museums, police and fire stations. 
g.  Farms, nurseries, truck gardens and greenhouses provided no sales office is maintained. 
h.  Customary home occupations. 
i.  Accessory buildings and accessory uses, customarily incidental to the above uses (not involving the conduct of a business) when located on the same lot, including a private garage for one or more cars, bona fide servants' quarters not for rent or used for commercial purposes; 
j.  Signs. 
1.  One unlighted sign, which shall not exceed one square foot in area, indicating the name of the occupant or occupation of a customary home occupation, provided the sign is attached flat-wise to the building. 
2.  One sign, which shall not exceed 18 square feet, for church or school. 
3.  One sign, which shall not exceed four square feet in area for temporary unlighted sign pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of building or premises, provided the sign is immediately removed upon the lease, hire or sale of such building or premises. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 56-64. 
(3)  Area regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, but such side yard need not exceed six feet and shall not be less than five feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 30 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 40 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than 7,000 square feet and an average width of not less than 60 feet, except that if a lot or tract on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived had an average width of not less than 50 feet and an area of not less than 6,000 square feet, and shall not have changed ownership since the date, such parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Additional use, height and area regulations. Additional use, height and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(6)  Parking regulations. 
a.  For single-family dwelling, a minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained on the lot. 
b.  Whenever a home occupation is established in a residence, a minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained on the lot. 
c.  Whenever a public building, that is schools, churches, hospitals, etc., is erected, one off-street parking area shall be provided and maintained for each 200 square feet of floor space contained in such building. All parking spaces so provided shall be arranged so as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 5; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 5, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-117. - "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes. Any use permitted in the "R-1" First One-Family Dwelling District. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 56-64. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, but such side yard need not exceed five feet and shall not be less than four feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 25 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet, and an average width of not less than 50 feet, except that if a lot or tract should have less area or width than is herein required and its boundary lines along their entire length should touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall not have been changed since the date, such parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(6)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking requirements are the same as those required for an "R-1" District. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 6; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 6, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-118. - "R-3" Duplex And Apartment District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-3" Two-Family Dwelling and Apartment House District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in the "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District. 
b.  Apartment house or multiple family dwellings. 
c.  Boardinghouse, lodginghouse and roominghouse. 
d.  Hospitals, excepting tubercular, liquor, narcotic, insane and feeble-minded or animal hospitals. 
e.  Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature. 
f.  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those of the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, but such side yard need not exceed five feet and shall not be less than four feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 25 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Except as hereinafter provided, all dwellings hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, or reconstructed, shall be located on lots containing the following areas: 
a.  A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square feet. 
b.  A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 6,000 square feet. 
c.  A lot on which there is erected an apartment house or multiple family dwelling shall contain: 
1.  Not less than 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit if such unit be one story in height. 
2.  Not less than 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit if such unit is two stories in height. 
d.  Where a lot or tract has less area than herein required and its boundary lines along their entire length touched lands under other ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and have not since been changed, such parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
e.  On the property along the west side of St. Mary's Street and facing on St. Mary's Street from Poesta Creek south to and including Lot 38 of Victoria Land and Improvement Company Subdivision, detached dwelling units may be constructed provided that a front yard of 25 feet is maintained and that the rear building is not closer to the rear property line than five feet, and that the dwellings are not closer to each other than 12 feet, and that there be not less than 2,500 square feet of lot area for each family to be accommodated on the lot. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  Parking regulations for uses permitted in the "R-1" and "R-2" Districts shall be the same as required in such "R-1" and "R-2" Districts. 
b.  Multiple family dwelling, two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be provided and maintained on the lot. 
c.  For a boardinghouse, lodginghouse or roominghouse one off-street parking space for each unit plus the next highest number equating to ten percent of the number of units shall be provided and maintained on the lot. 
d.  For any other use allowed in this district one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the building shall be provided and maintained on the lot. All parking spaces so provided shall be so arranged so as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile. 
(Code 1973, app. A, §7; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 7, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-119. - "M/H" Mobile Home Parks or Mobile Home Subdivision District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "M/H District." 
(1)  Use regulations. A premises shall be used only for the location of mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions. Manufactured/mobile homes are permitted only in M/H districts. 
(2)  Height regulations. City mobile home park regulations shall apply. 
(3)  Yard regulations. Regulations for front, side and rear yards set out in the city, mobile home parks regulations shall apply and for subdivisions, regulations from an "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District shall apply. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Minimum lot area and width set out in the city, mobile home parks regulations shall apply for mobile home parks. Regulations set out in the "R-2" Second One-Family Dwelling District shall apply for mobile home subdivisions. 
(5)  Parking regulations. Regulations for parking as set out in the city, mobile home parks regulations shall apply. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 8; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 8, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2257, § 1, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 56-120. - "R-4" Townhouse District. 
    The following standards shall apply to the construction of townhouses and a townhouse shall not be constructed unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Use regulations. All townhouses shall be located within a townhouse subdivision as defined in section 48-2; in no case shall a building permit be issued for the construction of a townhouse on a lot located in a subdivision filed for record prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless the land, or a part of it is resubdivided for townhouse development. 
(2)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. No front yard is required except a building setback of 25 feet shall be required for all structures not fronting on an interior street as defined in the subdivision ordinance (chapter 48). 
b.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except a building setback of 20 feet shall be required for all structures located on lots which abut the boundary of a townhouse subdivision. 
c.  Side yard. No side yards are permitted except a building setback of ten feet is required for all structures siding on other than an interior street or the boundary of a townhouse subdivision plat. 
(3)  Intensity of use. The minimum lot area is 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width. The minimum lot width is 25 feet. 
(5)  Parking regulations. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided on the lot in the rear of each townhouse. All such parking spaces provided hereunder should be so arranged so as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile. 
(6)  Screening walls. Where townhouses are backing up on any public street other than interior street, a two-foot wide private easement shall be provided abutting the street and a masonry wall not less than six feet in height shall be constructed and maintained upon the easement to provide a visual screen. 
(7)  Side lots. Townhouse dwelling units shall be constructed up to the side lot lines without side yards. Windows shall not face a side lot line unless a side wall of a townhouse dwelling unit is at least ten feet from the side lot line. 
(8)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 9; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 9, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 56-121. - "R-5" Patio/Garden One-Family Dwelling District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-5" Patio/Garden One-Family Dwelling District. 
(1)  Use regulation. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Subdivision parks. 
c.  Signs and billboards. 
No signs (except not more than one nine square foot "For Rent" or "For Sale" sign per Lot), billboards, posters or advertising devices of any character shall be erected, permitted or maintained on any Lot or any portion of the properties unless specifically addressed on applied deed restrictions or through a covenant between the buyer and seller and approved by the building inspector as to compliance with the city sign ordinance. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed two stories or 36 feet in height. 
(3)  Area regulations. 
a.  Bulk regulations. 
1.  Lot size, 3,450 square-foot minimum. 
2.  Home, 800 square-foot minimum of livable space. 
3.  Lot coverage, 50 percent maximum. 
4.  Lot width, 30-foot minimum. 
5.  Minimum number of lots. There shall be at least one-half block of patio home lots in each project and in no case shall there be less than eight lots. 
b.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front. Home, 25 feet from right-of-way of public street. Garage, 25 feet from right-of-way of public street. 
2.  Rear. 16 feet minimum. 
3.  Side yard. Five feet, minimum, with exception of corner lots which shall allow a ten feet minimum from the building to the side street right-of-way. 
c.  Additional regulations. In no case shall one dwelling be built closer than ten feet from the next nearest dwelling or authorized land use improvement. 
d.  Zero lot line wall. No openings for access, light, or air. Must be constructed of brick, masonry, or wood veneer. No portion including appendages and overhands, shall project over the property line. Slab must be coincident with a side lot line; zero lot line wall may setback no more than seven inches on the slab. 
e.  Fencing. Solid wall or fence of wood, masonry or other suitable material. Must extend the full length of the rear lot line, side lot lines to the front building line, and the front building line. Chair link fences using opaque slats are prohibited. Minimum height, six feet. Corner lots, privacy shall be required adjacent to the side street. 
f.  Patio. One thousand square feet minimum. Oriented toward side and may include rear area. Must be entirely enclosed by the dwelling wall, lot line wall of the neighboring dwelling, or other fences and walls. 
g.  Garages and driveways. 
1.  Garage or carport optional (see minimum setback requirements). If garaged, must be screened from street view by garage-type door. 
2.  Driveways. Provide two off-street parking spaces on each lot exclusive of garage, 20 foot maximum width. 
h.  Drainage. 
1.  Surface. Must be diverted away from all adjacent properties. Site plan indicating drainage system for each lot must be reviewed and approved in writing by city building inspector. Drainage shall not cross a lot line. 
2.  Roof. Shall not be discharged onto a neighboring property or yard. Where roofs slope toward a lot line or neighboring property, gutter system shall provide drainage directly to street 
i.  Utilities. Must be underground. 
(Ord. No. 1787, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 56-122. - "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Advertising signs, when the same are attached to a building and advertise only services, articles or products which are offered within the building to which such sign is attached, and provided that such signs shall not extend above the outside walls of such building, nor more than one foot from the face of the walls of such building, nor shall it contain an area of more than 12 square feet. One free standing sign not to exceed 24 feet in height will be allowed in the front yard provided such sign does not exceed 30 square feet in area. 
b.  Bakery, not employing more than three persons. 
c.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
d.  Cleaning, pressing and laundry pickup stations. 
e.  Grocery and other neighborhood type retail stores and shops, provided the building area of each establishment does not exceed 4,000 square feet. 
f.  Offices. 
g.  Radio and television repair and sales, if sales are incidental to repairs. 
h.  Assisted living facilities. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the side yard regulations for that district shall apply. For additional uses permitted in the "B-1" District no side yards are required except that on a corner lot the side yard on a street side shall be 20 feet. Where a lot is used for any of the commercial purposes permitted in this district and abutting on the side of a lot in an "R-1," "R-2" or "R-3" District there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the rear yard shall be the same as in the "R-3" District. For all other uses a rear yard is not required except when it abuts upon an "R-1," "R-2" or "R-3" District in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-3" District. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  Offices, general. One space for each 300 square of floor area (minimum of five spaces). 
b.  Retail or personal service. One space for each 200 square feet of floor area (minimum of five spaces). 
c.  Clinics, dental, and/or doctor's office. One space for each 200 square feet of floor area (minimum of five spaces). 
(6)  Additional use, height and area regulations. Additional use, height and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(7)  Zone change. Whenever a zone change is granted for a business, commercial use, or for multiple dwelling in a residential zone there shall be erected by the appellant for the zone change a six foot privacy fence with boards to be no more than one-eighth inch apart from each other on the property line abutting residential property on all sides with the exception of the frontage as defined in this article. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 10; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 10, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1796, §§ 2, 3, 11-22-1994; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2262, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 2307, § II, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 56-123. - "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District. 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Automotive repairs and sales. 
b.  Automobile parking lots. 
c.  Bakery. 
d.  Bank. 
e.  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing plants. 
f.  Dance hall and skating rink. 
g.  Filling stations, provided all storage tanks for gasoline shall be below the surface of the ground. 
h.  Frozen food locker plant. 
i.  Garage storage. 
j.  Moving picture house or theater. 
k.  Job printing. 
l.  Laundry and cleaning. 
m.  Lodge halls. 
n.  Restaurants, cafes, and cafeterias. 
o.  Studios (art, photo, music, radio, television). 
p.  Tourist courts. 
q.  Any retail business not included in the Neighborhood Business District, provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibrations, smoke, odor, dust, gas or noise. 
r.  Assisted living facilities. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the front yard requirements for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses permitted in this district a front yard of 20 feet in depth is required. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the side yard requirements shall apply. For other uses no side yards are required. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the "R-3" District regulations shall apply. There are no rear yard regulations for other uses. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-3" District. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  The parking regulations for dwellings are the same as in the "R-3" District. 
b.  The parking regulations for a retail type business are the same as in the "B-1" District. The parking regulations for a professional type office are the same as in the "B-1" District. 
c.  Motel tourist court. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained on the lot for each tourist or motel unit. 
d.  For use as a dance hall, skating rink, moving picture theater or similar type business, one off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained for each 100 square feet of floor space contained in such building. Such off-street parking spaces may be located on the same lot as the building or on an area within 300 feet of the building. Two or more owners of buildings may join together to provide these parking spaces. All such parking spaces provided hereunder shall be so arranged as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile. 
(6)  Additional use, height and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 11; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 11, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2262, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 2307, § III, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 56-124. - "B-3" Central Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-3" Central Business District. 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Storage in bulk, or warehouse for such material as household goods, clothing, drugs, glass, drygoods, furniture, hardware, groceries, millinery, and shop supplies. 
b.  Wholesale sales room. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed six stories or 75 feet. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the front yard requirements for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses no front yard is required. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the side yard requirements for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses there are no side yard requirements. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the rear yard regulations for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses there are no rear yard regulations. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-3" District. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. The parking regulations for dwellings are the same as those in the "R-3" District. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 12; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 12, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2262, 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 56-125. - "P" Public Use District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "P" Public Use District. 
(1)  Use regulations. The primary use of the land, building, or premises shall be used only for the following: 
a.  Parks, playgrounds. 
b.  Designated water ways, wetlands, open spaces, etc. 
c.  Athletics and recreational facilities open for public use and/or public viewing. 
d.  Community centers, exhibition facilities. 
e.  City, county, state or federal governmental buildings and related facilities. 
f.  Public or private educational institutions, including elementary, middle school, senior high school, colleges, and technical schools. Accessory facilities incidental to operations shall include athletic fields, training arenas, playgrounds, maintenance, etc. 
g.  Non-profit libraries, museums, cultural centers. 
h.  Golf courses. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 56-64. 
(3)  Intensity of use. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than 7,000 square feet and a minimum width of not less than 60 feet. 
(4)  Area regulations. 
a.  Front yard. The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. The minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet. 
(5)  Maximum building coverage. Maximum building coverage as a percentage of lot area shall be 60 percent. 
(6)  Parking regulations. One off-street parking area shall be provided and maintained for each 200 square feet of floor space contained in such building, facility, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2249, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 56-126. - "I-1" Light Industrial District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "I-1" Light Industrial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. Any building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes. 
a.  Any use permitted in the "B-1," "B-2" and "B-3" Districts, except residential uses. 
b.  Manufacturing and assembly plants which are not noxious or offensive by reason of vibrations, smoke, odor, dust, gas or noise. 
c.  Warehousing. 
d.  Amusement redemption machine facilities, provided that no such facility shall be located within 500 feet of a school, church, or residence, measured from property line to property line. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed a height of 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot the minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building of not less than five feet. 
c.  Truck loading. No truck loading operations shall utilize front or side yard space adjacent to a street. 
(4)  Intensity of use. There is no minimum lot area or width requirement. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  The parking regulations for the uses permitted in the "B-1," "B-2" and "B-3" Districts are the same as those in the "B-1," "B-2" and "B-3" Districts respectively. 
b.  For a manufacturing and assembly plant, one parking space for each employee plus one space for each vehicle used in connection with the plant plus one space for each 200 square feet in the retail or wholesale sales room. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 13; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 13, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2267, 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 56-127. - "I-2" Industrial District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "I-2" Industrial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. Any building or premises may be used for any purpose except residential development not in conflict with any ordinance of the city, providing that no building occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such uses shall be approved by the city council following a recommendation by the planning commission: 
a.  Cement and lime manufacture. 
b.  Strip mining. 
c.  Explosives manufacture or storage. 
d.  Fat rendering. 
e.  Garbage, offal or dead animal incineration, reduction or dumping. 
f.  Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards. 
g.  Petroleum refinery. 
h.  Slaughter and dressing of animals (not including poultry and rabbits). 
i.  Stockyards. 
j.  Wholesale storage of gasoline or other petroleum products in car lots or more above ground. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed a height of six stories or 75 feet. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the front yard requirements for the "R-3" District shall apply. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District, the side yard requirements for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses no side yards are required. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the rear yard requirement for the "R-3" District shall apply. For other uses there are no rear yard requirements. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-3" District the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-3" District. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Additional use, height and area regulations. Additional use, height and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 56-64. 
(6)  Parking regulations. Whenever any structure is erected, reconstructed, converted, or structurally altered for any use permitted in this section, one off-street parking space for each employee of the business or commercial use allowed shall be provided and maintained. Such off-street parking spaces may be located on the same lot as the building or in an area within 300 feet of the building. Two or more owners of the buildings may join together providing these parking spaces. All such spaces provided hereunder shall be so arranged as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile. 
(Code 1973, app. A, § 14; Ord. No. 359, 6-14-1955; Ord. No. 437, 5-27-1958; Ord. No. 482, 3-24-1959; Ord. No. 644, 5-14-1963; Ord. No. 660, 7-23-1963; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-1965; Ord. No. 750, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 751, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 752, 4-27-1965; Ord. No. 818, 10-25-1966; Ord. No. 826, 12-13-1966; Ord. No. 971, 7-8-1969; Ord. No. 1114, § 14, 4-24-1973; Ord. No. 1114-B, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 56-128-56-152. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT ZONES 

Sec. 56-153. - Established. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface. Such areas are shown on the city municipal airport zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the state aeronautics commission, Austin, Texas and dated January 23, 1978, which is attached to this article and made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zone. Approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at each end of all runways on the municipal airport for non-precision instrument landings and take-offs. The approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transition surfaces extend outward from a line 250 feet on either side of the centerline of the runway, for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end. The line is parallel to and level with the runway centerlines. The transition surfaces along such runways slope upward and outward one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the point where they intersect the horizontal surface. Further, transition surfaces are established adjacent to approach surfaces for the entire length of the approach surfaces. These transition surfaces have variable widths, as shown on the zoning map. Such transition surfaces flare symmetrically with either side of the runway approach surfaces from the base of such surfaces and slope upward and outward at the rate of one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontal and conical surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zones. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical zone. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 3, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-154. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in questions as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. One foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the elevation of the end of the runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. One foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at any point 250 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of runways extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 419 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. That area beneath the horizontal surface which is located 150 feet above the airport elevation, or a height of 419 feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone. That area beneath the conical surface which is one foot in height fore each 20 feet of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 20 feet above the surface of the land. 
(b)  Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail. 
(c)  For the purpose of determining the height limits as provided in this section, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 1304, §§ 2, 4, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-155. - Use restrictions. 
    Not withstanding any other provisions of this division, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 5, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-156. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this division shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Beeville Bee County joint airport zoning board to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of city. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 6, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-157. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(1)  In the area laying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 5,200 feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 56-154. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated; all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the joint airport zoning board determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this division, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this division. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this division and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the city at its own expense to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of any airport hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 7, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-158. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the joint airport zoning board to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the joint airport zoning board through the office of the city secretary upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this division to be submitted to the joint airport zoning board shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the chairman, joint airport zoning board. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 8, 1-4-1979) 
Sec. 56-159. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the joint airport zoning board made in his administration of this division, if of the opinion that a decision of the joint airport zoning board is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the joint airport zoning board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The chairman of the joint airport zoning board shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the joint airport zoning board certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 10, 1-4-1979) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-10 1-5 1-15 1-6 1-14 2-1 2-206 2-2 2-208 2-3 2-209 3-1 2-227 3-2 2-229 3-3 2-232 3-4 2-228 3-5 2-230 3-7 2-176 4-1 8-1 4-2(A) 8-114 4-2(B) 8-114 4-2(C) 8-114 4-2(D) 8-114 4-2(E) 8-114 4-2(F) 8-114 4-2(I) 8-116 4-2(J) 8-180 4-2(K) 8-181 4-2(L) 8-182 4-2(O) 8-117 4-2(P) 8-35 4-2(Q) 8-34 4-3 8-33 - 8-55 - 8-56 - 8-78 - 8-79 - 8-80 - 8-81 - 8-82 - 8-83 - 8-84 - 8-85 - 8-185 4-4(A) 8-26 4-4(B) 8-27 4-4(C) 8-27 4-4(D) 8-27 4-4(F) 8-182 4-5 8-25 4-6(A) 8-30 4-6(B) 8-31 4-6(C) 8-32 4-6(D) 8-29 4-6(E) 8-119 4-6(F) 8-24 4-6(J) 8-184 4-6(K) 8-183 4-6(L) 8-28 4-6(M) 8-28 4-6(N) 8-28 5-1 10-3 5-2 10-3 5-3 10-3 5-4 10-3 5-5 20-49 5-6 10-226 5-7 10-227 5-8 10-228 5-9 10-229 5-21 10-1 5-22 10-1 5-23 10-2 5-38 10-49 5-39 10-50 5-40 10-51 5-41 10-52 5-53 10-53 5-54 10-54 5-56 10-82 5-66 10-83 5-67 10-84 5-74 10-85 5-75 10-116 5-76 10-117 5-77 10-118 5-78 10-119 5-79 10-120 5-80 10-121 5-81 10-122 5-82 10-123 5-83 10-145 5-84 10-146 5-85 10-147 5-86 10-148 5-87 10-149 5-88 10-150 5-89 10-151 5-90 10-152 5-91 10-153 5-93 10-175 5-94 10-176 5-95 10-177 5-96 10-178 5-97 10-179 5-98 10-180 5-99 10-25 5-101 10-26 5-102 10-27 5-103 10-28 5-104 10-29 5-105 10-30 5-107 10-86 6-1 50-19 6-2 50-20 6-4 28-4 6-5 2-259 7-5 20-53 7-18 20-50 7-19 20-1 7-20 20-50 7-22 20-51 7-23 20-52 7-26 20-55 7-45 20-54 7-46 20-54 7-47 20-54 8-1 44-1 9-1 22-10 9-2 22-11 9-3 22-12 9-4 22-13 9-5 22-1 9-6 22-24 9-7 22-25 9-8 22-26 9-9 22-27 9-10 22-28 9-11 22-39 9-12 22-40 9-13 22-41 9-14 22-42 9-15 22-43 9-16 22-44 9-17 22-45 9-18 22-46 9-19 22-47 9-20 22-48 9-37 54-151 9-39 54-144 9-40 54-149 9-41 54-145 9-42(a) 54-173 9-42(b) 54-144 9-42(c) 54-146 9-43 54-147 9-44 54-152 9-45 54-175 9-46 54-148 9-47 54-174 9-48 54-176 9-49 54-150 9-67 22-65 9-69 22-67 9-70 22-68 9-71 22-69 9-72 22-70 9-73 22-71 9-74 22-72 9-75 22-73 9-76 22-74 9-77 22-75 9-78 22-76 9-90 22-96 9-91 22-97 9-92 22-98 9-93 22-99 9-94 22-100 9-95 22-101 9-96 22-102 9-97 22-103 9-98 22-104 9-99 22-105 9-100 22-106 9-101 22-107 9-102 22-108 9-103 22-109 9-104 22-110 9-105 22-111 9-106 22-112 91/2-1 28-1 91/2-2 28-27 91/2-3 28-28 91/2-4 28-29 91/2-6 28-30 10-1 12-1 10-2 12-1 10-14 12-21 10-15 12-22 10-16 12-23 10-17 12-24 10-18 12-25 10-19 12-26 10-20 12-27 10-21 12-28 11-1 32-1 11-14 32-2 11-21 20-86 11-22 20-87 11-23 20-88 11-24 20-89 11-25 20-90 11-26 20-91 11-27 20-93 11-28 20-92 11-41 30-3 11-42 30-119 11-43 30-122 11-45 30-125 11-46 30-118 14-1 46-1 14-2 46-2 14-3 46-3 14-15 46-25 14-16 46-26 14-17 46-27 14-18 46-28 14-30 46-93 14-31 46-94 14-32 46-95 14-33 46-96 14-34 46-97 14-46 46-60 14-47 46-61 14-48 46-62 14-49 46-63 14-50 46-64 14-51 46-65 14-52 46-66 14-53 46-67 15-1 48-1 15-2 48-2 15-3 48-27 15-4 48-28 15-5 48-29 15-5.1 48-30 15-6 48-49 15-7 48-50 15-8 48-51 15-9 48-3 15-10 48-4 16-1 12-60 16-2 12-91 16-3 12-92 16-4 12-93 16-5 12-94 16-6 12-95 16-7 12-96 16-8 12-97 16-9 12-98 16-10 12-99 16-11 12-100 16-12 12-101 16-13 12-102 16-14 12-103 16-15 12-104 16-16 12-105 16-17 12-106 16-18 12-107 16-19 12-108 16-20 12-109 16-21 12-110 16-22 12-111 16-23 12-112 16-24 12-113 17-1 52-21 17-2 52-21 17-3 52-262 17-4 52-263 17-5 52-264 17-6 52-265 17-7 52-1 17-8 52-1 17-9 52-1 17-10 36-29 17-11 52-22 17-12 52-23 17-15 52-158 17-16 52-159 17-17 52-25 17-30 52-74 17-31 52-75 17-41 52-50 17-51 52-94 17-53 52-95 17-55 52-96 17-64 52-136 17-65 52-137 17-72 52-192 17-73 52-193 17-74 52-190 17-76 52-194 17-77 52-191 17-88 52-224 17-89 52-208 17-90 52-209 17-91 52-210 17-92 52-211 18-6 54-22 18-8 54-24 18-9 54-23 18-10 54-1 app. A, § 2 56-1 app. A, § 3 56-2 app. A, § 4 56-59 app. A, § 4 56-60 app. A, § 4 56-61 app. A, § 4 56-62 app. A, § 5 56-116 app. A, § 6 56-117 app. A, §7 56-118 app. A, § 8 56-119 app. A, § 9 56-120 app. A, § 10 56-122 app. A, § 11 56-123 app. A, § 12 56-124 app. A, § 13 56-126 app. A, § 14 56-127 app. A, § 15 56-64 app. A, § 16 56-5 app. A, § 17 56-31 app. A, § 18 56-33 app. A, § 19 56-32 app. A, § 20 56-63 app. A, § 21 56-29 app. A, § 22 56-30 app. A, § 23 56-35 app. A, § 24 56-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 3 - 50-20 Ord. No. 31 2 46-60 3 46-61 4 46-62 5 46-63 6 46-64 7 46-65, 46-66 8 46-67 Ord. No. 50 - 22-1 Ord. No. 51 1 54-174 2 54-148 3 54-175 4 54-176 4A 54-150 Ord. No. 1133 I 2-259 II 2-259 Ord. No. 38 7-3-1912 - 46-2 Ord. No. 43 10-7-1912 - 46-60-46-67 Ord. No. 59 4-6-1914 - 54-150 Ord. No. 62 6-24-1915 1 22-11 Ord. No. 87 2-8-1921 1 46-3 Ord. No. 118 6-9-1925 1 22-44 2 22-45 3 22-46 4 22-48 5 22-47 Ord. No. 167A 7-29-1929 1 12-1 3 12-1 Ord. No. 210 2-13-1940 - 50-19 Ord. No. 243 10-28-1943 - 52-74 Ord. No. 245 12-12-1944 1 22-65 2 22-66 3 22-67 4 22-68 5 22-70 6 22-71 7 22-69 8 22-72 9 22-73 10 22-74 11 22-75 12 22-76 Ord. No. 250 4-9-1946 III 54-24 Ord. No. 252 5-29-1946 4 52-50 15 52-137 16 52-94 17 52-96 22 52-95 Ord. No. 253 7-11-1946 1 12-60 Ord. No. 310 9-8-1952 - 52-74 Ord. No. 311 9-24-1952 1 20-53 2 20-53 Ord. No. 313 10-13-1952 - 52-74 Ord. No. 316 12-8-1952 - 52-22 Ord. No. 326 4-13-1953 9 20-54 10 20-54 11 20-54 Ord. No. 327 5-11-1953 1 12-91 2(b) 12-99 2(c) 12-94 3(f) 12-92 4(b) 12-92 4(c) 12-92 4(d) 12-93 4(e) 12-96 4(f) 12-95 - 12-98 5 12-97 6 12-100 6(a) 12-101 6(b) 12-103 6(c) 12-102 6(d) 12-105 6(e) 12-104 7 12-106, 12-107 8 12-108 10 12-109 11 12-112 12 12-110 13 12-111 17 12-113 Ord. No. 328 5-27-1953 1 54-147 Ord. No. 329 6-11-1953 1 2-206 2 2-209 3 2-208 Ord. No. 341 3-9-1954 - 52-75 - 52-136 Ord. No. 344 6-8-1954 - 52-22 Ord. No. 347 7-13-1954 1 46-1 Ord. No. 350 9-28-1954 - 52-22 Ord. No. 356 3-8-1955 - 52-22 Ord. No. 359 6-14-1955 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 439 7-8-1955 - 52-22 Ord. No. 440 7-8-1955 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 362 9-13-1955 1 12-98 Ord. No. 363 9-13-1955 1 22-10 2 22-1 Ord. No. 457 11-11-1955 - 52-23 Ord. No. 366 12-13-1955 - 52-74 Ord. No. 391 1-9-1956 - 52-22 Ord. No. 373 2-14-1956 - 52-136 Ord. No. 377 3-13-1956 - 52-22 Ord. No. 397 2-12-1957 - 52-22 Ord. No. 398 2-12-1957 - 52-23 Ord. No. 403 4-9-1957 - 52-74 Ord. No. 405 4-15-1957 I 2-206 Ord. No. 416 9-24-1957 - 52-23 Ord. No. 418 10-22-1957 12 54-149 14 54-145 34 54-144 35 54-144 - 54-146 - 54-173 Ord. No. 423 3-11-1958 - 52-74 - 52-193 Ord. No. 425 3-25-1958 I 12-94 Ord. No. 426 3-25-1958 - 52-74 Ord. No. 432 4-22-1958 - 52-22 Ord. No. 434 4-22-1958 - 52-192 Ord. No. 437 5-27-1958 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 441 7-8-1958 1 12-22 2 12-21, 12-23 3 12-24 4 12-25 6 12-26 7 12-27 8 12-21 9 12-28 Ord. No. 445 7-22-1958 - 52-22 Ord. No. 447 8-26-1958 - 52-74 Ord. No. 446 9-22-1958 - 52-23 Ord. No. 450 10-14-1958 - 52-74 Ord. No. 456 11-11-1958 - 52-22 Ord. No. 458 11-11-1958 - 52-22 Ord. No. 467 1-27-1959 1 22-24 2 22-25 3 22-26 4 22-27 5 22-27 6 22-28 Ord. No. 469 1-27-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 470 1-27-1959 - 52-22 Ord. No. 475 2-24-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 482 3-24-1959 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 483 3-24-1959 - 52-22 Ord. No. 484 4-14-1959 - 52-23 Ord. No. 485 4-14-1959 - 52-22 Ord. No. 488 5-12-1959 1 12-97 Ord. No. 489 5-12-1959 - 52-22 Ord. No. 490 5-12-1959 - 52-23 Ord. No. 492 5-26-1959 - 52-23 Ord. No. 497 8-11-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 498 8-11-1959 - 52-25 Ord. No. 503 8-30-1959 - 52-192 Ord. No. 506 9-8-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 515 10-10-1959 - 52-191 - 52-194 Ord. No. 509 10-13-1959 IV 52-50 XV 52-137 XVI 52-94 XVII 52-96 Ord. No. 510 10-13-1959 - 52-74 - 52-136 Ord. No. 511 10-13-1959 - 52-192 Ord. No. 514 11-10-1959 - 52-23 Ord. No. 516 11-10-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 518 12-8-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 462 12-19-1959 - 52-74 Ord. No. 519 1-12-1960 - 52-136 Ord. No. 520 1-12-1960 - 52-192, 52-193 Ord. No. 521 2-9-1960 - 52-74 Ord. No. 531 4-26-1960 IV 52-136 - 52-25 - 52-74 Ord. No. 532 5-10-1960 - 52-74 Ord. No. 533 5-10-1960 - 52-22 Ord. No. 540 7-12-1960 - 52-22 Ord. No. 542 7-26-1960 - 2-259 Ord. No. 546 8-9-1960 - 52-23 Ord. No. 549 9-24-1960 I 52-224 II 52-209 III 52-208 IV 52-210 V 52-211 Ord. No. 550 9-27-1960 - 52-23 Ord. No. 553 11-8-1960 - 52-23 Ord. No. 555 11-8-1960 - 52-74 Ord. No. 557 1-10-1961 - 52-23 Ord. No. 558 1-10-1961 1 52-96 Ord. No. 594 1-10-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 595 1-10-1961 - 52-23 Ord. No. 561 1-24-1961 I 46-93 II 46-94 Ord. No. 596 1-24-1961 - 52-74 Ord. No. 561 2-14-1961 IV 46-96 V 46-97 Ord. No. 564 2-14-1961 - 52-74 Ord. No. 572 3-21-1961 - 52-74 Ord. No. 574 3-28-1961 - 52-74 Ord. No. 577 4-25-1961 - 52-23 Ord. No. 578 4-25-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 777 4-25-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 581 5-9-1961 - 52-74 Ord. No. 561 5-24-1961 III 46-95 Ord. No. 587 7-25-1961 - 52-159 Ord. No. 588 8-22-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 589 9-12-1961 - 52-74 - 52-193 Ord. No. 592 9-26-1961 - 52-192 Ord. No. 593 9-26-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 728 10-10-1961 - 52-23 Ord. No. 597 11-28-1961 - 52-22 Ord. No. 602 2-13-1962 - 52-22 Ord. No. 603 2-13-1962 - 52-23 Ord. No. 608 2-27-1962 1 52-1 2 52-1 3 52-1 Ord. No. 607 3-13-1962 - 52-74 Ord. No. 612 5-8-1962 I 46-25 II 46-26 III 46-27 IV 46-28 Ord. No. 631 5-8-1962 - 52-74 Ord. No. 615 6-26-1962 - 52-136 Ord. No. 619 8-7-1962 I 52-208 Ord. No. 621 9-11-1962 - 52-22 Ord. No. 624 10-23-1962 II 12-100, 12-101 - 12-103 Ord. No. 626 11-13-1962 - 52-74 Ord. No. 599 12-26-1962 1 28-4 Ord. No. 632 1-8-1963 - 52-136 Ord. No. 633 1-8-1963 1 12-21 - 12-23 3 12-21 Ord. No. 634 1-22-1963 - 52-192 Ord. No. 635 1-22-1963 - 52-22 Ord. No. 637 2-12-1963 - 52-136 Ord. No. 638 2-12-1963 II 48-27 III 48-28 IV 48-29 V 48-49 - 48-1 VI 48-50 VII 48-51 VIII 48-3 X 48-4 Ord. No. 643 5-14-1963 I 22-10 II 22-12 III 22-13 Ord. No. 644 5-14-1963 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 645 5-14-1963 - 52-22 Ord. No. 646 5-14-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 647 5-14-1963 - 52-74 Ord. No. 653 6-11-1963 - 52-74 Ord. No. 655 6-11-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 886 6-11-1963 VII 20-49 Ord. No. 657 6-25-1963 - 52-74 Ord. No. 660 7-23-1963 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 662 8-13-1963 - 52-25 Ord. No. 665 8-13-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 666 8-13-1963 II(a) 12-21 II(c) 12-21 II(e) 12-21 II(b) 12-23 II(b) 12-23 Ord. No. 668 8-27-1963 - 52-136 Ord. No. 671 8-27-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 672 8-27-1963 - 52-22 Ord. No. 673 8-27-1963 - 52-136 Ord. No. 677 9-10-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 680 9-24-1963 - 52-22 Ord. No. 682 10-8-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 681 10-17-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 686 11-12-1963 - 52-23 Ord. No. 689 11-12-1963 - 52-159 Ord. No. 687 12-12-1963 - 52-22 Ord. No. 695 2-25-1964 - 52-23 Ord. No. 698 3-24-1964 - 52-159 Ord. No. 699 3-24-1964 - 52-23 - 52-25 Ord. No. 700 4-14-1964 1 52-1 Ord. No. 701 4-14-1964 - 52-74, 52-75 Ord. No. 702 5-12-1964 - 52-23 Ord. No. 703 5-12-1964 - 52-22 Ord. No. 706 5-12-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 710 6-9-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 711 7-14-1964 - 52-22 Ord. No. 712 7-14-1964 - 52-23 Ord. No. 721 10-12-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 722 10-13-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 723 10-13-1964 - 52-192 Ord. No. 724 10-13-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 725 11-10-1964 - 52-74 Ord. No. 726 11-10-1964 - 52-22 Ord. No. 727 11-10-1964 - 52-193 Ord. No. 737 1-12-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 739 1-26-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 740 1-26-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 748 3-23-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 749 4-13-1965 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 750 4-27-1965 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 751 4-27-1965 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 752 4-27-1965 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 753 5-11-1965 II 36-29 Ord. No. 755 5-27-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 759 7-27-1965 1 32-1 Ord. No. 763 8-24-1965 I 48-29 II 48-50 Ord. No. 764 9-14-1965 1 10-226 2 10-227 3 10-228 4 10-229 Ord. No. 771 10-26-1965 - 52-74 Ord. No. 772 10-28-1965 - 52-25 Ord. No. 774 11-9-1965 - 52-22 Ord. No. 776 11-23-1965 - 52-74 Ord. No. 780 12-14-1965 - 52-193 Ord. No. 783 1-25-1966 - 52-22 Ord. No. 784 1-25-1966 - 52-192 Ord. No. 782 2-3-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 787 2-22-1966 - 52-75 Ord. No. 792 3-8-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 793 3-8-1966 - 52-25 Ord. No. 794 3-8-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 800 4-26-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 802 4-26-1966 - 52-136 Ord. No. 807 6-14-1966 - 52-22 Ord. No. 808 6-14-1966 - 52-23 Ord. No. 810 6-14-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 789 7-8-1966 - 52-192 Ord. No. 814 8-23-1966 I 2-176 II 2-176 Ord. No. 818 10-25-1966 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 819 10-25-1966 - 52-136 Ord. No. 821 11-8-1966 - 52-136 Ord. No. 822 11-8-1966 - 52-22 Ord. No. 823 11-22-1966 - 52-74 Ord. No. 826 12-13-1966 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 828 12-13-1966 - 52-23 Ord. No. 827 12-23-1966 1 12-107 Ord. No. 831 1-10-1967 I 22-10 Ord. No. 835 2-14-1967 - 52-75 Ord. No. 839 3-14-1967 - 52-136 Ord. No. 841 4-11-1967 - 52-192 Ord. No. 843A 5-9-1967 - 52-22 Ord. No. 849 6-13-1967 - 52-74 Ord. No. 857 10-24-1967 - 52-22 Ord. No. 858 10-24-1967 - 52-136 Ord. No. 859 10-24-1967 - 52-136 Ord. No. 860 10-24-1967 - 52-74 Ord. No. 861 10-24-1967 - 52-74 Ord. No. 862 10-24-1967 - 52-136 Ord. No. 863 10-24-1967 - 52-192 Ord. No. 864 10-24-1967 - 52-193 Ord. No. 872 11-28-1967 - 52-22 Ord. No. 873 12-12-1967 - 52-23 Ord. No. 874 12-12-1967 - 52-22 Ord. No. 875 12-12-1967 - 52-74 Ord. No. 877 12-12-1967 - 52-74 - 52-136 Ord. No. 879 1-9-1968 - 52-22 Ord. No. 883 2-27-1968 I 52-262 II 52-263 III 52-264 IV 52-265 Ord. No. 886 3-12-1968 I 10-1 II 10-3 III 10-3 IV 10-3 V 10-3 VI 10-1 VII 10-2 Ord. No. 892 4-23-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 893 4-23-1968 - 52-136 Ord. No. 894 4-23-1968 - 52-23 Ord. No. 898 5-14-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 905 6-11-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 906 6-11-1968 - 52-25 Ord. No. 907 6-11-1968 - 52-23 Ord. No. 908 6-11-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 912 6-25-1968 - 52-136 Ord. No. 916 7-23-1968 1 52-25 Ord. No. 919 7-23-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 923 8-27-1968 - 52-192 Ord. No. 924 8-27-1968 I 2-227 II 2-228 III 2-230 IV 2-232 V 2-229 Ord. No. 932 9-24-1968 - 52-23 Ord. No. 933 9-30-1968 - 52-74 Ord. No. 941 11-26-1968 - 52-136 Ord. No. 946 2-11-1969 I 22-96 II 22-97 III 22-101 IV 22-98 V 22-102 VI 22-100 VII 22-99 VIII 22-103 IX 22-107 X 22-104 XI 22-105 XII 22-106 XIII 22-108 XIV 22-109 XV 22-110 XVI 22-112 XVII 22-111 Ord. No. 947 2-25-1969 1 12-111 Ord. No. 949 2-25-1969 - 52-74 Ord. No. 950 2-25-1969 - 52-74 Ord. No. 951 2-25-1969 - 52-22 Ord. No. 952 2-25-1969 - 52-23 Ord. No. 953 2-25-1969 - 52-22 Ord. No. 963 5-27-1969 - 52-193 Ord. No. 964 5-27-1969 - 52-22 Ord. No. 970 6-24-1969 - 52-22 Ord. No. 971 7-8-1969 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 979 8-26-1969 - 52-74 Ord. No. 980 8-26-1969 - 52-192 Ord. No. 983 9-23-1969 I 54-1 II 54-1 III 54-1 IV 54-1 Ord. No. 984 9-23-1969 - 52-192 Ord. No. 985 10-28-1969 1 22-10 II 44-1 Ord. No. 987 10-28-1969 - 52-192 Ord. No. 988 10-28-1969 - 52-192 Ord. No. 989 11-13-1969 - 52-159 - 52-192 Ord. No. 991 11-25-1969 - 52-193 Ord. No. 994 2-24-1970 - 52-190 - 52-193 Ord. No. 999 3-10-1970 - 52-158, 52-159 Ord. No. 1004 4-28-1970 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1005 4-28-1970 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1012 5-26-1970 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1016 7-28-1970 1 22-40 II 22-39 III 22-42 4 22-41 5 22-43 Ord. No. 1024 12-8-1970 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1027 12-22-1970 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1033 2-9-1971 1 20-50 2 20-1 3 20-50 5 20-51 6 20-55 9 20-52 Ord. No. 1034 2-23-1971 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1037 5-11-1971 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1038 5-25-1971 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1040 5-25-1971 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1041 5-25-1971 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1044 6-22-1971 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1047 7-27-1971 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1058 10-23-1971 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1059 10-23-1971 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1055 10-26-1971 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1056 10-26-1971 2 52-21 Ord. No. 1060 11-23-1971 - 52-25 Ord. No. 1062 11-23-1971 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1069 1-25-1972 I 48-1, 48-2 - 48-27-48-29 - 48-50 Ord. No. 1070 1-25-1972 - 52-194 Ord. No. 1071 1-25-1972 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1077 2-14-1972 5 54-152 8(a) 54-23 9(a) 54-151 Ord. No. 1075 2-22-1972 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1076 2-22-1972 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1081 3-28-1972 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1082 3-28-1972 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1092 9-26-1972 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1093 9-26-1972 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1101 1-23-1973 5 54-22 7 54-1 8 54-24 Ord. No. 1102 1-23-1973 2 44-1 Ord. No. 1103 1-23-1973 1 30-3 2 30-119 3 30-122 5 30-125 6 30-118 Ord. No. 1107 2-27-1973 1 52-192 Ord. No. 1112 4-10-1973 1 28-1 2 28-27 3 28-28 4 28-29 6 28-30 Ord. No. 1114 4-24-1973 2 56-1 3 56-2 4 56-59-56-62 5 56-116 6 56-117 7 56-118 8 56-119 9 56-120 10 56-122 11 56-123 12 56-124 13 56-126 14 56-127 15 56-64 16 56-5 17 56-31 18 56-33 19 56-32 20 56-63 21 56-29 22 56-30 23 56-35 24 56-3 Ord. No. 1115 4-24-1973 2 48-2 Ord. No. 1116 4-24-1973 1 48-30 2 48-30 Ord. No. 1118 5-8-1973 art. III, § 1 10-49 art. III, § 2 10-50 art. III, § 3 10-51 art. III, § 4 10-52 art. IV, § 11 10-53 art. IV, § 12 10-54 art. V, § 1 10-82 art. V, § 11 10-83 art. V, § 12 10-84 art. V, § 19 10-85 art. VI, § 1 10-116 art. VI, § 2 10-117 art. VI, § 3 10-118 art. VI, § 4 10-119 art. VI, § 5 10-120 art. VI, § 6 10-121 art. VI, § 7 10-122 art. VI, § 8 10-123 art. VII, § 1 10-145 art. VII, § 2 10-146 art. VII, § 3 10-147 art. VII, § 4 10-148 art. VII, § 5 10-149 art. VII, § 6 10-150 art. VII, § 7 10-151 art. VII, § 8 10-152 art. VII, § 9 10-153 art. VIII, § 2 10-175 art. VIII, § 3 10-176 art. VIII, § 4 10-177 art. VIII, § 5 10-178 art. VIII, § 6 10-179 art. VIII, § 7 10-180 art. IX, § 1 10-25 art. IX, § 3 10-26 art. IX, § 4 10-27 art. IX, § 5 10-28 art. IX, § 6 10-29 art. IX, § 7 10-30 art. X, § 2 10-86 Ord. No. 1121 5-22-1973 1 12-111 Ord. No. 1125 6-12-1973 1 2-206 Ord. No. 1129 8-14-1973 4 32-2 Ord. No. 1132 8-28-1973 1 20-86 2 20-87 3 20-88 4 20-89 5 20-90 6 20-91 7 20-93 8 20-92 Ord. No. 1135 9-11-1973 1 8-1 2 8-34, 8-35 - 8-114 2(H) 8-180 2(K) 8-180 2(L) 8-181, 8-182 2(O) 8-117 2(P) 8-117 3 8-33 - 8-55, 8-56 - 8-78-8-85 - 8-185 4 8-26, 8-27 4(Q) 8-182 5 8-25 6 8-28-8-32 6(J) 8-24 - 8-183, 8-184 II(J) 8-116 VI(I) 8-119 Ord. No. 1138 9-25-1973 1 52-136 Ord. No. 1149 2-12-1974 2 52-194 Ord. No. 1150 2-12-1974 1 52-192 Ord. No. 1158 3-26-1974 1 52-23 Ord. No. 1160 4-23-1974 2 52-22, 52-23 3 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1165 5-28-1974 1 52-74 Ord. No. 1178 7-23-1974 1 52-159 Ord. No. 1179 8-13-1974 1 12-111 Ord. No. 1183 9-24-1974 1 52-192 Ord. No. 1184 9-24-1974 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1185 9-24-1974 1 52-74 Ord. No. 1186 9-24-1974 1 52-194 2 52-194 Ord. No. 1196 1-14-1975 5 54-152 8 54-23 9 54-151 Ord. No. 1200 3-25-1975 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1201 3-25-1975 - 56-4 Ord. No. 1206 5-27-1975 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1210 8-26-1975 I 52-74 II 52-74 Ord. No. 1212 8-26-1975 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1213 8-26-1975 - 52-208 Ord. No. 1214 8-26-1975 I 52-74 II 52-74 Ord. No. 1215 8-26-1975 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1218 10-28-1975 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1220 11-25-1975 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1221 11-25-1975 - 52-194 Ord. No. 1229 2-24-1976 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1244 8-24-1976 I 52-74 Ord. No. 1255 3-8-1977 I 56-29 II 26-30 Ord. No. 1275 11-22-1977 I 52-75 Ord. No. 1278 12-13-1977 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1279 12-13-1977 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1280 1-10-1978 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1281 1-10-1978 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1283 2-14-1978 2 2-176 Ord. No. 1292 6-13-1978 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1294 7-25-1978 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1295 7-25-1978 - 52-75 Ord. No. 1270 9-27-1978 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1298 10-10-1978 - 52-27 Ord. No. 1299 10-10-1978 1 52-136 Ord. No. 1304 1-4-1979 2 56-2, 56-154 3 56-153 4 56-154 5 56-155 6 56-156 7 56-157 8 56-158 10 56-159 Ord. No. 1307 2-27-1979 - 50-135 Ord. No. 1315 5-22-1979 - 48-52 Ord. No. 1336 3-27-1980 3 32-27 4 32-28 5 32-29 6 32-30 Ord. No. 1381 4-14-1981 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1382 5-12-1981 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1383 6-9-1981 I 12-111 Ord. No. 1389 7-14-1981 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1411 3-9-1982 - 52-76 Ord. No. 1431 10-12-1982 - 52-25 Ord. No. 1449 2-22-1983 II 54-112 III 54-109 IV 54-108 V 54-112 VI 54-113 VII 54-114 VIII 54-114, 54-115 IX 54-110 Ord. No. 1452 3-15-1983 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1466 7-26-1983 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1468 9-13-1983 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1471 9-27-1983 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1474 10-11-1983 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1475 10-11-1983 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1476 10-11-1983 - 52-25 Ord. No. 1478 10-25-1983 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1481 12-13-1983 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1486 2-28-1984 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1498 7-24-1984 I 54-113 Ord. No. 1498 7-24-1984 II 54-114, 54-115 Ord. No. 1501 7-24-1984 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1505 8-28-1984 I 36-1 II 36-1 Ord. No. 1503 10-1-1984 I 12-26 Ord. No. 1520-A 11-13-1984 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1530 7-23-1985 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1531 7-23-1985 I 52-23 Ord. No. 1533 8-13-1985 I 52-206, 52-207 II 52-208 - 52-223 III 52-224 IV 52-212 V 52-225, 52-226 Ord. No. 1539 11-12-1985 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1540 11-26-1985 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1547 2-25-1986 1 52-241 Ord. No. 1551 4-29-1986 1 54-108 2 54-114 3 54-113 4 54-113 Ord. No. 1556 5-27-1986 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1560 6-24-1986 - 52-76 - 52-76 Ord. No. 1561 6-24-1986 1 16-21, 16-22 2 16-21 3 16-23 4 16-24 5 16-25 6 16-26 7 16-27 9 16-28 Ord. No. 1564 8-26-1986 1 32-49 2 32-50 3 32-51 4 32-52 6 32-53 Ord. No. 1575 2-10-1987 - 52-212 Ord. No. 1583 4-28-1987 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1589 10-13-1987 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1590 10-13-1987 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1591 10-13-1987 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1592 10-13-1987 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1593 10-13-1987 - 52-25 Ord. No. 1594 10-27-1987 - 52-27 Ord. No. 1607 8-9-1988 - 52-192 - 52-194 Ord. No. 1617 10-10-1988 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1621 2-14-1989 I 8-1 II 8-34, 8-35 - 8-114 II(H) 8-180 II(I) 8-116 II(J) 8-180 II(K) 8-181 II(L) 8-182 II(N) 8-117 II(O) 8-117 III 8-33 - 8-55, 8-56 - 8-78-8-85 III(J) 8-185 IV 8-26, 8-27 IV(P) 8-182 V 8-25 VI 8-28-8-32 VI 8-183, 8-184 VI(E) 8-119 VI(F) 8-24 Ord. No. 1627 5-9-1989 II 54-52 III 54-53 IV 54-52 V 54-54 Ord. No. 1630 7-11-1989 - 52-158 Ord. No. 1633 8-15-1989 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1635 9-19-1989 I 22-105 II 22-104 III 22-108 Ord. No. 1637 9-26-1989 III 6-16 Ord. No. 1429 10-12-1989 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1647 12-12-1989 - 52-160 Ord. No. 1647-A 12-12-1989 - 52-24 Ord. No. 1642 12-20-1989 - 50-19 Ord. No. 1643 1-9-1990 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1646 2-13-1990 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1655 7-3-1990 - 52-75 Ord. No. 1656 7-3-1990 - 52-160 Ord. No. 1658 7-24-1990 - 52-74 - 52-136 Ord. of 10-23-1990 10-23-1990 1 36-23 2 36-23 3 36-24 4 36-24 5 36-24 6 36-24 7 36-24 8 36-24 9 36-24 10 36-24 11 36-24 12 36-24 13 36-24 14 36-24, 36-25 15 36-24, 36-26 16 36-24 17 36-24 18 36-29 20 36-27 23 36-28 Ord. No. 1686 4-16-1991 - 44-28 Ord. No. 1690 4-23-1991 I 54-24 II 54-24 III 54-24 IV 54-24 V 54-24 VI 54-24 VII 54-24 VIII 54-24 IX 54-24 Ord. No. 1695 6-11-1991 1 50-131 2 50-132 3 50-133 4 50-134 Ord. No. 1696 6-11-1991 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1697 6-11-1991 - 52-23 Ord. No. 1698 6-11-1991 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1699 6-11-1991 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1700 6-11- 1991 - 52-75 Ord. No. 1702 8-13-1991 - 50-133 Ord. No. 1705 10-22-1991 - 52-160 Ord. No. 1710 11-26-1991 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1712 11-26-1991 II 44-1 III 44-25 IV 44-25 V 44-28 VI 44-28 VII 44-26 VIIIF 44-27 IX 44-28 X 44-28 XI 44-29 Ord. No. 1728 7-14-1992 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1729 7-14-1992 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1730 8-11-1992 I 36-24 II 36-23 III 36-24 IV 36-24 VI 36-24 VII 36-24 VIII 36-24 IX 36-24 X 36-24 XI 36-24 XII 36-2 - 36-24 XIII 36-24 XIV 36-24 - 36-25 XV 36-24 - 36-26 XVI 36-24 XVII 36-24 XVIII 36-29 XIX 36-29 XX 36-27 Ord. No. 1732 9-8-1992 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1736 10-27-1992 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1738 11-10-1992 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1739 11-10-1992 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1740 11-10-1992 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1745 3-9-1993 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1751 10-12-1993 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1753 10-12-1993 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1754 10-12-1993 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1755 10-12-1993 - 52-27 Ord. No. 1766 3-22-1994 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1772 6-14-1994 - 52-158, 52-159 Ord. No. 1774 6-14-1994 - 52-76 Ord. No. 1775 6-14-1994 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1779 6-28-1994 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1787 9-13-1994 - 56-121 Ord. No. 1788 9-27-1994 - 50-44 Ord. No. 1784B 10-23-1994 - 52-160 Ord. No. 1792 10-25-1994 I 16-1 Ord. No. 1794 10-25-1994 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1796 11-22-1994 1 56-2 2 56-122 3 56-122 Ord. No. 1811 8-22-1995 - 52-22 - 52-74 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1819 12-12-1995 1 16-60 2 16-61 3 16-64 4 16-62 5(A) 16-63 - 16-64 5(B) 16-63 6(A) 16-65 6(B) 16-66 6(C) 16-67 7 16-65 Ord. No. 1822 2-13-1996 A 54-206 1 54-207 2.1 54-238 2.2 54-267 2.3 54-268 2.4 54-239 3.1 54-269 3.2 54-270 3.3 54-240 3.4 54-241 4.2 54-289 4.3 54-290 4.4 54-291 4.5 54-292 4.6 54-293 4.7 54-294 5.1 54-295 5.2 54-296 5.3 54-297 5.4 54-298 5.5 54-299 5.6 54-300 5.7 54-301 5.8 54-242 6.2 54-302 6.3 54-303 6.4 54-304 6.5 54-305 6.6 54-306 6.7 54-307 6.8 54-308 6.9 54-309 6.10 54-310 6.11 54-311 6.12 54-312 6.13 54-313 7.2 54-314 8 54-315 9 54-316 10 54-317 11.1 54-318 11.2 54-318 11.3 54-318 11.4 54-318 12.3 54-319 12.4 54-320 13.1 54-244 13.3 54-243 13.4 54-321 14 54-322 Ord. No. 1826 3-26-1996 I 36-47 II 36-48 III 36-49 IV 36-50 V 36-51 Ord. No. 1832 9-10-1996 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1833 9-10-1996 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1836 11-12-1996 2 10-252 3 10-253 4 10-254 5 10-254 Ord. No. 1839 12-17-1996 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1845 2-11-1997 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1846 2-11-1997 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1847 2-11-1997 - 52-25, 52-26 Ord. No. 1856 9-9-1997 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1850 10-14-1997 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1862 10-14-1997 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1863 10-14-1997 - 52-74 - 52-76 Ord. No. 1864 10-28-1997 - 52-76 Ord. No. 885 3-12-1998 I 48-49 Ord. No. 1875 6-30-1998 1 28-1 2 28-27 3 28-28 4 28-29 6 28-3 7 28-30 Ord. No. 1878 10-27-1998 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1879 10-27-1998 - 52-193 Ord. No. 1880 10-27-1998 - 52-25 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1887 4-13-1999 - 36-2 Ord. No. 1893 5-25-1999 1 2-206 2 2-206 Ord. No. 1901 11-9-1999 1 12-141 2 12-143 3 12-144 4 12-145 Ord. No. 1924 9-26-2000 - 52-22 Ord. No. 1925 9-26-2000 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1927 10-10-2000 1 50-62 2 50-63 3 50-64 4 50-65 5 50-66 6 50-67 7 50-68 8 50-69 9 50-70 10 50-71 Ord. No. 1928 10-10-2000 - 2-264 Ord. No. 1932 12-12-2000 I 4-1 II 4-2 III 4-3 IV 4-25 V 4-90 VI 4-91 VIII 4-92 IX 4-93 X 4-94 XI 4-95 XII 4-26 XIV 4-58 XV 4-59 XVI 4-89 XVII 4-60 XVIII 4-62 XIX 4-63 XX 4-64 XXI 4-65 XXII 4-61 Ord. No. 1937 6-26-2001 2 56-34 3 56-34 4 56-34 Ord. No. 1946 10-23-2001 I 8-55 - 8-78-8-85 - 8-185 I(A) 8-34, 8-35 - 8-114 - 8-116, 8-117 - 8-180-8-182 I(B) 8-33 I(C) 8-33 I(D) 8-33 - 8-56 I(E) 8-26 I(F) 8-26, 8-27 - 8-182 I(G) 8-27 - 8-182 Ord. No. 1844 11-13-2001 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1947 11-13-2001 - 52-26 Ord. No. 1948 11-13-2001 - 52-160 Ord. No. 1949 11-13-2001 - 52-192 Ord. No. 1992 9-10-2002 1.3 30-1 art. 2 30-3 3.1 30-44 3.2 30-44 3.3 30-44 3.4 30-44 3.5 30-44 3.6 30-45 4.1 30-64 4.2 30-65 5.1 30-88 5.2 30-89 5.3 30-90 5.4 30-91 6.1 30-92 6.2 44-2 6.3 30-44 7.1 30-93 7.2 30-93 8.2 44-30 8.3 44-30 8.4 44-30 8.5 44-30 8.6 44-30 9.1 30-94 Ord. No. 1993 9-10-2002 - 52-74 Ord. No. 1994 9-10-2002 - 52-159 Ord. No. 1995 9-10-2002 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 1998 11-12-2002 I 8-1 II 8-34, 8-35 II(H) 8-180 II(J) 8-180 II(K) 8-181 II(L) 8-182 II(N) 8-117 II(O) 8-117 III 8-33 - 8-55, 8-56 - 8-78-8-85 III(O) 8-185 IV 8-26, 8-27 IV(P) 8-182 V 8-25 VI 8-28-8-32 - 8-114 - 8-116 - 8-183, 8-184 VI(E) 8-119 VI(F) 8-24 Ord. No. 2000 1-28-2003 1 12-140 2 12-141 3 12-142 Ord. No. 2004 2-25-2003 1 12-141 2 12-142 Ord. No. 2005 3-11-2003 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2006 3-11-2003 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2008 5-13-2003 1 2-227 2 2-228 3 2-230 4 2-232 5 2-231 6 2-229 Ord. No. 2015 10-14-2003 - 36-2 Ord. No. 2016 10-14-2003 - 52-159 Ord. No. 2017 11-25-2003 - 52-192 Ord. No. 2019 12-9-2003 - 52-160 Ord. No. 2020 12-9-2003 - 52-25 Ord. No. 2024 1-27-2004 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2025 3-9-2004 1 10-1 Ord. No. 2030 7-13-2004 1 14-67 2 14-68 3 14-69 7 14-69 Ord. No. 2031 7-13-2004 1 14-97 - 14-99 Ord. No. 2033 7-27-2004 1 42-1 2 42-2 3 42-3 4 42-4 5 42-4 6 42-5 7 42-6 8 42-7 9 42-8 10 42-9 11 42-10 12 42-11 13 42-12 14 42-13 15 42-14 16 42-15 Ord. No. 2035 8-10-2004 - 52-25 Ord. No. 2042 11-23-2004 1 42-7 Ord. No. 2049 4-12-2005 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2050 4-12-2005 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2054 7-26-2005 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2081 8-22-2006 I(A) 8-1 II 8-180 IV 8-83 - 8-182 IV(A) 8-26 IV(B) 8-27 IV(C) 8-27 IV(D) 8-27 V 8-25 VI 8-115 - 8-118 VI(F) 8-24 VI(L) 8-28 VI(M) 8-28 VI(N) 8-28 Ord. No. 2082 9-12-2006 2 12-176 3 12-177 4 12-175 5 12-174 Ord. No. 2090 2-13-2007 2 10-199 3 10-200 4 10-201 Ord. No. 2094 3-27-2007 1 50-100 2 50-101 Ord. No. 2101 6-12-2007 1 10-200 Ord. No. 2102 6-26-2007 - 52-192 Ord. No. 2104 6-26-2007 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 2122 3-25-2008 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2123 3-25-2008 - 52-193 Ord. No. 2124 3-25-2008 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2125 3-25-2008 - 52-192 Ord. No. 2156 7-14-2008 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2144 1-13-2009 1 52-1 2 52-1 3 52-1 Ord. No. 2147 2-24-2009 - 52-75 Ord. No. 2148 2-24-2009 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2149 2-24-2009 - 52-192 Ord. No. 2151 3-10-2009 - 52-76 Ord. No. 2155 6-23-2009 1 54-82 Ord. No. 2160 10-13-2009 - 52-192 Ord. No. 2063 11-24-2009 - 2-260 Ord. No. 2067 2-9-2010 - 52-160 Ord. No. 2068 2-9-2010 - 52-160 Ord. No. 2071 4-14-2010 art. I, § B 18-20 art. I, § C 18-21 art. I, § D 18-22 art. 2 18-19 art. 3, § A 18-23 art. 3, § B 18-24 art. 3, § C 18-25 art. 3, § D 18-26 art. 3, § E 18-27 art. 3, § F 18-28 art. 3, § G 18-29 art. 4, § A 18-49 art. 4, § B 18-50 art. 4, § C 18-51 art. 4, § D 18-52 art. 5, § A 18-78 art. 5, § B 18-79 art. 5, § C 18-80 art. 5, § D 18-81 art. 5, § E 18-82 art. 5, § G 18-30 Ord. No. 2172 4-27-2010 - 52-22, 52-23 Ord. No. 2174 8-24-2010 - 52-136 Ord. No. 2175 8-24-2010 - 52-22 Ord. No. 2179 11-9-2010 2 32-26 Ord. No. 2180 12-14-2010 I 40-1 II 40-2 III 40-3 IV 40-4 V 40-5 VI 40-6 VII 40-7 VIII 40-8 IX 40-9 X 40-10 XI 40-11 XII 40-12 XIII 40-13 XIV 40-14 XV 40-15 Ord. No. 2181 1-11-2011 - 10-1 - 20-50 Ord. No. 2199 9-13-2011 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2204 11-30-2011 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2205 11-30-2011 - 52-75 Ord. No. 1533-A 6-26-2012 I 52-206, 52-207 II 52-208 - 52-223 III 52-224 IV 52-212 V 52-225, 52-226 Ord. No. 2081 7-24-2012 II(A) 8-114 II(B) 8-114 II(C) 8-114 II(D) 8-114 II(E) 8-114 II(F) 8-114 II(G) 8-114 II(H) 8-34 II(I) 8-116 II(J) 8-180 II(K) 8-181 II(L) 8-182 II(N) 8-117 II(O) 8-117 II(P) 8-35 II(Q) 8-34 III(A) 8-79 III(B) 8-79 III(D) 8-55 III(F) 8-78 III(G) 8-78 III(H) 8-80 III(I) 8-79 III(J) 8-81 III(K) 8-81 - 8-83 III(L)(1) 8-83 III(L)(2) 8-82 III(L)(3) 8-81 III(L)(4) 8-84 III(L)(5) 8-85 III(M) 8-83 III(O) 8-182 - 8-185 III(P)(1) 8-56 III(P)(2) 8-33 IV(E)) 8-182 IV(F) 8-182 VI(A) 8-30 VI(B) 8-31 VI(C) 8-32 VI(D) 8-29 VI(E) 8-119 VI(H) 8-118 VI(I) 8-115 - 8-184 VI(J) 8-184 VI(K) 8-183 Ord. No. 2081-A 7-24-2012 I(A) 8-1 II(A) 8-114 II(B) 8-114 II(C) 8-144 II(D) 8-144 II(E) 8-144 II(F) 8-144 II(G) 8-144 II(H) 8-34 II(I) 8-116 II(J) 8-180 II(K) 8-181 II(L) 8-182 II(N) 8-117 II(O) 8-117 II(P) 8-35 II(Q) 8-34 III(A) 8-79 III(B) 8-79 III(D) 8-55 III(F) 8-78 III(G) 8-78 III(H) 8-80 III(I) 8-79 III(J) 8-81 III(K) 8-81 - 8-83 III(L)(1) 8-83 III(L)(2) 8-82 III(L)(3) 8-81 III(L)(4) 8-84 III(L)(5) 8-85 III(M) 8-83 III(O) 8-182 III(O) 8-185 III(P)(1) 8-56 III(P)(2) 8-33 IV(A) 8-26 IV(B) 8-27 IV(C) 8-27 IV(D) 8-27 IV(E) 8-182 IV(F) 8-182 V 8-25 VI(A) 8-30 VI(B) 8-31 VI(C) 8-32 VI(D) 8-29 VI(E) 8-119 VI(F) 8-24 VI(H) 8-118 VI(I) 8-115 - 8-184 VI(J) 8-184 VI(K) 8-183 VI(L) 8-28 VI(M) 8-28 VI(N) 8-28 Ord. No. 2184-B 8-14-2012 1 12-140 2 12-141 3 12-141 - 12-142 Ord. No. 2081-B 9-8-2012 II 8-180 VI 8-115 - 8-118 Ord. of 9-11-2012 9-11-2012 I(A) 8-1 II(A) 8-114 II(B) 8-114 II(C) 8-114 II(D) 8-114 II(E) 8-114 II(F) 8-114 - 8-182 II(G) 8-114 II(H) 8-34 II(I) 8-116 II(J) 8-180 II(K) 8-181 II(L) 8-182 II(N) 8-117 II(O) 8-117 II(P) 8-35 II(Q) 8-34 III(A) 8-79 III(B) 8-79 III(D) 8-55 III(F) 8-78 III(G) 8-78 III(H) 8-80 III(I) 8-79 III(J) 8-81 III(K) 8-81 III(K) 8-83 III((L)(1) 8-83 III(L)(2) 8-82 III(L)(3) 8-81 III(L)(4) 8-84 III(L)(5) 8-85 III(M) 8-83 III(O) 8-182 - 8-185 III(P)(1) 8-56 III(P)(2) 8-33 IV(A) 8-26 IV(B) 8-27 IV(C) 8-27 IV(D) 8-27 IV(E) 8-182 V 8-25 VI(A) 8-30 VI(B) 8-31 VI(C) 8-32 VI(D) 8-29 VI(E) 8-119 VI(F) 8-24 VI(H) 8-118 VI(I) 8-115 - 8-184 VI(J) 8-184 VI(K) 8-183 VI(L) 8-28 VI(M) 8-28 VI(N) 8-28 Ord. No. 1114-B 11-27-2012 - 56-1-56-3 - 56-5 - 56-29-56-33 - 56-35 - 56-59-56-64 - 56-116-56-120 - 56-122-56-124 - 56-126, 56-127 Ord. No. 2222 8-8-2013 1 12-60 2 12-61 3 12-62 4 12-63 5 12-64 6 12-65 7 12-66 8 12-67 9 12-68 10 12-69 11 12-70 12 12-71 13 12-72 14 12-73 15 12-74 16 12-75 17 12-76 18 12-77 19 12-78 20 12-79, 12-80 21 12-81 22 12-82 23 12-83 24 12-84 25 12-85 26 12-86 27 12-87 28 12-88 29 12-89 30 12-90 Ord. No. 2223 9-27-2013 1 50-156 3 50-157 Ord. No. 1647-B 2-25-2014 - 52-24 Ord. No. 2237 9-23-2014 - 54-82 Ord. No. 2249 2-24-2015 - 56-125 Ord. No. 2255 3-24-2015 I 48-1 II 48-2 III 48-27 IV 48-28 V 48-29 VI 48-50 VII 48-50 Ord. No. 2257 4-14-2015 1 56-119 2 56-5 Ord. No. 2259 5-12-2015 - 10-272-10-284 Res. No. 2015-11 5-12-2015 - 2-207 Res. No. 2015-12 5-12-2015 - 2-207 Ord. No. 2262 5-26-2015 - 56-122-56-124 Ord. No. 2267 9-8-2015 - 56-126 Ord. No. 2273 10-13-2015 1 54-128 2 54-127 3 54-129 4 54-130 5 54-131 6 54-131 7 54-132 Ord. No. 1533-B 1-12-2016 I 52-206, 52-207 II 52-208 - 52-223 III 52-224 IV 52-212 V 52-225, 52-226 Ord. No. 2292 4-26-2016 - 52-74 Ord. No. 2303  8-23-2016 31       Added 12-90.1 Ord. No. 2307  9-13-2016 I 56-2 II       Added 56-122(1)h. III       Added 56-123(1)r. Ord. No. 2309  9-27-2016 1-8       Added 22-113 Ord. No. 2313 11-21-2016> 1-3       Added 52-2 Ord. No. 2316  1-10-2017 1-7       Added Adopt. ord. 
pg. xi Ord. No. 2321  2-14-2017       Added 44-28(d)       Added 44-31 Ord. No. 2322  2-14-2017       Rpld 52-224(b) Ord. No. 2330  9-26-2017 1       Added 52-192(52) Ord. No. 2331 12-12-2017 1-3       Added 52-77 Ord. No. 2333 10-10-2017 1 52-192(52)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Texas statutory law. 
V.A.T.S. Insurance Code 
Article Section 
this Code 2003.051 Ch. 20 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section Section 
this Code 141.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 11.38 Ch. 6 (note) 61.36 Ch. 6 (note) 109.31 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 251.71 et seq. Ch. 6 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Business and Commerce Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 43 12-141 601.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II - Ch. 12, Art. VI  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section Section 
this Code 101.001 et seq. Char. § 12-4  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section Section 
this Code 41.001 Char. § 3-1 - Char. § 4-1 52.001 et seq. Char. § 4-4 61.001 et seq. Char. § 4-2 65.001 et seq. Char. § 4-5 141.001 et seq. Char. § 4-3 143.001 et seq. Char. § 3-2  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 29.001 Char. § 3-10 29.002 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 29.003(b) 1-3 29.003 1-14 29.003(b) Ch. 32 (note) 30.007801 Char. § 3-11 34.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 51.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 71.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 101.161 Ch. 14 (note) 311.011 1-2 311.012 1-2 311.014 1-2 311.016(1), (2) 1-2 311.024 1-4 311.027 1-4 311.030 1-11 311.032 1-15 312.003(b) 1-2 312.004 1-2 312.007 1-11 312.008 1-2 312.011(11) 1-2 312.013 1-15 323.007 1-2 418.001 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 418.001 16-21 418.101 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 418.1015 16-21 418.103 16-21 418.106 16-23 418.108 16-23 418.111 Ch. 16 (note) 418.121 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 418.151 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 551.001 et seq. Char. § 3-12 - Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 - 2-50 551.021 2-50 551.041 2-50 552.001 et seq. Char. § 12-1 - Ch. 2 (note) 556.001 Ch. 2 (note) 571.001 et seq. Char. § 12-2 - Ch. 2 (note) 601.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - Ch. 2, Art. III  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 121.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 122.006 Ch. 44 (note) 341.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 342.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 342.007 30-64 361.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 361.501 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 362.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 363.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 365.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 382.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 382.018 Ch. 18 (note) 431.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) ch. 481 Ch. 32 (note) ch. 482 Ch. 32 (note) 791.002 Ch. 20 (note) 821.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 822.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 822.002-822.006 8-34 826.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 826.021 Ch. 8 (note) 826.031 Ch. 8 (note) 826.033 Ch. 8 (note) 826.042 et seq. Ch. 8 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 5.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 9.001 Char. § 12-14 21.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 21.021 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 22.038 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 - 2-50 - 2-74 22.077 Ch. 2, Art. III 23.052 Ch. 2, Art. III 25.021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 25.051 Ch. 2, Art. III 26.021 Char. § 1-2 - 2-1 26.041 et seq. 2-115 26.047 Char. § 3-4 - Char. § 3-6 41.001 et seq. Char. § 1-3 - 2-2 42.001 et seq. 2-2 42.021 56-4 43.001 et seq. Char. § 1-4 - 2-2 51.001 et seq. Char. § 2-1 - Char. § 2-2 51.001 Char. § 3-15 53.001 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 53.001 1-1 - 1-14 53.005 Ch. 1 (note) 53.006 Ch. 1 (note) ch. 54 10-281 54.001 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 54.001 1-14 54.012 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 54.017 10-281 54.031-54.042 10-284 54.032 10-272 54.033 10-272 54.034 et seq. 10-276 54.035 10-283 54.036 10-281 54.037 10-281 54.039 10-283 101.021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 101.022 Char. Art. VII - Char. § 7-1 - Char. Art. VIII 102.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 103.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 105.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 201.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 211.001 et seq. Char. § 12-9 - Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 211.006 Char. § 3-15 211.008 Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 213.001 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 215.002 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 215.031 Ch. 12, Art. II - Ch. 12, Art. VI 215.074 Ch. 12, Art. V 215.075 Ch. 12 (note) 216.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 216.004 Ch. 42 (note) 216.901 Ch. 42 (note) 216.903 Ch. 42 (note) 217.001 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 229.001 Ch. 32 (note) 229.001(b) 1-3 229.002 Ch. 32 (note) 242.001 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 243.001 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) - 4-2 Ch. 12 (note) 243.004 4-2 245.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - Ch. 48 (note) - Ch. 56 (note) 251.001 Char. § 2-3 ch. 252 Char. § 9-6 - 2-264 252.002 Char. § 9-6 - 2-264 306.001 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 331.001 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 315.001 Ch. 36 (note) 331.007 Ch. 36 (note) 332.001 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 341.001 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 341.905 Ch. 32 (note) - Ch. 32, Art. III 342.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 342.003 Ch. 20 (note) 344.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 351.001 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. IV 351.002 Ch. 50, Art. IV 351.003 Ch. 50, Art. IV 361.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 361.061 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 370.002 Ch. 32 (note) - Ch. 32, Art. III 370.003 Ch. 32 (note) 371.001 et seq. Ch. 56 (note) 552.001 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 552.903 Ch. 54 (note) 601.001 Ch. 52 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 141.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 153.047 Ch. 20 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 801.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 1201.001 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 1201.008 Ch. 28 (note) 1202.252 Ch. 28 (note) 2001.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) - Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2154.004 Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2154.253 Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2303.001 et seq. 52-241  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section Section 
this Code 64.002 et seq. Ch. 8 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 46 Ch. 32 (note) 1.01 et seq. 1-3 1.08 1-3 - Ch. 32 (note) 6.01 et seq. 1-3 12.01 et seq. 1-3 28.02 Ch. 20 (note) 37.11 16-27 38.15 16-27 42.09 Ch. 8 (note) 49.09 22-43  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code tit. 6 22-26 41.001 Ch. 50 (note) 72.001 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.01 Ch. 50 (note) 11.02 Ch. 50 (note) 31.05(b) 50-157 101.008 Ch. 50 (note) 151.024 Ch. 12, Art. II - Ch. 12, Art. VI 151.429 50-133 151.431 50-133 171.10150 50-133 171.501 50-133 312.001 et seq. 50-101 312.201 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 312.202 50-100 312.204 50-100 321.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 321.105(c) 50-135 351.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 371.001 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 501.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.251 Ch. 50 (note) 42.203 Ch. 52 (note) 254.001 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 311.001 Ch. 46 (note) 311.004 Ch. 46 (note) 312.001 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) - Ch. 52 (note) 312.041 46-3 316.001 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 391.031 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) 391.061 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) 393.0025 Ch. 42 (note) 471.001 et seq. Ch. 52 (note) 541.001 et seq. Ch. 52 (note) - 52-21 542.202 Ch. 52 (note) 542.2035 Ch. 52 (note) 544.001 Ch. 52, Art. II 545.301 Ch. 52, Art. III 545.305 Ch. 52, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 545.3051 Ch. 52, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 547.501 16-27 552.007(c) 12-174 553.002 Ch. 52, Art. II 621.303 Ch. 52, Art. VI 681.001 et seq. Ch. 52, Art. III 683.001 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV - 30-117 - Ch. 52, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 - 52-261 683.011 30-119 - 52-262 683.012 30-122 - 52-263 683.014 et seq. 30-122 - 52-263 683.071 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 683.071 30-119 - 52-262  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code 16.311 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 16.315 Ch. 18 (note) 21.001 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) ch. 26 54-268 26.001 Ch. 18 (note)  
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
Article Section 
this Code 2.01 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 45.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 102.017 14-97 102.017(d) 14-99 102.0172 14-67 102.0172(d) 14-69  
