CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 95-3 
"ORDINANCE ADOPTING REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES" 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES, ESTABLISHING THE SAME AND PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN SUCH CODE AS WELL AS PROVIDING FOR EXCEPTIONS; AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE FOR THIS ORDINANCE AND THE NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1 
That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 12 and including Appendix A and B, provided with and attached to this Ordinance, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bowie, Texas, and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance, which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the City Council on or before February 21, 1995, to the extent provided herein in this Ordinance. "Code of Ordinances," or "Code," shall refer to that new code adopted under the provisions herein. 
SECTION 2 
That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 2nd day of May, 1995, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Bowie, Texas, enacted on or before and not included in this Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed from and after the 2nd day of May, 1995, except as hereinafter provided. 
SECTION 3 
That the repeal provided for in Section 2 above shall not affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any event or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or occurring before the effective date of this code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City, or any evidence of the City's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the City. 
(4)  Any franchise and amendments thereto granted by the City. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, or affecting the right-of-way of any street or public way in the City. 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget. 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the City including their related service plans, or any ordinance discontinuing territory as part of the City. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City. 
(11)  Any ordinance pertaining to the calling of municipal elections, appointing of election officers, or ratifying the results of any election. 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing rates to be charged by privately or semi-publicly owned utility companies. 
(13)  Any ordinance amending the zoning district map, approving planed development districts, or pertaining to the issuance of specific use permits or the granting of variances. 
(14)  Any ordinance enacted on or after February 21, 1995. 
The repeal provided for in Section 2 shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 4 
That whenever in the Code of Ordinances or any ordinance of the City previously adopted by the City Council, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except for: 
(1)  violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse, in which case the maximum fine shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and for 
(2)  violations of traffic laws and ordinances which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor, in which case the maximum fine shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas. Each day any violation of such Code of Ordinances or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise designated. Any violation of any provision of such Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the City of such purposes. 
SECTION 5 
That any and all amendments and additions to such Code of Ordinances, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code of Ordinances so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Bowie, Texas," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
SECTION 6 
That in case of the amendment of any article or section of the Code of Ordinances for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provide in Section 4 hereof shall apply to the article or section as amended, or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided, the penalty so provided in existing article or section shall be held to relate to the article or section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
SECTION 7 
That a copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be kept on file in the office of the City Secretary in loose-leaf form. It shall be the express duty of the City Secretary, or someone authorized by the City Secretary, to insert in the designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code of Ordinances when the same has been printed or reprinted in page form by the codifier designated by the City Council and to extract from such Code all provisions ow which may be from time to time repealed by the City Council. Such copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same at any time during regular business hours. 
SECTION 8 
That it shall be an offense for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the City of Bowie to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor offense. 
SECTION 9 
That it is hereby declared to be in the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the Code of Ordinances hereby adopted are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not effect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
SECTION 10 
That said Code of Ordinances shall be admitted in evidence without further proof and the City Secretary shall record said Code as adopted in the ordinance records of the City, and thereafter such record shall serve as a record of the ordinances so codified and it shall not be necessary in establishing the context of any particular ordinance so codified to go beyond said record. 
SECTION 11 
That all references in this Ordinance to the "Code" or "Code of Ordinances" refer to the new Code being adopted and any references to a prior Code would refer to the Code of Ordinances in effect previously, as adopted March 19, 1991. 
SECTION 12 
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
SECTION 13 
That this ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication, as the law in such cases provided. 
DULY ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Bowie, Texas, on the 2nd day of May, 1995 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Bert Cunningham    
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Linda Shelton    
City Secretary 
CITY OF BOWIE CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
Published in 2001 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 96-14 11- 5-96 Included 17 99-3  3- 2-99 Included 17 2010-15 11-16-10 Omitted 17 2010-16  1-18-11 Included 17 2011-01  3-15-11 Omitted 17 2011-02  4- 5-11 Omitted 17 2011-03  4-19-11 Included 17 2011-04  5- 3-11 Omitted 17 2011-05  8- 2-11 Omitted 17 2011-06  8-16-11 Omitted 17 2011-07  9- 6-11 Omitted 17 2011-08  9-20-11 Omitted 17 2011-09  9-20-11 Omitted 17 2011-10  9-20-11 Included 17 2011-11  9-20-11 Omitted 17 2011-13 11- 1-11 Included 18 2011-14 12-20-11 Omitted 18 2011-15 12-20-11 Included 18 2011-16 12-20-11 Included 18 2012-01  2-21-12 Omitted 18 2012-03  2-21-12 Omitted 18 2012-04  2-21-12 Included 18 2012-05  4- 3-12 Omitted 18 2012-06  5- 1-12 Included 18 2012-07  8-23-12 Omitted 18 2012-08  9- 4-12 Omitted 18 2012-09 10- 2-12 Included 18 2012-10  9-18-12 Omitted 18 2013-08  5-21-13 Included 19 Exh. A  8-20-13 Included 19 2013-13  9-17-13 Included 19 2013-17 12-17-13 Included 19 2014-02  2- 4-14 Included 19 2014-03  3-18-14 Included 19 2013-14  9-17-13 Included 19, Add. 2014-05  5- 6-14 Omitted 20 2014-06  5- 6-14 Omitted 20 2014-07  5-20-14 Omitted 20 2014-08  5-20-14 Included 20 2014-09  5-20-14 Included 20 2014-12  9- 2-14 Omitted 20 2014-13  9-16-14 Omitted 20 2014-14  9-16-14 Omitted 20 2015-01  2- 3-15 Omitted 20 2015-02  2- 3-15 Included 20 2015-03  3- 3-15 Omitted 20 2015-04  3-17-15 Included 20 2015-06  9- 1-15 Omitted 21 2015-07  9-15-15 Included 21 2015-08  9-15-15 Omitted 21 2015-09  9-15-15 Omitted 21 2015-10 10- 6-15 Omitted 21 2015-11 11-17-15 Included 21 2015-12 12- 1-15 Included 21 2015-13 12-15-15 Included 21 2015-14 12-21-15 Omitted 21 2016-01  3- 1-16 Omitted 22 2016-02  6- 7-16 Omitted 22 2016-03  6- 7-16 Included 22 2016-04  8-16-16 Omitted 22 2016-05  9-20-16 Omitted 22 2016-06  9-20-16 Omitted 22 2016-07 10- 4-16 Omitted 22 2017-01 Tabled Omitted 22 2017-02  2-21-17 Included 22 2017-03  5- 2-17 Included 23 2017-04  5- 2-17 Included 23 2017-08  6-20-17 Included 23 2017-10  8-29-17 Included 23 2018-02  5-14-18 Included 23 2018-03  5-30-18 Included 23 2018-04  5-30-18 Included 23 2018-05  5-30-18 Included 23 2018-06  6-25-18 Included 23 2018-08  8-27-18 Included 23 2018-09  8-27-18 Included 23 2018-11  9-18-18 Included 23 2018-12  9-18-18 Included 23  
CHARTER[1] 
Art. I. Boundaries: Name of City: Powers of City, 1.01-1.05 Art. II. The City Council, 2.01-2.11 Art. III. Administrative Organization, 3.01-3.04 Art. IV. Municipal Court, 4.01-4.03 Art. V. Elections, 5.01-5.06 Art. VI. Initiative, Referendum and Recall, 6.01-6.09 Art. VII. Finance, 7.01-7.13 Art. VIII. Bonds, Certificates of Obligation, Warrants, and Other Evidence of Indebtedness, 8.01-8.05 Art. IX. Taxation, 9.01-9.08 Art. X. Franchise and Public Utility, 10.01-10.06 Art. XI. General Provisions, 11.01-11.08 Art. XII. Submission of Proposed Charter to Voters, 12.01, 12.02  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The city's home rule charter was adopted at an election held on April 7, 1984 and was declared by ordinance to be in effect on May 15, 1984. The original arrangement and numbering system has been retained, although the editor has used a uniform system of capitalization and formatting. Amendments of this charter are set out herein as enacted and are indicated by history notes in parenthesis following the amending section. Any provisions ins brackets have been added for clarity by the editor. 
State constitution reference- Charter to be consistent with constitution and general laws, Art. XI, Sec. 5. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 9.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - BOUNDARIES; NAME OF CITY; POWERS OF CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Territorial boundaries, Sec. 1-1801. 

Sec. 1.01 - Name 
    The inhabitants of the City of Bowie, Montague County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established, in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Bowie." 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1.02 - Boundaries 
    The boundaries and limits of the city are hereby established and described as those which exist under authority of the current city ordinances as displayed on a map maintained by the city secretary and the boundaries established and changed hereafter as provided. 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1.03 - Extension of Boundaries 
    The council shall have the power by ordinance, to annex territory lying adjacent to the city, subject to procedural laws, and prior to the final passage of such ordinance, the council shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard at a public hearing, notice of which is duly given. All city services are to be provided, operational, as prescribed by applicable laws of the State of Texas in effect on the date of the final passage of said ordinance. Purpose of which is extending and enlarging the boundary limits of the city. Such annexation shall be limited and controlled only by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-6-00, Prop. 1) 
Editor's note- The required annexation procedures are provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, 43.051 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 43.001 et seq.; annexation of property during tax year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 26.14. 
Sec. 1.04 - De-Annexation 
    In addition to the other powers of de-annexation as authorized by law, the council may discontinue territory adjacent to the corporate limit as part of said city by ordinance duly passed, with or without the consent of the inhabitants or qualified voters of said territory. Prior to the final passage of such ordinance, the council shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard at a public hearing, notice of which is to be given as in the case of annexation by ordinance unless otherwise required by law. 
State Law reference- Disannexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 43.141 et seq. 
Sec. 1.05 - Powers of the City 
    The city shall have all of the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all of the implied powers necessary to execute such granted powers. The city may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency or political subdivision thereof; or with the federal government or any agency thereof; to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city and its' [sic] inhabitants; may acquire property within or without its' [sic] corporate limits for any municipal purpose in fee simple, or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, device [sic], lease, or condemnation, and, subject to the provisions of this charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve, and control such property as may now or hereafter to be owned by it; may adopt ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of good government, order and peace of the city and the welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of its' [sic] inhabitants. In addition to the powers enumerated herein, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the laws of the State of Texas, and this charter, the city shall have, without the necessity of express enumeration in this charter, each and every power which, by virtue of Article XI, Sec. 5 of the Constitution of Texas, the people of the city are empowered by election to grant or confer upon the city by expressly and specifically granting and enumerating the same herein. 
State Law reference- General powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.001 et seq.; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.072. 
ARTICLE II. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.01 - Number; Selection; Terms 
    The city council shall be composed of the mayor and six (6) members. The mayor shall be elected, as provided by law, from the city at large. All members of the council will be elected at large, two (2) being selected from each of three (3) precincts, which shall be hereafter established. One (1) councilperson from each precinct will be elected each year for a two-year term. The mayor will be elected each odd-numbered year. The members of the council, including the mayor, shall each have terms consisting of two (2) years, with a limit of three (3) consecutive terms (six (6) years). Council members must reside in the precinct from which they are elected, for the length of time they are in office. 
State Law reference- Applicability of Election Code, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 1.002. 
Sec. 2.02 - Qualifications 
    The mayor and each member of the council must, at the time of taking office, have resided in the city for the time required by law, and be otherwise qualified according to the laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference- Age and residence requirements for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 141.003. 
Sec. 2.03 - Precincts 
    The city council shall establish three (3) precincts within the city, each containing the approximate same number of citizens. Such precinct boundaries may be changed by the council. 
Sec. 2.04 - Mayor 
    The mayor shall be the official head of the city government and shall preside at all meetings of the council. The mayor, as a member of the council, is required to cast a vote in case of a tie vote by the council, and that vote is obligatory. Subsequent to a vote on any matter by the council, the mayor may veto the council's action on such matter. Such veto must be made by the mayor and announced by the mayor in open meeting prior to the adjournment of the council meeting where such matter was considered. Any matter so vetoed shall be included in the agenda for reconsideration by the council at the next regular or special meeting of the council. The mayor shall not have the authority to veto any action of the council on such reconsidered matter. The mayor shall see that all ordinances, bylaws, and resolutions of the council are faithfully obeyed and enforced; shall, when authorized by the council, sign all official documents such as ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, agreements, official plats, contracts, and bonds; shall appoint special committees as the mayor deems advisable as instructed by the council. The mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with this charter or as may be imposed by the council. 
Sec. 2.05 - Mayor Pro Tem 
    A mayor pro tem shall be a member of the council, elected by the council at the first regular council meeting following each regular city election. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and, in this capacity, shall have the rights conferred upon the mayor. 
Sec. 2.06 - Vacancies; Forfeiture; and Filling of Vacancies 
(A)  Vacancies. A council member's office, including that of mayor, shall become vacant upon such person's death, mental or physical disability, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of office. Determination of mental or physical disability shall be made by the remaining members of the council upon the certificate of two (2) physicians qualified to practice medicine in the State of Texas. 
(B)  Forfeiture. A member of the council, including the mayor, shall forfeit office upon: 
(1)  Final conviction of a felony or offense involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Ceasing to be a resident of the city. Council members ceasing to reside in the precincts from which they were elected. 
(3)  Failure to regularly attend council meetings without good cause. Good cause shall be illness, temporary disability, absence from the country, physical emergency, or urgent business matters. There shall be presumption of regular failure to attend when more than three (3) consecutive regular meetings are missed. 
(4)  Automatic forfeit of office if running for elective office. 
(C)  Filling Vacancies. 
(1)  A single vacancy upon the council, including the mayor, shall be filled for the unexpired term within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the vacancy, by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council, or the council may call a special election; if the council does not fill any such vacancy within thirty (30) days, the council, at the next regular meeting after such thirty (30) days, shall call a special election to fill the vacancy. 
(2)  When more than one (1) vacancy shall exist at any one (1) time, a special election shall be called by the council within [thirty] (30) days following the occurrence of the last vacancy to fill the unexpired terms of the vacancies. 
Sec. 2.07 - Compensation 
    The council, including the mayor, shall serve without pay or compensation. They shall be entitled to reimbursement of actual necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when approved by the council. 
Sec. 2.08 - Meetings 
(A)  Regular meetings. The city council shall have as many regular meetings as it shall deem necessary, provided, it shall have at least one (1) meeting each month. 
(B)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the mayor. Upon written application of any three (3) members of the council, the city secretary shall call a special meeting for the time and date set out in the application. Notice of special meetings shall be given by the city secretary to each member of the council, including the mayor, or left at such person's residence address. 
(C)  Open meetings. Meetings shall be open to the public, except where closed meetings are authorized by law. 
State Law reference- Open meetings of governmental bodies, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 551.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2.09 - Quorum 
    Four (4) council members shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three (3) or more members of the council. 
Sec. 2.10 - Rules of Procedure 
    The council shall determine its' [sic] own rules and order of business. Provisions shall be made for the taking of minutes, which minutes shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural matters, shall be by a roll call and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be recorded in the minutes. 
Sec. 2.11 - Passage of Ordinances 
    Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the city council only in written or printed form. The subject or subjects of all ordinances shall be clearly expressed in the caption which summarizes the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violating the ordinance, if any. Except as may be otherwise prescribed in this charter, an ordinance shall not be passed at the meeting of the council at which it is first introduced, but the caption shall be read aloud and the council shall determine whether the proposed ordinance shall be rejected or further considered at the next meeting of the council. If rejected, no further action shall be required. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, if the council, including the mayor, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the members present at the meeting at which an ordinance is first introduced, determines that an emergency exists requiring immediate action, such ordinance may then be voted upon and rejected or passed at that meeting. The "ayes" and "nays" shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the council. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS," and every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and the city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. 
(1)  Penal ordinances. Caption or title and penalties of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture shall, after passage thereof, be published in the official newspaper of the City of Bowie at least one (1) time within fifteen (16) days after the passage of said ordinance. The council shall designate the official newspaper of the City of Bowie. 
(2)  Franchise ordinances. All ordinances granting, confirming, extending, renewing, or amending a franchise shall be accepted in writing by the grantees and before taking effect shall be published as otherwise provided in this charter for penal ordinances. 
(3)  Effective date. Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be enrolled by the city secretary as soon as practicable after its' [sic] passage. If the ordinance is published, the city secretary shall note the time and place of publication which shall be prima facie proof of publication thereof. The affidavit by printer or publisher shall also be prima facie proof of publication. Enrollment of an ordinance shall be prima facie proof of its legal adoption and effect. Ordinances shall become effective upon enrollment or enrollment and publication, as the case may be. 
(4)  Codification of ordinances. The city council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified, and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. All printed ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted as evidence in all courts without further proof, and shall have the same force and effect as did the original ordinance. 
(Amend. of 5-6-00, Prop. 2) 
State Law reference- Authorization for ordinances, etc., V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.001; publication of ordinance adopting a code of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 53.002. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 3.01 - City Manager 
    The council may appoint a city manager who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city manager shall have such authority and responsibilities as designated and given in written form by the council. 
Sec. 3.02 - City Secretary 
    The council shall appoint a city secretary to serve at their pleasure. The city secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings of all council meetings, shall be the official custodian of the records of the city and shall perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be designated and granted by the council. The council may appoint such deputies as needed. 
Sec. 3.03 - The Administrative Department[s] 
    There shall be such administrative departments as may be established by the council. The council shall establish the duties and responsibilities of each department and provide for their control and direction. The council may combine one (1) or more departments created by it and may assign or transfer duties of any department of the city from one (1) department to another, or create additional departments. The council may employ a city attorney and a health officer. No employee of the city may hold the office of member of the council, including mayor, and no member of the council, including mayor, may become an appointed officer or employee of the city within one (1) year after vacating such office. 
Sec. 3.04 - City Planning Commission 
(A)  Appointment of members; purpose. The city council shall appoint a city planning commission which shall consist of five (5) members, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position in the city. The five (5) members of the commission shall be real property taxpayers of the City of Bowie. The commission shall elect its' [sic] chairman from among the appointive members. The purpose and object of said city planning commission is to act as an advisory board to the city council relating to all nature of public improvements, civic improvements, city planning, opening, widening, and changing of streets, routing of public utilities, controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets and ways of the City of Bowie, and such other matters relating to city improvements as the city planning commission and the city council of the city may deem beneficial to the City of Bowie, Texas. A majority of said commissioners shall constitute a quorum. The members of this commission shall serve without compensation, in the same manner as the city council. 
(B)  Term of office; Vacancies. The members shall be appointed to serve a two-year term. There shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms to which a person may be appointed to serve on the city planning commission. 
Three (3) members shall be appointed every even numbered year and two (2) members shall be appointed every odd numbered year. 
This modification shall become effective immediately upon its passage: 
Members of the city planning commission who are serving at the time of passage of this modification shall draw lots to determine which of them shall be reappointed during the next odd numbered year and during the next even numbered year. 
Any vacancy during the unexpired term of any appointive member shall be filled by a person appointed by the city council for the remainder of the term. 
(C)  Removal from commission. The members of the city planning commission shall be subject to removal from the office by the city council for any cause deemed by the city council sufficient for their removal in the interest of the public service, but only after a public hearing before the city council on charges publicly made, if demanded by such members within ten (10) days. 
(D)  Adoption of state laws. All of the laws and constitution of the State of Texas are hereby adopted and made a part of this charter, and shall be controlling on the city planning commission, as the law may now exist or may be hereafter enacted or amended. 
(E)  Powers. The city planning commission shall have the power to pass upon all plans which may be considered by the city council of the City of Bowie, relating to public improvements, and it shall be the duty of the city council as far as practicable to submit plans governing public improvements involved under the terms of this charter, to the city planning commission to obtain its' [sic] advice with reference thereto. The city council may thereafter adopt the methods recommended by the city planning commission or any plans or methods which may be deemed most advisable by the city council of the City of Bowie; provided, however, that any public improvements undertaken hereunder, or otherwise by the city council shall never be deemed invalid because the city planning commission has not been consulted or has not furnished any advice thereon, or because the city council has failed to submit the plans thereon for consideration by said city planning commission. The commission shall be required to: 
(1)  Make, amend, extend and add to the master plan for the physical development of the city; 
(2)  Draft for the city council an official map of the city and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such map; 
(3)  Make and adopt a zoning plan and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such plan; 
(4)  Meet not less than once each month and keep a public record of its' [sic] resolutions, findings, and determinations. 
(F)  The city planning commission shall have power to: 
(1)  Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from the other departments of the city government in relation to its' [sic] work; 
(2)  Within its' [sic] budget appropriation, contract with the city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Ord. No. 030789-C, Sec. 4, adopted 3-21-89) 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.01 - Municipal Court 
    There shall be a court known as the municipal court in Bowie, Texas, with such jurisdiction, powers, and duties as are given and prescribed by this charter, by ordinances, the laws of the State of Texas, and the constitution of the State of Texas. 
State constitution reference- Courts, Art. V. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 29.001 et seq. 
Sec. 4.02 - Judge 
    The council may appoint a judge for the municipal court who shall serve at the pleasure of the council, for a two-year term. The judge shall receive such compensation as may be set by the council. The council may authorize the mayor to act as judge. 
State Law reference- Judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code, 29.004. 
Sec. 4.03 - Clerk of the Municipal Court 
    The council of the City of Bowie must appoint a clerk of the municipal court, purpose being to assist the appointed judge, with any and all such duties and responsibilities as the council may direct. The clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in the issuing process of such court, in conducting the business thereof. Nothing herein shall prevent the city secretary or any other city official or employee from also being designated the clerk, and the council may appoint a deputy with the same power as the clerk. 
State Law reference- Clerk, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 29.010. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.01 - General Election 
    The general city election shall be held annually on a date prescribed by the applicable laws of the State of Texas in effect as of January 1 of the year of the election at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices of council, including mayor, which become vacant that year. The council shall adopt an ordinance or resolution for the conduct of the election. Each candidate for city council shall file for one (1) of six (6) council places or mayor and shall be elected by obtaining the most votes cast for that particular place. 
(Amend. of 5-6-00, Prop. 3) 
Editor's note- Election dates are provided in V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 5.02 - Filing for Office 
    Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to the office of city council, including mayor, shall file with the city secretary, within the time prescribed by law, an application as required by law. 
State Law reference- Application for place on ballot, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 141.031 et seq. 
Sec. 5.03 - Official Ballot 
    The official ballot shall be drawn by the city secretary in the manner, form and time prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 52.001 et seq. 
Sec. 5.04 - Canvassing 
    The return of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judge to the mayor and one (1) copy to the city secretary. As soon as practicable after a regular or special election, either at a special meeting of the council or at the next regular meeting, the council shall canvass the returns and declare the results of such election. Returns of each municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. The candidates who receive the most legal votes cast for each place shall be declared the winner. 
State Law reference- Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 67.001 et seq. 
Sec. 5.05 - Tie Vote 
    In the event there is an equal number of votes given to two (2) or more of the candidates receiving the highest vote for the same office, such candidates may, by agreement in writing and filed with the city secretary, draw lots to determine the winner; if both or all such candidates are present. If the candidates receiving the equal number of votes do not agree to draw lots within ten (10) days after the votes are canvassed, the council shall order a tie breaking election between the two (2) or more candidates who have tied. 
State Law reference- Runoff election day, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 2.025. 
Sec. 5.06 - Special Elections 
    The council may, by ordinance or resolution, call special elections as authorized by law and this charter. 
State Law reference- Ordering election of political subdivision, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 3.004. 
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 6.01 - General Power 
    The qualified voters of the City of Bowie, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power of direct legislation by the initiative and referendum. 
Sec. 6.02 - Initiative 
    Registered voters of the City of Bowie may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the city council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the city. Said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in numbers to twenty (20) percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city, or one hundred fifty (150), whichever is greater, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in Section 6.07 of this charter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided for recall petitions in Section 6.07 of this charter. The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies as permitted for recall petitions. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within five (5) days after the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the city council. Upon presentation to it of the petition and draft of the proposed ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the city council, within ten (10) days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons filing the petition, or to call a special election, to be held within thirty (30) days thereafter, at which the qualified, registered voters of the City of Bowie shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other municipal election is to be held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the petition, the question may be voted on at such election. 
Editor's note- Election dates are provided in V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 41.001 et seq. 
State Law reference- Wording of propositions on ballots, V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 52.072. 
Sec. 6.03 - Referendum 
    Qualified, registered voters of the City of Bowie may require that any ordinance or resolution, with the exception of ordinances or resolutions levying taxes, passed by the city council, be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within thirty (30) days after its' [sic] publication. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in Section 6.02 of this charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition to the city council. Thereupon the city council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 6.02 of this charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified, registered voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof. 
Sec. 6.04 - Ballot Form and Results of Election 
    The ballot used in voting upon an initiated or referred ordinance shall state the caption of the ordinance and below the caption shall set forth on separate lines the words: "For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance." 
    An initiated ordinance and an alternative ordinance proposed by the council which are submitted at the same election shall be appropriately identified as the initiated ordinance and as the ordinance proposed by the council. 
    Any number of ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this article. An ordinance submitted and receiving an affirmative majority of the votes cast, shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the city. An ordinance so adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by five (5) affirmative votes of the council. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the votes cast shall be deemed thereupon repealed. 
Sec. 6.05 - Power of Recall 
    The citizens of Bowie reserve the power to recall any member of the council, including the mayor, and may exercise such power by filing with the city secretary a petition, signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the registered voters of the city, or by one hundred fifty (150) registered voters, whichever is greater, demanding the removal of a member of the council. The petition shall be signed and verified in the manner required for an initiative petition, shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought, and one (1) of the signers of each petition paper shall make an affidavit that the statements therein made are true. 
Sec. 6.06 - Recall Election 
    Within fifteen (15) days after the date of the filing of the recall petition, the city secretary shall certify the petition in the manner established for initiative petitions and present such petition to the council. 
    If the duly certified petition meets the requirements set forth, it shall be the duty of the council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election. The date of such election, if permitted by law, shall not be less than forty-five (45) days, nor more than sixty (60) days, from the date such petition was presented to the council, or on the next date thereafter on which election is permitted by law. 
Editor's note- Election dates are provided in V.T.C.A., Election Code, Sec. 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 6.07 - Recall Ballot 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(A)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted, 
"Shall (Name) be removed from the office as (Member of the Council) (Mayor)"? 
(B)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two (2) following propositions, one (1) above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the removal of (Name)" 
"Against the removal of (Name)" 
Sec. 6.08 - Results of a Recall Election 
    If a majority of the votes cast at such an election shall be for the removal of the individual named on the ballot, the council shall immediately declare this office vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 6.09 - Limitations on Recall 
    No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the city within three (3) months after such person's election, or within six (6) months after an election for such officer's recall. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 

Sec. 7.01 - Fiscal Year 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first (1st) day of October of each calendar year and shall end on the thirtieth (30th) day of September of the following calendar year. The fiscal year will also be the accounting and budget year. 
    All funds collected by the city during any fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenue, shall belong to such fiscal year, and except funds designated to pay interest and create a sinking fund on any indebtedness of the city, may be applied to the payment of the expenses incurred during such fiscal year. Any revenues uncollected at the end of any fiscal year, and any unencumbered funds actually on hand, shall become resources of the next succeeding fiscal year. 
State Law reference- City fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 101.022, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 1.05. 
Sec. 7.02 - Budget 
    The council shall cause to be prepared and submitted unto it a budget covering the next fiscal year that shall be submitted to the council prior to the fifteenth (15th) day of July each year, which shall contain the following information: 
(A)  The proposed financial policies for the next year with explanations of any changes from previous years in expenditures and any major changes of policy and a complete statement regarding the financial condition of the city; 
(B)  An estimate of all revenue from taxes and other sources, including the present tax structure rates and property evaluation for the ensuing year, together with tax levies and collections for the last five (5) years; 
(C)  A carefully itemized list of proposed expenses by office[,] department, agency, employee, project and an unallocated reserve fund for the budget year, as compared to actual expenses of the last ended fiscal year, and the estimated expenses for the current year; 
(D)  A description of all outstanding bond indebtedness, showing amount, purchaser, date of issue, rate of interest, and maturity date, as well as any other indebtedness which the city has incurred and which has not been paid; 
(E)  A statement proposing any capital expenditures deemed necessary during the next budget year and recommended provisions for financing; 
(F)  A projected list of capital projects which should be undertaken within the five (5) next succeeding years; 
(G)  A summary of the annual budget and a statement of actual revenue and expenditures, as opposed to those proposed, will be published in newspaper; 
(H)  Such other information as may be requested by the council. 
State Law reference- Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, 102.001 et seq.; when charter provisions control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, 102.011. 
Sec. 7.03 - Proposed Budget a Public Record 
    The proposed budget shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection. 
State Law reference- Inspection of proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 102.005. 
Sec. 7.04 - Public Hearing on Proposed Budget 
    During the council meeting at which the proposed budget is submitted, the council shall name the date and place of a public hearing to be held thereon and shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city, the time and place of such hearing which will be not less than ten (10) days after the date of the notice. At the hearing, interested citizens may express their opinions concerning the proposed budget. 
Editor's note- The requirements for a public hearing on a proposed budget are provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 102.006. 
Sec. 7.05 - Proceeding on Adoption of Proposed Budget 
    After public hearing, the council shall analyze the proposed budget, making any additions or deletions which it feels appropriate, and shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, adopt a budget by a majority vote. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such date, the then existing budget, together with its' [sic] tax-levying ordinance and its' [sic] appropriation ordinance shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council. No budget shall be adopted or appropriations made unless the total of estimated income and funds available shall be equal to or in excess of such budget or appropriations, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 102.007. 
Sec. 7.06 - Appropriation 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes named therein. Except as provided in this article no funds of the city shall be expended nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to the annual appropriation ordinance provided in this article. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of appropriation shall revert to the fund from which appropriated and become available for reappropriation for the next fiscal year. The council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one (1) office, department, or agency to another, at any time. The city manager shall have authority, without council approval, to transfer appropriation balances from one (1) expenditure account to another within a single office, department, or agency of the city. 
Sec. 7.07 - Emergency Appropriations 
    At any time in any fiscal year, the council may, pursuant to this section, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than regular recurring requirements, to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. Such appropriation shall be by ordinance adopted by the affirmative vote of five (5) council members. Should the unappropriated and unencumbered revenues, income and available funds of the city for such fiscal year be insufficient to meet the expenditures under the appropriation authorized by this section, thereby creating a deficit, the council shall include the amount of such deficit in its' [sic] budget for the following fiscal year, during which such deficit shall be paid off and discharged. 
Sec. 7.08 - Borrowing to Meet Emergency Appropriations 
    In the absence of unappropriated available revenues or other funds to meet emergency appropriations under the provisions of the next [preceding] section, the council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money to meet such deficit by the issuance of notes, each of which shall be designated "Emergency Note" and may be renewed but all such notes and any renewals thereof shall mature and be payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the emergency appropriation was made, as provided in the last preceding section. 
Sec. 7.09 - Depository 
    All moneys received by any person, department, or agency of the city for or in connection with affairs of the city shall be deposited in the city depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be provided by law. All checks, vouchers, or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depositories shall be signed by two (2) individuals as prescribed by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 105.001 et seq.; drawing of checks and warrants, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 105.074. 
Sec. 7.10 - Budget Filed with City Secretary 
    A copy of the adopted budget shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection. 
State Law reference- Approved budget filed with municipal clerk, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 102.008. 
Sec. 7.11 - Defect Shall Not Invalidate the Tax Levy 
    Error or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate. 
Sec. 7.12 - Independent Audit 
    At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as it may be deemed necessary, the council shall direct that an independent audit be made of all accounts of the city by a certified public accountant. The C.P.A. shall have no personal interest in the financial affairs of the city. 
State Law reference- Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 103.001 et seq. 
Sec. 7.13 - Purchase Procedure 
    All purchases to be made and contracts to be executed by the city shall be reviewed by the city council or its' [sic] designated representative, who shall determine that there is to the credit of such office, department, or agency, a sufficient unencumbered budgeted appropriation and allotment balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual [contractual] services for which the contract or order is to be issued. The council may, by ordinance, confer upon its' [sic] duly designated representative general authority to contract for the expenditures without further approval of the council for all budget items, provided such amounts do not exceed the maximum allowed by law. In cases where bids are taken, all contracts or purchases shall be let to the lowest bidder as provided by law or ordinance; provided that the council shall have the right to reject any and all bids. Contracts for professional services for which bidding is prohibited by law shall not be let on competitive bids. 
State Law reference- Competitive bidding, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 252.021 et seq.; general exemptions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 252.022. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BONDS, CERTIFICATES OF OBLIGATION, WARRANTS, AND OTHER EVIDENCE OF INDEBTEDNESS 

Sec. 8.01 - Powers to Issue 
    The City of Bowie shall have the power to borrow money for any public purpose not prohibited by law, and shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, certificates of obligation, time warrants and any other evidence of indebtedness authorized by law. 
State Law reference- Municipal bonds, V.A.C.S., Art. 823 et seq. 
Sec. 8.02 - Sale of Bonds 
    All bonds and other evidence of indebtedness of the city having been issued and sold in accordance with the terms of this article, and having been delivered to purchasers thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable, and all bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds and other evidence of indebtedness previously issued shall be incontestable. 
State Law reference- Validity of certain bonds, V.A.C.S., Art. 709b. 
Sec. 8.03 - Interest and Sinking Funds 
    The council shall levy an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on and provide the necessary sinking fund required by law on all outstanding general obligation bonds and other general obligation evidence of indebtedness of the city. The interest and sinking fund shall be deposited in a separate account and shall not be diverted to or used for any other purpose than to pay the interest and principal on all such bonds and other evidence of indebtedness issued by the city, or for authorized investments. 
State Law reference- Interest and sinking fund, V.A.C.S., Art. 707. 
Sec. 8.04 - Revenue Bonds 
    The city shall have power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, acquiring, improving, extending, or repairing all public utilities, recreational facilities or any other property or facility not prohibited by law and issue revenue bonds or other evidence of indebtedness to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such revenue bonds or other evidence of indebtedness shall be a charge upon, and payable solely from the revenues, pledges to payment thereof or the properties, or interest therein acquired and the income therefrom, and shall never be a general obligation debt of the city. Revenue bonds issued by the city may, within [the] discretion of the city council, be submitted for approval by a majority of qualified voters, voting at an election held for that purpose. The council shall have authority to provide for the terms and force of any purchase agreement, contract, mortgage, bond or document desired or necessary for the issuance of revenue bonds, or other evidence of indebtedness, and the acquisition and operation of any property or interest. 
State Law reference- Municipal bonds, V.A.C.S., Art. 823 et seq. 
Sec. 8.05 - Execution and Registration of Bonds 
    All bonds, and other evidence of indebtedness shall be signed by the mayor, countersigned by the city secretary, and sealed with the seal of the city in the manner prescribed by law, and shall be payable not more than forty (40) years from their date. The mayor shall, to the extent permitted or required by law, forward such issued bonds and other evidence of indebtedness to the attorney general of the State of Texas for approval and for registration by the comptroller of public accounts. 
State Law reference- Registration of bonds, V.A.C.S., Arts. 710, 715b; signatures on municipal bonds, V.A.C.S., Art. 825. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAXATION 

Sec. 9.01 - Department of Taxation 
    There shall be established a department of taxation to assess and collect taxes. The director of this department shall be the city tax assessor-collector whose appointment shall be made by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The tax assessor-collector shall give a surety bond for the faithful performance of the collector's duties in a sum which shall be fixed by the council. 
Sec. 9.02 - Powers of Taxation 
    The city shall have the powers to levy, assess and collect taxes in an amount and of every character and type not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas for any municipal purpose. 
State Law reference- Taxable property and exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 11.01 et seq. 
Sec. 9.03 - Assessment of Property for Tax Purposes 
    All owners of property subject to taxation shall, between January first (1st) and April first (1st) of each year, file with the tax assessor-collector a full and complete sworn inventory rendition of such property held, owned or controlled within the city limits on January first (1st) of each year. The council may prescribe by ordinance the mode and manner of making such inventories and penalty for failing or refusing to submit the same. The tax assessor-collector shall review all renditions made and determine the value of the property rendered and fix the value thereof for tax purposes. If the tax assessor-collector fixes a value higher than that shown on the owner's last tax statement, the tax assessor-collector shall give written notice thereof to such owner at the owner's last known address by depositing the same, postage paid, in the U. S. Mail, notifying the owner of such change and advising the owner that such owner may appear before the board of equalization to protest such change. 
State Law reference- Renditions and other reports, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 22.01 et seq.; appraisal, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Ch. 23 et seq. 
Sec. 9.04 - Unrendered Property 
    The tax assessor-collector shall assess all property subject to taxation which for any cause has not been rendered, placing such valuation thereon in accordance with law. If the owners of such property are unknown such assessment may be made in the name "Unknown." If the tax assessor-collector fixes a value higher than that shown on the owner's last statement, the tax assessor-collector shall, except as to unknown owners, give written notice thereof to such owner at the owner's last known address by depositing the same, postage paid, in the U. S. mail, notifying the owner of such change and advising the owner that such owner may appear before the board of equalization to protest such change. Unknown owners shall be notified by publication one (1) time in the official newspaper of the city. 
State Law reference- Omitted property, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 25.21. 
Sec. 9.05 - Taxes; When Due and Payable 
    All taxes due the city shall be payable at the office of the tax assessor-collector. The tax rolls shall be completed and approved not later than October first (1st) of each year. Taxes shall become due and payable on October first (1st) of the year assessed and shall be paid on or before January thirty-first (31st) of the following year. All such taxes not paid on or before such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the council may provide by ordinance. The council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the city may be paid in installments. 
    Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax rollback shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to pay such current or past-due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question. 
State Law reference- Tax collections, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 31.01 et seq. 
Sec. 9.06 - Tax Lien and Liability 
    A special lien is hereby created on all taxable property, located in the city, in favor of the city for all taxes, ad valorem, occupational or otherwise. Said lien shall exist from January first (1st) in each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other 
claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, can ever defeat such lien, but the tax assessor-collector can pursue such property and whenever found may, by judicial writ, seize and sell enough thereof to satisfy such taxes. 
State Law reference- Tax liens and personal liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 32.01 et seq. 
Sec. 9.07 - Board of Equalization 
    The council shall each year prior to June 1, appoint a board of equalization composed of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) members. 
State Law reference- Appraisal review board, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 6.41 et seq. 
Sec. 9.08 - Other Rules and Regulations 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the assessment and collection of all taxes, and to make such rules, regulations, and mode of procedure to enforce the collection by and payment to the city tax assessor-collector as it may deem expedient, and may provide such penalties for the failure to pay such taxes as it may deem expedient. 
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITY 

Sec. 10.01 - Powers of the City 
    In addition to the city's power to purchase, construct, lease, maintain, operate, tax and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 10.02 - Inalienability of Control of Public Property 
    The right to control and use of public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares and public places of the city is hereby declared to be inalienable by the city, except by ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this charter. No act or omission by the council or any officer or agent of the city shall be construed to grant, renew, extend or amend, expressly or by estoppel or implication, any right, franchise, or easement affecting said public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares, public places and other real property, except as provided in this charter. 
Sec. 10.03 - Franchise; Power of the City Council 
    The city council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew, and extend, all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Bowie. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be introduced and the caption read aloud at two (2) separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first introduction of the ordinance and reading aloud of the caption; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinances shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Bowie, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years nor be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance. 
(Amend. of 5-6-00, Prop. 4) 
Sec. 10.04 - Regulation of Franchise 
    Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council: 
(A)  To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise. Such power shall be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of such failure, and shall be exercised only after hearing and after such reasonable time has expired. 
(B)  To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. 
(C)  To require such expansion, extension, enlargement and improvements of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public. 
(D)  To require every franchise holder to furnish to the city, without cost to the city, full information regarding the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such franchise holder, in, over and under the streets, alleys, and other public property of the city, and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of such facilities. 
(E)  To collect from every public utility operating in the city such proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling the streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, viaducts, and other public places of the city as represents the increase[d] cost of such operations resulting from the occupancy of such public places by such public utilities and such proportion of such public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to perform at its own expense such operations as above listed which are made necessary by the occupance of such public places by such public utility or by damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility. 
(F)  To require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its' [sic] poles and other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, whenever in the judgment of the council such use shall be in the public interest, provided that in such event a reasonable rental shall be paid such owner of facilities for such use. Provided, further, that inability of such public utilities to agree upon rental of such facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with such requirements by the council. 
(G)  (1)  To require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the value of the property of each franchise holder which is used and useful in rendering its' [sic] service to the public and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds of such franchise holder. 
(G)  (2)  To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of any franchise holder. 
(G)  (3)  To require reports on the operations of the utility, which shall be in such form and contain such information as the council shall prescribe. 
Sec. 10.5 - [10.05] Regulation of Rates 
    The council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the city, provided that no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency measure. Every franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges, or fares, shall have, at the hearing of the council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by clear, competent and convincing evidence, the value of its investments properly allocable to service in the city, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service. If, upon such hearing, the council is not satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence so furnished, it shall be entitled to call upon such public utility for the furnishing of additional evidence at a subsequent date, to which said hearing may be adjourned. If, at the conclusion of said adjourned hearing, the council is still not satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence furnished by said utility, the council shall have the right to select and employ, then and later, rate consultants, accountants, auditors, engineers, and attorneys to conduct investigations, present evidence, advise the council, and conduct litigation on such requested increase in rates, charges, or fares; and said utility shall reimburse the city for its reasonable and necessary expense so incurred. Each [sic] rate consultants, accountants, auditors, engineers, and attorneys shall be qualified, competent, and of good standing in their professions. No public utility franchise holder shall institute any legal action to contest any rate, charge or fare fixed by the council until such franchise holder has filed a motion for rehearing with the council specifically setting out each ground of its complaint against the rate, charge, or fare fixed by the council, and until the council shall have acted upon such motion. Such motion shall be deemed over-ruled unless acted upon by the council within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the filing of such motion for rehearing; provided, that the council may[,] by resolution, extend such time limit for acting on said motion for rehearing from ninety (90) days to one hundred eighty (180) days. 
Sec. 10.06 - Grant Not to be Exclusive 
    No grant or franchise to construct, maintain or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive. 
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11.01 - Notice of Claims 
    Before the city shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for the damage to or destruction of property of any kind, the person injured, if living, or his representatives, if dead, or the owner of the property damaged or destroyed, shall give the city secretary notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within thirty (30) days after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages, and the failure to so notify the city secretary within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officer or employee of the city shall waive compliance, or estop the city from requiring compliance, with the provisions of this section as to notice, but such provisions may be waived by resolution of the council, made and passed before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period herein provided, and evidenced by minutes of the council. 
Editor's note- Required notice procedures are provided in V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Sec. 101.101. 
Sec. 11.02 - Assignment, Execution and Garnishment 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill, nor shall the funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, be liable to garnishment on account of any debt the city may owe or funds the city may have on hand due any person, nor any of its' [sic] officers or agents shall be required to answer any writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever, nor shall the city be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee, whether earned or unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and any such attempted assignment shall be absolutely void as to the city. 
State Law reference- Garnishment, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Sec. 63.001 et seq.; garnishment of municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 101.023. 
Sec. 11.03 - Amendment of the Charter 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended. 
Editor's note- Charter amendments are now provided for in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 9.004 et seq. 
Sec. 11.04 - Separability Clause 
    If any section or part of a section of this charter is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this charter. 
Sec. 11.05 - Rearrangement and Renumbering 
    The council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this charter, or any amendments thereto, and to correct any typographical errors or incorrect reference or term, and upon passage of such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the city secretary and filed with a copy of this charter, shall be forwarded to the secretary of state for filing, as well as certified copies of such ordinance being filed with other appropriate offices. 
Sec. 11.06 - Effective Date of Charter 
    This charter, when adopted, shall become effective after the votes cast at the election at which it is submitted shall have been counted and the result of said election declared. 
Sec. 11.07 - Effect of This Charter on Existing Law 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force prior to the adoption of this charter, and not in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the council. 
    All rights of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the city. 
    All official actions taken by the city, its' [sic] councils or other city officials, and all previous elections, contracts, bonds, warrants, and other evidence of indebtedness and any annexations, prior to the adoption of this charter, are hereby adopted, validated, confirmed and ratified. 
Sec. 11.08 - Interim Government 
    The present city council members and the mayor shall complete their terms of office and the council shall provide, by ordinance, for the orderly transition of the business and affairs of the city from the present form of government to the form of government set forth in this charter. 
ARTICLE XII. - SUBMISSION OF PROPOSED CHARTER TO VOTERS 

Sec. 12.01 - Submission of the Charter to Electors 
    The charter commission in preparing this charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "Yes" or "No" on the same, for the reason that the charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its' [sic] entirety. For these reasons the charter commission directs that the charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Bowie at an election to be held for that purpose on the seventh (7th) day of April, 1984. In not less than thirty (30) days prior to such an election the city council shall cause the city secretary to mail a copy of this charter to each qualified voter of the City of Bowie. If a majority of the qualified voters in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, it shall become the charter of the City of Bowie and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted. 
State Law reference- Charter commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Secs. 9.002, 9.003. 
Sec. 12.02 - Filing Official Charter 
    An official copy of the charter shall be filed with the records of the city, and the mayor shall, as soon as practicable, certify to the secretary of state an authenticated copy under the seal of the city, showing the approval by the qualified voters of such charter. 
    We, the undersigned members of the charter commission, heretofore duly elected to prepare a charter for the City of Bowie, Texas, do hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed charter of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
John H. Word, Chairman W. A. Ragsdale Joe E. Probst, Vice Chairman Juanita Pollard Frances Cantrell, Secretary Ralph Gann Ruth Cordell Joe Falsone Bill Cleveland Harold Haile Dr. James B. Doughty Lee Anderson Ward Wallace Bill Yarbro Jimmie Sue Lawson  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cities, V.A.C.S., Art. 969a-2 et seq.; open meetings, V.A.C.S., Art. 6252-17; elections, V.T.C.A. Election Code, 1.001 et seq.; home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Sec. 9.001 et seq.; municipal finances, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 101 et seq.; compensation of officers, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Sec. 141.004; extra-territorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Sec. 42.001 et seq.; residence of municipal employees, V.A.C.S., Art. 1269j-14. 

ARTICLE 1.100 - CODE OF ORDINANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, 2.11(4). 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify civil and criminal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 53.001 et seq. 

Sec. 1.101 - How Code Designated and Cited 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the Code of Ordinances [of the] City of Bowie, Texas, and may be so cited. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-1) 
Sec. 1.102 - Catchlines of Articles, Sections and Subsections 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference- Headings in state codes, V.T.C.A. Government Code, Sec. 311.024. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-2) 
Sec. 1.103 - Definitions and Rules of Construction 
    In the construction of this Code and for all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Bowie in the County of Montague and State of Texas. 
Charter reference- Boundaries, name of city, Art. I; general provisions. 
    City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city manager," "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.014. 
    Council. Whenever the term "council" or "this council" or "the council" is used in this Code, it shall mean the city council of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Montague, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Gender, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.012(c). 
    Highway. The word "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference- "Highway" defined, V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d, Sec. 13(a). 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.013. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference- Number, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.012(b). 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. 
State Law reference- "Oath" defined, V.T.C.A. Government Code, Sec. 311.005(1). 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
State Law reference- "Person" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.005(2). 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference- "Sidewalk" defined, V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d, Sec. 13(d). 
    Signature, subscription, signed. The word "signature," "subscription" or "signed" includes any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
State Law reference- "Signed" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.005(6). 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference- "Street" defined, V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d, Sec. 13(a). 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference- Tense, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.012(a). 
    Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The designation "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." means Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
    V.A.C.S. The designation "V.A.C.S." means Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended. 
    V.T.C.A. The designation "V.T.C.A." means Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- "Written" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.005(11). 
    Year. The word "year" means twelve (12) consecutive months. 
State Law reference- "Year" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.005(12); Code Construction Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.001 et seq.; construction of Local Government Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 1.002; application of Penal Code definitions, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 1.03. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-3) 
Sec. 1.104 - Severability of Parts of Code 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code or any code adopted by reference herein are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or code adopted by reference, or its application to any person or circumstance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or any code adopted by reference herein, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code or any code adopted by reference herein of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference- Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.032, 312.013. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-4) 
Sec. 1.105 - General Penalty; Continuing Violations 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for violations of all such provisions that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference- Amount of fine or penalty imposed by city, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 54.001; jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 29.003. 
(Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 1.106 - Certain Ordinances Not Affected by Code 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance consistent with this Code providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance adopting subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Ordinances or resolutions consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances or resolutions designating no-parking areas, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(13)  Any administrative ordinance consistent with this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance relating to elections; 
(15)  Ordinance No. 1001, regulating certain public utilities; 
(16)  Any special ordinance or temporary ordinance; 
    and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-6) 
Sec. 1.107 - Amendments or Additions to Code 
(a)  Manner. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Bowie, Texas," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Language. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ___ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Bowie, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  New section. In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Bowie, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ___, which such section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 1-7) 
Sec. 1.108 - Supplementation of Code 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___"(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(1991 Code of Ordinances, Sec. 108) 
Sec. 1.109 - Effect of Repeal of Ordinances 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 311.030, 312.007. 
ARTICLE 1.200 - AUTHORIZED SIGNATURES ON CHECKS, WARRANTS, VOUCHERS 
(a)  All checks, warrants or vouchers for the withdrawals of monies from the city depositories shall be signed by two signatures as prescribed by subsection (1) and (2) herebelow and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 252. 
(1)  Checks, warrants or vouchers of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be signed by any two (2) of the following: mayor, city manager or the city secretary. 
(2)  Checks, warrants or vouchers of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall be signed by any two (2) of the following: mayor, mayor pro tem or city secretary. 
(b)  Authorization to sign any checks, warrants or vouchers not clearly prescribed in section (a) of this article shall be subject to approval and ratification of the city council. 
Charter reference- Depositories, withdrawal of money, 7.09; finance, Art. VII; bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants and other evidence of indebtedness, Art. VIII; taxation, Art. IX. 
State Law reference- Drawing of checks and warrants, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 105.074. 
(Ord. No. 060788-B, Sec. 1, 2, adopted 6-7-88) 
ARTICLE 1.300 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES 

Sec. 1.301 - Supervision 
    All boards, commissions and committees established by ordinance or other method by the mayor and council will receive their control and direction from such directive and/or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 062684-D, Sec. 1; adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 1.302 - Limitation of Activity 
    Any staff activity that any board, committee or commission is to associate should be limited to an advisory, supportive or coordinative role or posture. 
(Ord. No. 062684-D, Sec. 2; adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 1.303 - Requests for Service; Information 
    Boards, committees or commissions should have their requests for service and/or information in a timely manner from the city manager, or if so designated, the department head; failing that, the situation should be brought before the mayor and/or city council. 
(Ord. No. 062684-D, Sec. 4; adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 1.400 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, Ord. No. 121890-C, adopted 12-18-90, has been incorporated into the Code as Art. 1.400, at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference- Public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 203.021 et seq. 

Sec. 1.401 - Definition of Municipal Record 
    All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by Bowie or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the City of Bowie and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 1, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.402 - Additional Definitions 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers. The persons designated under Section 1.408(a) of this article. 
    Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules; the management of filing and information retrieval systems; the protection of essential and permanent records; the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records; control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence; and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management officer. The person designated in Section 1.406(a) of this article. 
    Records management plan. The plan developed under 1.405 of this article. 
    Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 2, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.403 - Municipal Records Declared Public Property 
    All city records, as defined in Section 1.401 of this article, are hereby declared to be the property of the City of Bowie. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 3, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.404 - Policy 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 4, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.405 - Record Management Plan 
(a)  Development. The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Approval. Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  Authority of Plan. State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 6, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.406 - Records Management Officer 
(a)  Designation. The city secretary, and the successive holders of such office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(b)  Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in every department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under provision (13) above; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by departments heads or other personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 7, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.407 - Duties and Responsibilities of Department Heads 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 8, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.408 - Records Liaison Officers 
(a)  Designation. Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(b)  Duties and Responsibilities. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 9, 10, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.409 - Records Control Schedules-Development, Monitoring and Amendment,Approval, Filing with State 
(a)  Development. The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Monitoring and amendment. Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Approval. Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head, the city attorney and the city manager. 
(d)  Filing with state. Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 11, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.410 - Records Control Schedule-Implementation; Destruction of Records Under Schedule 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under Section 1.405 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 12, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.411 - Destruction of Unscheduled Records 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 13, adopted 12-18-90) 
Sec. 1.412 - Records Center 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by Section 1.405, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under Section 1.405. 
(Ord. No. 121890-C, Sec. 14, adopted 12-18-90) 
ARTICLE 1.500 - BOWIE AIRPORT 

Sec. 1.500 - Airport Manager 
    The purpose of this classification is to manage the daily operations of the municipal airport. Duties include developing and implementing plans, policies and procedures; managing the airport's budget, resources and contractual agreements; and managing daily operational, maintenance and administrative functions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17,  1, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 1.501 - Use of Airport Restricted 
    No person, firm, association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the airport for any commercial activity, unless approved by a written authorization from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 1, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.502 - General Rules and Regulations 
    The following rules and regulations shall pertain and be observed in the use, operation and conduct of the Bowie, Texas Municipal Airport: 
(1)  Rule 1. Federal air rules. The federal air rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration for observance by aircraft operated anywhere in the United States, and presently or hereafter effective, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. 
(2)  Rule 2. Safeguard of persons and property. The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take such action(s) as may, at his discretion, be necessary to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment or property at the airport. 
(3)  Rule 3. T hangars or conventional hangars. T hangars or conventional hangars owned by the city may be rented to private individuals, companies or corporations on a monthly or yearly basis for the storage of aircraft and ancillary equipment only. 
(4)  Rule 4. Lease of airport property to private individuals, companies or corporations. The city may lease property within the building area or other portions of the airport for the private construction of hangars, buildings, lean-tos, aprons, taxiways and automobile parking lots in accordance with the approved airport layout plan. All leased property and all buildings or structures erected on the leased property will be utilized for aviation related activities. Storage of non-aviation equipment, such as automobiles, boats, or farm equipment in a private hangar, or conducting of non-aviation business in any structures is not authorized. The city council may, however, choose to promote agricultural use of the properties lying on and around the airport that are not otherwise used for aviation purposes. 
(A)  Property leased to a private individual, company or corporation on which hangars, T hangar units or buildings will be erected for rental to the public will be leased at a reasonable rate commensurate with similar facilities in the state as deemed acceptable by the city council. 
(B)  No leases will be written for a period in excess of twenty (20) years. 
(C)  Any private structure or hangar not in use for aviation purposes for a period in excess of six (6) months or not available for rent or sub-lease for aviation purposes, unless so authorized by the city council, must be removed after due notice in writing or the city will consider such structures or hangars abandoned and title will pass to the city. 
(D)  Leased land from which any building, hangar or structure is removed after due notice will be cleared and the property restored by the lessee to its original condition. 
(E)  Leased property on the airport may be sub-leased by the lessee only with the prior notification and approval of the city council. 
(F)  No structure may be erected beyond the building restriction line (BRL) or in conflict with the approved airport layout plan. 
(G)  All construction must be authorized by the city council, and must be in a compatible standard capable of withstanding winds of eighty-five (85) miles per hour, with the doors open or closed. Furthermore, all structures must comply with the building codes and airport zoning and land use ordinance. 
(5)  Rule 5. Unauthorized signs. No signs or equipment or portable buildings and house trailers may be erected, moved in or installed on the airport property except as may be specifically authorized by the city council. 
(6)  Rule 6. Disabled/wrecked aircraft. The airport manager shall immediately notify the city manager of any disabled/wrecked aircraft. 
(7)  Rule 7. Repairs to aircraft. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the runway or taxiway, and all outside repairs shall be made at the places designated by the airport manager for such purposes. 
(8)  Rule 8. Agricultural operations. Agricultural spraying operations will be conducted in accordance with procedures approved by the airport manager and made known to all persons conducting agricultural spraying operations. Said operations shall be conducted only on the designated areas, by persons licensed to handle chemicals. Chemicals used in agricultural flying operations shall be dispersed, maintained, stored, the dispensing equipment and dispensing areas cleaned, and all empty containers promptly disposed of or stored in accordance with the standards set by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Texas Department of Water Resources and the airport manager. 
(9)  Because of the hazard of such operation, the city will require each agricultural spraying operator to present a certificate or proof of insurance bond in an amount acceptable to the city council. 
(10)  Rule 9. Injury to person. No person shall enter the airport operations area either on foot or by motor or any type of vehicle, without permission from the airport manager, and any person so entering upon airport property does so at his own risk and with no liability to the city or the airport manager for any injury or damage to person or property. The violation of any federal law may be enforced as necessary concerning the operation of the airport facility. The term airport operation area (taxiway/runway) as used in this rule shall not include carriage of passengers to and from the terminal in the normal course of business. 
(11)  Rule 10. Licensed pilots. Only properly registered aircraft and persons holding a current airman's license issued by FAA shall operate upon or over the municipal airport without written authorization from the city or its designated agent. Provided that this limitation shall not apply to students in training under certified flight instructors nor to the public aircraft of the U.S. military, federal or state government, or a territory or political subdivision thereof, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign government with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. 
(12)  Rule 11. Registration. Every person stationed, employed, receiving instructions or operating upon the municipal airport shall register at the office of the airport manager. The information shall include: his name, address, telephone number and the nature of his business or occupation. Identification numbers of all aircraft hangared at the municipal airport shall be registered at the office of the airport manager. The airport manager shall file a monthly activity report with the city manager setting out the above information along with a monthly maintenance/repair need. 
(13)  Rule 12. Intoxicants and narcotics forbidden. No person under the influence of an intoxicant or narcotic shall operate or fly in any aircraft upon or over the municipal airport. Provided such prohibition shall not apply to a passenger when accompanied by a nurse or caretaker in an aircraft apart from the pilot. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 2, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.503 - Ground Operations 
(1)  Rule 13. Air and ground traffic-vehicular traffic. All vehicular traffic shall be confined to the roads, streets, avenues and alleys provided on the grounds for that purpose, and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. Vehicles used by the city/county, airport manager or other authorized personnel to check the condition of the landing area will have an amber rotating/flashing light on top of the vehicle or an approved orange and white checkered flag attached to the vehicle and contain a mobile or portable radio transceiver tuned to the appropriate Unicom and emergency frequencies (122.8 and 121.5). 
(2)  Rule 14. Fueling of aircraft. Fueling of aircraft shall be accomplished by authorized airport personnel only. 
(A)  Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed places. 
(B)  All aircraft will be positively grounded by an approved grounding system when being serviced with fuel. Aircraft being serviced by a fuel truck will be grounded to the fuel truck in an approved manner and the fuel truck will be positively grounded. 
(C)  All aircraft shall be fueled at the fuel pump, or if by fuel truck, out on the ramp well clear of the hangars and buildings. 
(D)  Aircraft fuel trucks will be equipped, operated and maintained in accordance with National Fire Protection Association, Incorporated, NEPA Manual 407 Aircraft Fuel Servicing. 
(E)  Persons or aviation businesses wishing to supply and dispense aviation fuel for their private use must first obtain written authorization from the city. Private fueling facilities must be located on leased property and the fueling system must be installed and the fuel dispensed in accordance with aircraft fueling rules and directives. 
(F)  Public sale of automobile fuel for use in aircraft will not be permitted on the airport without proper approval. Aircraft authorized by the FAA to use nonaviation type auto fuel may be privately fueled by the aircraft owner only by receiving approval from the airport manager. 
(G)  Aviation or auto fuel shall not be stored in or around hangars. 
(3)  Rule 15. Tiedown of aircraft. 
(A)  All aircraft not hangared shall be tied down or otherwise secured at all times. 
(B)  The aircraft owner or his agent is responsible for the tiedown or securing of his aircraft at all times. 
(4)  Rule 16. Running aircraft engines. 
(A)  If not equipped with adequate brakes, the engine of an aircraft shall not be started until and unless the wheels have been set with blocks or other suitable means of restraining the aircraft. The chocks or blocks must have handling ropes or other safe suitable means for removing the holding blocks when needed. 
(B)  No aircraft will be propped, started or left running without qualified personnel at the controls. 
(C)  No engine will be started up or operated inside any building. 
(D)  No engine shall be operated or warmed up until and unless the aircraft is in such a position that the propeller stream or the jet blast will clear all buildings, other aircraft and persons in the observation areas and path of the aircraft. 
(5)  Rule 17. Taxiing aircraft. 
(A)  No person shall start or taxi an aircraft until he has ascertained that there will be no danger of injury or collision of any person or object in the immediate area or path of the aircraft. 
(B)  Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed, and in such manner as to be at all times under the control of the pilot. 
(C)  Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and taxiway area if there is an aircraft approaching to land, or on the ground in position for take-off. 
(D)  There shall be no taxiing of aircraft by engine power into or out of hangars. 
(6)  Rule 18. Parking aircraft. 
(A)  Aircraft may be parked only in areas so designated in the airport layout plan. 
(B)  Aircraft shall not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the normal movement of other aircraft and traffic unless specifically authorized by the airport manager as an emergency measure. 
(C)  It is the responsibility of the pilot when leaving a parked aircraft unattended to insure that the brakes are set or that the aircraft is properly tied down, chocked and secured. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 3, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.504 - Landing and Take-off 
(1)  Rule 19. Authority to suspend operations. The airport manager may suspend or restrict any or all operations without regard to weather conditions, whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety. 
(2)  Rule 20. Take-off from apron or other non approved areas. No take-off or landing shall be made on the apron, parking ramp or taxiway. 
(3)  Rule 21. Take-offs and landings. No take-off or landing shall be made except on the designated runways or designated special use landing and take-off areas. 
(4)  Rule 22. Traffic pattern. All airplanes, fixed wing, not rotorcraft, landing at the Bowie Municipal Airport shall fly a standard, left-hand traffic pattern at an altitude of two thousand one hundred feet indicated pressure altitude adjusted to barometric pressure (2,100 feet MSL). Entry for landing at the Bowie Municipal Airport shall be made according to the latest FAR Revision (Federal Aviation Regulations). 
Rotorcraft shall utilize the designated landing area and avoid over-flying other aircraft or hangars. Aircraft landing at the designated rotorcraft area shall utilize an one thousand eight hundred (1,800) foot MSL close-in pattern avoiding conflict with other traffic. 
Persons operating ultralight aircraft shall conform to FAR 103. 
(5)  Rule 23. Straight-in approaches. Straight-in approaches should not be used except in an emergency or instrument training. 
(6)  Rule 24. Student training and practice flying. 
(A)  All certified flight instructors will be informed of rules and regulations in effect of the municipal airport and thoroughly instruct their students appropriately, assuming responsibility for their trainees. 
(B)  The airport manager will post notices in the office designating limited areas of the airport and local areas for practice and student training. 
(7)  Rule 25. Special procedures. The airport manager will, in the interest of safety, designate special traffic procedures for certain operations, such as air shows, agricultural displays, lighter-than-air activities, ultralight aircraft flying and any other activities that may fall under the jurisdiction of the airport manager's responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 4, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.505 - Fire Regulations 
(1)  Rule 26. Fire regulations. 
(A)  Everyone availing themselves of the airport facilities in any manner, shall exercise the greatest care and caution to avoid and prevent fires. 
(B)  Smoking or open flames within fifty (50) feet of any aircraft, fuel truck or fueling facility is prohibited. 
(C)  Compressed flammable gas shall not be kept or stored on the airport, except at such places as may be designated by the airport manager. 
(D)  No flammable substance shall be used in cleaning engines or other parts of an aircraft inside a hangar or other buildings. 
(E)  Smoking is allowed only in areas designated by the airport manager. 
(F)  Hangar entrances shall be kept clear and unobstructed at all times so as to provide a fire lane access. 
(G)  The floors in all buildings shall be kept clean and free from oil and solvents. Volatile, flammable substances shall not be used for cleaning floors. 
(H)  No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper, tall grass/weeds or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate on or about the airport so as to cause a potential hazard to aircraft, equipment or buildings. 
(I)  Prior to being fueled, all aircraft will be positively grounded by a grounding cable which is connected to a copper, copper clad, galvanized or other approved ground rod 5/8" or greater in diameter and buried to a sufficient depth so as to reach permanent subsoil moisture. The resistance of the ground rod should not exceed ten (10) ohms. The bonding/grounding cable shall be of flexible, durable and conducting material. The attaching clip on the end of grounding cable should be connected to an approved bare, unpainted metal on the aircraft; however, the grounding clip shall not be attached to the propeller, landing gear or radio antennas. 
(J)  Where aircraft fueling is performed by a fuel truck, an adequate number of suitable grounding connections shall be provided at the parking ramp servicing area. 
(K)  At least two (2) twenty (20) pound portable fire extinguishers will be available within fifty (50) feet of the fuel pumps where the open hose discharge capacity of the fuel pump is not more than two hundred (200) gallons per minute; at least one portable, wheelmounted 80-pound fire extinguisher is required where the open hose discharge capacity is more than two hundred (200) gallons per minute, but not more than three hundred fifty (350) gallons per minute; at least two (2) 80-pound fire extinguishers are required where the open hose fuel discharge capacity is greater than three hundred fifty (350) gallons per minute. 
(L)  All aviation fuel nozzles will have dead men controls which will shut off the flow of fuel when the nozzle hand control is released. 
(M)  The pilot and passenger(s) will exit the aircraft before fueling. The aircraft must be unoccupied during fueling operations. 
(N)  In all matters related to aircraft fueling safety, the provisions of NEPA Manual 407 Aircraft Fuel Servicing, published and available from National Fire Protection Association, Incorporated, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02210, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 6, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.506 - Conflict in Rules 
    In each and every case where the rules so stated herein may conflict with Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) the latter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 7, adopted 6-1-93) 
Sec. 1.507 - Penalty for Violation 
(a)  Any person operating or handling an aircraft in violation of any of these rules or refusing to comply therewith, may, at once, be ejected from the airport, or may, for a period of time, be denied access to the airport facilities pending a hearing by the city council for any necessary disciplinary action as they deem necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(b)  Any violation of the ordinance/order shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 93-6, Sec. 8, adopted 6-1-93) 
ARTICLE 1.600 - EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 418.106. 

Sec. 1.601 - Authority 
    This article was enacted under the authority of the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A. Government Code, Section 418.001 et seq.) and Executive Order No. DB23, June 21, 1975, and city ordinance (Ord. No. 5010) on civil defense. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. I, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.602 - References 
    The following references are hereby provided: 
(1)  Texas disaster plan. 
(2)  Public Law 81-920, Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950. 
(3)  Public Law 93-288, Federal Disaster Relief Act of 1974. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. II, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.603 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for effective emergency operations in the city utilizing existing forms of local government, civic groups, business and industry leaders in cooperation with the state and federal governments. The city is responsible to its citizens for saving lives, minimizing damage, alleviating suffering and helping to restore and rehabilitate property and society in the event of a natural disaster or national emergency, including nuclear attack or threat thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. III, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.604 - Situation and Assumptions 
(a)  Situation. The city is located in the southwestern part of the county. The northern boundary of the county is the Red River separating Oklahoma and Texas. The city has an estimated population of 5,810 and the county an estimated population of 17,410. There are 932 square miles located in the county. The city is intersected by Highways 287 and 59, and is 50 miles southeast of Wichita Falls, and is approximately 70 miles northwest of Fort Worth. 
(1)  The climate of the city is generally described as follows: The average temperatures range between 41 and 81. The average rainfall ranges from 25 to 35 inches per year. 
(2)  The city operates under a city council-manager form of government with the city manager as the chief executive officer. The city government provides police, fire, electricity, water, and sewerage to the population. Gas utility service is supplied by Lone Star Gas Company and telephone service is provided by Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. 
(3)  The city is intersected by the Burlington Northern Rock Island Railroad. There is a municipally-owned airport with a lighted 3,600-foot runway. The city is also served by Continental Trailways Bus Line. 
(4)  Radio station KBAN, AM, 1410 kh. serves the city. Television is provided by Bowie Cable T.V. and antenna with channels originating from Wichita Falls, Lawton, Oklahoma, Dallas, Fort Worth and Sherman. 
(5)  In the event of a nuclear attack, the closest probable high-risk target is Sheppard Air Force Base in Wichita Falls, followed closely by Carswell Air Force Base in Fort Worth. Fort Worth and Dallas would be probable targets because of their manufacturing and defense plants. 
(b)  Assumptions. The following assumptions apply to the city. 
(1)  Because of its geographical location, topography, and transportation conditions, the city is subject to disasters such as the following: 
(A)  Tornadoes. 
(B)  Industrial accidents of toxic fumes. 
(C)  Petro/chemical storage, fire/explosion. 
(D)  Natural gas leaks. 
(E)  Major transportation accidents. 
(F)  Severe thunderstorms. 
(G)  High winds. 
(H)  Train accidents (explosives/chemicals). 
(I)  Bus accidents. 
(J)  Water contamination. 
(K)  Epidemic. 
(L)  Radioactive material accident. 
(M)  Nuclear warfare. 
(N)  Major fires. 
(O)  Utility outages. 
(2)  It can be assumed that in the event of nuclear warfare, the nearby Wichita Falls, Fort Worth and Dallas area will be a primary target, and possibly this city will receive the direct effects of nuclear weapons, blast, heat, and initial radiation. High level radio-active fallout would probably affect this city. 
(3)  In the event of severe international tension, the nationwide crisis relocation plan may be implemented by the president through the governor. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. IV, adopted 2-15-83) 
State Law reference- Interjurisdictional emergency management agencies, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 418.104; mutual aid, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 418.109. 
Sec. 1.605 - Organization Generally 
(a)  Director. The mayor is hereby designated as the emergency management director for the city. The mayor will be responsible for disaster planning, emergency services and, if so chosen, delegating his authority to an emergency management coordinator (EMC) who shall serve as an assistant to the presiding officer of the political subdivision for emergency management purposes. Existing agencies of government in the city will perform emergency functions related to those they perform in normal operations. The basic function of the city officials will be to coordinate these activities and insure availability from other sources of any skills not normally available in existing government. 
(b)  Emergency operation center (EOC). The EOC for the city is located in the city office/police department. The alternate EOC is located at the Pelham Park Administration Building. The city manager will exercise direction and control from the Bowie EOC. Only the mayor/city manager, or officials designated by him, are authorized to activate the EOC as necessary during actual or threatened disasters. Heads of departments and other personnel having emergency assignments will report to the EOC upon its activation. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. V, adopted 2-15-83) 
State Law reference- Declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A. Government Code, Sec. 418.108. 
Sec. 1.606 - Assignment of Responsibilities and Tasks 
(a)  Executive group. The mayor and council members shall: 
(1)  Provide support and leadership to the Bowie EMC. 
(2)  Encourage the training and education of the citizens of Bowie, the EMC, and departmental personnel. 
(3)  Meet in emergency session as necessary. 
(b)  Mayor. The mayor shall: 
(1)  Prepare plans for emergency public information in coordination with local and area news media. 
(2)  Appoint assistants from various media as needed. 
(3)  Coordinate daily status reports. 
(4)  Coordinate the bilingual preparation of disaster information/instructions. 
(5)  Establish point for incoming news media. 
(6)  Request aid from state and federal governments, including military support, if required. 
(c)  City manager. The city manager shall: 
(1)  Implement the decisions and policies of the city council. 
(2)  Serve as staff advisor to the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Prepare, review, and revise, as necessary, the emergency operations plan, and coordinate and assist other departments in the development of operating procedures to the plan. 
(4)  Control and direct the actual operations and/or training efforts of the civil defense and disaster relief organization for the city. 
(5)  Coordinate other community agencies and their emergency plans, e.g., schools, industry, Red Cross, and Salvation Army. 
(6)  Be responsible for gathering damage assessment information from department and agency chiefs. 
(7)  Conduct post-disaster damage surveys to obtain accurate records of losses suffered. 
(8)  Update tax records to reflect changes in value due to loss or restoration. 
(9)  Authorize demolition, condemning and posting of unsafe structures. 
(10)  Coordinate EOC operations. 
(11)  Maintain current EOC staffing, organization and assignments. 
(12)  Provide supplies for EOC. 
(13)  Make or authorize emergency purchases. 
(14)  Issue identification badges or cards to city employees and other individuals used as emergency personnel. 
(15)  Coordinate photographic documentation of disaster damages and activities. 
(16)  Be responsible to the mayor and city council for situation analysis of the disaster. Gather, assemble, and evaluate information pertinent to the emergency situations. Provide reports of the emergency to state and federal agencies. 
(17)  Prepare standard operating procedures to accomplish above functions. 
(d)  Assistant city manager. The assistant city manager shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for providing updated information to the state concerning the community shelter plan (CSP) as necessary; planning for and directing shelter occupancy, including preparation of shelters for natural or nuclear disasters, and selection and training of shelter staffs; coordinating with welfare officers, building owners, churches, Red Cross and other civic agencies on use of their personnel and/or facilities; in emergencies, directing filling of shelters, overloading if required; when feasible, movement between shelters, evacuation of persons from endangered shelters and final closure of shelters when possible. 
(2)  Be responsible for emergency clothing, housing, feeding, registration and family rehabilitation services, utilizing the facilities, equipment and personnel of the Texas Department of Public Welfare, American Red Cross, Salvation Army, service clubs, churches and other welfare agencies in accordance with advance agreements with them. 
(3)  Issue permits for temporary housing. 
(4)  Coordinate with the clergy to provide for the spiritual welfare and morale of the citizens. 
(5)  Prepare estimates of numbers of injuries and fatalities. 
(6)  Coordinate with local mortuaries on the establishment of an emergency morgue in the event of a major disaster or accident with a large number of fatalities. 
(7)  Act as the city's liaison officer with all welfare oriented agencies. 
(8)  Keep the executive group apprised of the status of welfare activities within the city during and following disaster activities. 
(9)  Supervise and coordinate all local transportation resources: 
(A)  City vehicles including public transportation buses. 
(B)  Public school system buses. 
(C)  Church buses. 
(D)  Local trucking agencies. 
(10)  Ensure the availability of gasoline. 
(11)  Coordinating with the police department the planning and moving of materials and personnel during disaster emergencies. 
(12)  Keep records on the use of noncity-owned vehicles used by the city during an emergency. 
(13)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. VI, adopted 2-15-83) 
State Law reference- Local finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 418.107. 
Sec. 1.607 - Department and Agency Functions 
(a)  Police Department. The police department and the chief of police shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for police services within the city, including law enforcement, traffic control and protection of life and property. 
(2)  Provide communications center and services for the city. 
(3)  Perform intelligence assignments. 
(4)  The police chief will, during any disaster emergency, act as a staff advisor to the EMC and be under his supervision. 
(5)  Act as liaison between military groups and the city's civil defense program. 
(6)  Act as reception committee for incoming military units. 
(7)  Designate reception sites and field command post locations. 
(8)  Ensure training of police personnel. 
(9)  Supervise animal control personnel. 
(10)  Develop and maintain a standard operating procedure for the above functions. 
(b)  Fire Protection and Rescue. The fire protection and rescue department and the fire chief/fire marshal shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for use of the fire department's personnel, volunteers and equipment to control all types of fires. 
(2)  Conduct rescue operations with the assistance of other agencies such as the Red Cross and military units. 
(3)  Assist the police department in warning the public in case of emergency and in setting up field command posts. 
(4)  Upon receipt of warning, sound city sirens and notify industry. 
(5)  Assist in radiological monitoring. 
(6)  Assist in decontamination. 
(7)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(c)  Street Department. The street department and the street superintendent shall: 
(1)  Coordinate, restore and maintain streets, roads and storm drains including removal of debris. 
(2)  Coordinate with police on barricading disaster areas; set up and remove barricades. 
(3)  Coordinate with city health department for spraying operations and removal of dead animals/mass burials. 
(4)  Coordinate traffic control with police department. 
(5)  Report damages to EOC. 
(6)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(d)  Water and Sewer Department. The water and sewer department and the director of water and wastewater utilities shall: 
(1)  Coordinate, maintain and restore water and wastewater systems and facilities. 
(2)  Prepare for and prevent water contamination. 
(3)  Assist in decontamination. 
(4)  Report damages to EOC. 
(5)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(e)  Public Works and Sanitation. The public works and sanitation department and the public works director shall: 
(1)  Maintain and restore solid waste service. 
(2)  Remove trees and shrubbery which have been uprooted. 
(3)  Provide vehicles and drivers as requested by the CEC. 
(4)  Report damages to EOC. 
(5)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(f)  Electric department. The electric department and the utility service supervisor shall: 
(1)  Insure that all private utility companies' emergency plans support the emergency operations plan. 
(2)  Insure that private utilities place a representative in the EOC with necessary radio communications to dispatch and coordinate disaster operations. 
(3)  Coordinate restoration of service to essential facilities such as hospitals, police and fire stations, nursing homes, EOC, etc., on a priority basis as conditions require. 
(4)  Report damages to EOC. 
(5)  Prepare standard operating procedures for the above functions. 
(g)  Health and Medical. The health and medical department and the city health officer shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the protection of the population through emergency health and medical measures utilizing all available resources in the city. 
(2)  Coordinate medical help to affected areas; provide medical care of all injured and those needing emergency treatment and direct first-aid operations. 
(3)  Coordinate with city health department and other agencies to prevent the spread of sickness and disease. 
(4)  Instruct other operating departments regarding medical measures. 
(5)  Advise officials on health and medical problems. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. VII, adopted 2-15-83) 
State Law reference- Impersonating public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 37.11. 
Sec. 1.608 - Line of Succession 
    The line or order of succession for the chief executive officer of the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Mayor. 
(2)  Mayor pro tem. 
(3)  Ranking councilperson. 
(4)  City manager. 
(5)  Assistant city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. VIII, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.609 - Status; Conflict of Laws 
    The city government supersedes all other authority within the city during a declared emergency. At times of emergency, orders, rules, regulations, promulgated by civil defense shall be in effect and shall supersede other orders, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. IX, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.610 - Review; Amendments 
    The emergency operations plan as set forth in this article shall be reviewed each six (6) months and revised or updated at least once a year as required. 
(Ord. No. 6202, Sec. X, adopted 2-15-83) 
Sec. 1.611 - Adoption of National Incident Management System 
    The city adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, adopted July 5, 2005. 
ARTICLE 1.700 - SALES AND USE TAXES 

Sec. 1.701 - 1969 Sales and Use Tax 
    The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of a one-percent local sales and use tax, the tax is hereby imposed in the city and shall become effective as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Section 321.102. The city secretary is hereby instructed to forward to the state comptroller of public accounts, by registered or certified mail, a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section derives and a map of this city clearly showing the boundaries thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4003, Sec. I, II, adopted 12-22-69) 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 321.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1.702 - 1997 Sales and Use Tax for the Promotion of Economic and Industrial Development 
    The city adopts and levies a sales and use tax for the promotion and development of new and expanded business enterprises at the rate of one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent to be used for improving and promoting economic and industrial development. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, Sec. 1, adopted 11-5-96) 
Editor's note- Approved by the voters at and election held on January 18, 1997. 
Sec. 1.703 - 1997 Sales and Use Tax for the Purchase and Improvement of Land, Buildings and Facilities 
    There shall be and is hereby adopted and levied a sales and use tax within the city under and pursuant to authority conferred by Section 4B of the Act at a rate of one-half of one percent on the sales of items at retail and a use tax at the same rate on the use, storage or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer during such time as such tax is effective within the city. Such tax shall be imposed, computed, administered, collected and remitted in accordance with V.T.C.A. Tax Code, Chapter 321, except as inconsistent with Section 4B of the Act. The effective date of the tax levied by this section and imposed in accordance with Section 4B of the Act is July 1, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, Sec. 1, adopted 11-5-96; Ord. No. 99-3, Sec. 1, adopted 3-2-99) 
Editor's note- Approved by the voters at an election held on January 18, 1997. 
Sec. 1.704 - Authority of Type A Corporation to Undertake Type B Projects 
    As set forth in Texas Local Government Code Section 504.171, the Bowie Economic Development Corporation, Type A Corporation, may undertake any project that the Bowie 4B Sales Tax Corporation, Type B Corporation, may undertake under Local Government Code Chapter 505, and as may be amended. 
    The City Council of the City of Bowie may, by ordinance, revoke any authority granted to the Bowie Economic Development Type A Corporation under Local Government Code Section 504.17l(b). 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, Sec. 3, adopted 5-21-13) 
Sec. 1.705 - Telecommunications Tax 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City of Bowie, Texas. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications devices from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code  321.210(a) is hereby repealed by the City of Bowie, Texas, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code  321.210(b) thereof. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City of Bowie, Texas, for all other local sales and use taxes, as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, Sec. 3, adopted 2-21-17) 
ARTICLE 1.800 - TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(1)  The terms "dealer's motor vehicle inventory," "dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory," "dealer's heavy equipment inventory," and "retail manufactured housing inventory" have the meanings assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(2)  The term "goods-in-transit" is defined to mean tangible personal property that: 
(A)  Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
(B)  Is detained at a location in this state in which the owner of the property does not have a direct or indirect ownership interest for assembling, storing, manufacturing, processing, or fabricating purposes by the person who acquired or imported the property; 
(C)  Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
(D)  Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
(3)  The term "location" means a physical address. 
(4)  The term "petroleum product" means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-20, Sec. 2, adopted 11-20-07) 
ARTICLE 1.900 - AD VALOREM TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 1.01 et seq. 
Charter reference- Defect shall not invalidate tax levy, 7.11; annual tax for bond interest and sinking fund, 8.03; taxation generally, Art. IX. 

Sec. 1.901 - Conveyance of Transfers, Deeds 
    The mayor may make transfers and sign deeds to any and all lands sold at tax sales for the city taxes and bought in by the city. All deeds signed by the mayor shall pass all right, title and interest that may be held by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1302, Sec. 1, adopted 10-3-83) 
State constitution reference- Sales of lands and other property for taxes, Art. VIII, 13. 
State Law reference- Tax sales, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 34.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1.902 - Amount of Elderly Homestead Exemption 
    Upon compliance with all requirements of this article and all other applicable laws and ordinances, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of married or unmarried persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4004, Sec. 1, adopted 2-10-75) 
Sec. 1.903 - Effective Date for Elderly Homestead Exemption 
    Eligibility for an exemption under this article shall be determined each year as of January first of such year. 
(Ord. No. 4004, Sec. 2, adopted 2-10-75) 
Sec. 1.904 - Application for Elderly Homestead Exemption 
    The person claiming an exemption under this article shall file with the city tax assessor-collector, between January first and April first of the year for which such exemption is claimed, documentary proof of age satisfactory to the tax assessor-collector and a sworn claim for such exemption, describing the property for which exemption is sought, on forms prescribed by the tax assessor-collector. In the event of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the tax assessor-collector, late applications may be accepted, but no later than ten (10) days prior to the time for submission of assessments rolls to the appraisal review board. 
(Ord. No. 4004, Sec. 3, adopted 2-10-75) 
Sec. 1.905 - Determination; Appeal 
    After application for an exemption under this article, all necessary proof and any other necessary information has been filed, the tax assessor-collector shall determine eligibility for such exemption, which determination shall be final, and the property in question shall be placed on the tax rolls in accordance with such determination. In the event the tax assessor-collector should deny such application for exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant within ten (10) days of such determination and in no event later than the submission of all assessment lists to the appraisal review board. 
(Ord. No. 4004, Sec. 4, adopted 2-10-75) 
State Law reference- Residence homestead, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 11.13. 
Sec. 1.906 - Status 
    January first of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for such exemption, and qualification therefor shall be determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year in question, with each subsequent year requiring determination of eligibility as provided herein. There shall be no proration of the exemption provided for in this article for any taxable year either in the event of qualification or disqualification of either applicable person or property for such exemption after January first of the applicable year. 
(Ord. No. 4004, Sec. 5, adopted 2-10-75) 
ARTICLE 1.1000 - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 351.001 et seq.; "hotel" defined, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 156.001(1). 

Sec. 1.1001 - Levied, Amount 
    There is hereby levied a city hotel/motel occupancy tax of seven percent (7%). 
(Ord. No. 97-10 adopted 10-21-97) 
Sec. 1.1002 - Collection by Owners 
    All hotel/motel owners/operators shall collect the tax levied under this article on all sleeping accommodations where such occupancy is charged two dollars ($2.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 060485, Sec. 2, adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 1.1003 - Quarterly Accounting 
    All taxes levied by this article will be accounted for and submitted to the city secretary quarterly as provided for in the city procedures for the collection, validation and submission of hotel/motel occupancy tax revenues. 
(Ord. No. 060485, Sec. 2A, adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 1.1004 - Violations 
    For noncompliance with the direction of this article by any person having been served notice of noncompliance there will be a fine. The failure to submit proper records and payment of the hotel/motel tax within thirty (30) days following notification of late filing will result in citation and a fine as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code]. 
(Ord. No. 060485, Sec. 2B, adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 1.1005 - Use of Revenues 
(a)  The revenue derived from this municipal hotel occupancy tax shall be used to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry as provided by the Texas Tax Code, Chapter 351 "Municipal Hotel Occupancy Taxes," as now enacted or as hereafter may be amended, in accordance with resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the tax authorized by this article. 
(c)  The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the person, governmental entity or private organization to which it delegates those functions and shall require the person, governmental entity or private organization to make periodic reports to the city council, at least quarterly, listing the expenditures made by the person, governmental body or private organization with revenue from the tax provided by the city as authorized by law. 
(d)  The person, governmental entity or private organization must maintain revenue provided by the city from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(e)  The approval by the city council of the annual budget of that person, governmental entity or private organization to whom it delegates those functions creates a fiduciary duty in that person, governmental entity or private organization with respect to the revenue provided by the city from the tax. 
(f)  This section shall become effective on the date of its adoption, and shall apply to taxes due and received from and after April 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, Sec. 1, adopted 2-3-15) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-02, adopted Feb. 3, 2015, repealed  1.1005 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former  1.1005 pertained to uses for proceeds, and derived from Ord. No. 060485, Secs. 3, 3A, 3B, adopted June 18, 1985; and Ord. No. 97-10, adopted Oct. 21, 1997. 
Sec. 1.1006 - Advisory Board 
    An advisory board shall be established to meet on an annual basis to review the revenues collected and audit the expenditures from the hotel/motel tax receipts. The board shall report to the mayor and council with respect to their findings and offer any suggestions for improvements or inconsistencies with the provisions of this article. The board shall be comprised of a chairperson (councilmember) and four (4) members [two (2) from the hotel/motel industry and two (2) from the chamber of commerce]. Representatives of the board shall be renewed and/or replaced every two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 060485, Sec. 4, adopted 6-18-85) 
ARTICLE 1.1100 - LIBRARY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvements, V.A.C.S., Art. 1269j-4.1; libraries and archives, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 441.001 et seq.; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 251.001 et seq. 

Sec. 1.1101 - Library Department Created 
    A department is hereby created within the framework of the governmental organization of the city, which shall be known as the library department. It shall function according to state law and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1502, Sec. 1, adopted 12-14-70) 
Sec. 1.1102 - Board of Trustees-Created, General Authority 
    There is hereby created the Board of Trustees, Bowie Public Library. Such board shall administer and supervise the operations of the public library of the city and any branches thereof as may be established by the council, under the supervision and control of the library director. Such board may formulate such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary for the orderly use of the library facilities and in governing the performance of duties of the library employees and personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1502, Sec. 3, adopted 12-14-70) 
Sec. 1.1103 - Board of Trustees-Appointment, Terms 
    The board of trustees of the public library shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council for two-year staggered terms at the first council meeting in December of each year. Such terms shall commence on January first immediately following the appointment. The names of the appointees shall be appended to Ordinance No. 1502 by the city secretary at such times as appointments are made. 
(Ord. No. 1502, Sec. 4, adopted 12-14-70) 
Sec. 1.1104 - Board of Trustees-Fiscal Restriction 
    The board of trustees shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever. Its finances shall be handled in the same manner as any other division of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 1502, Sec. 5, adopted 12-14-70) 
Sec. 1.1105 - Board of Trustees-Advisory Function 
    The board of trustees of the city public library is advisory in nature to the mayor and city council concerning the needs and operation of the library and its associated activities. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C. Sec. 9, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 1.1106 - Library Director 
    The library department shall be under the control and direction of the library director. The library director will report to the city manager as a department head and will coordinate activities with and through the board of trustees of the library. The library director and the city manager are to provide administrative support to the board of trustees in a reasonable and timely manner. The library director will perform additional duties as required and be responsible for the proper and timely submission of reports required by the city manager to effectively evaluate the performance and capability of library personnel and activities. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 9, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 1.1107 - Acceptance of Gifts; Donations 
    The city hereby accepts all gifts and donations of books and equipment heretofore made for the city public library, with grateful thanks to the donors both of books and time. Such books and equipment, together with such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the books and equipment of the public library. 
(Ord. No. 1602, Sec. 2, adopted 12-14-70) 
Sec. 1.1108 - Promulgation of Policies 
    The library director is authorized to create policies necessary to govern the books, media and materials of the public library. Such policies will govern circulation and inventory of such books, media and other library material owned by the city or for which the city is responsible. Policies will be established for the term and number of terms in which material may be borrowed by an individual. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 2, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1109 - Responsibility of Card Holder 
    The individual to whom a library card is issued is responsible for the items which are loaned to the referenced library card. Parents or legal guardians are responsible for library cards issued under their consent and for properties loaned to the respective card. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 3, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1110 - Status of Lost, Destroyed Properties 
    Lost or destroyed properties will be treated as overdue and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 4, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1111 - When Property Due; Overdue Fines 
    Books, media, and materials that are borrowed, loaned or checked out from the public library are to be returned on or by the indicated due date. For such items that are not returned as indicated, a fine will be assessed for each item and for each calendar day the item is overdue. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 5, adopted 6-21-89) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations, Sec. 1.105. 
Sec. 1.1112 - Schedule of Fines 
    The following schedule of fines will be applied to properties of the public library that are not returned on the established due date: 
(1)  Books, magazines, tape recordings and records, per calendar day ..... $ 0.10 
(2)  Electronic media, per calendar day ..... $1.00 
(3)  Video cassette players, per calendar day ..... $10.00 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 6, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1113 - Maximum Fines 
    The total amount of overdue fines for a single item will not exceed the current replacement value of the item as established by the library director. Replacement value will include applicable freight, postage or applicable processing costs. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 7, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1114 - Suspension of Borrowing Privilege 
    Refusal to return library properties, to pay incurred fines, or to pay replacement property values in accordance with this article will result in the suspension of the individual's library card and subsequent privileges. The suspension of the individual's library card will remain in effect until the subsequent properties are returned, fine or fines are paid, and/or the payment for replacement property is made. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 8, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1115 - Return of Property Upon Request 
    Any properties owned, controlled or the responsibility of the public library will be surrendered and returned at the written request of the library director. Properties not returned in accordance with the director's request will be considered as stolen and subject to applicable prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 9, adopted 6-21-89) 
Sec. 1.1116 - Damage of Property 
    The act of willful injury, destruction or defacing of any properties belonging or responsible to the public library is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 10, adopted 6-21-89) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 28.03. 
Sec. 1.1117 - Penalty for Violations 
    The failure of a person to return library material within ten (10) days of a request made under Section 1.1115, or to, within such ten (10) day period, pay the replacement value in accordance with Section 1.1114, shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code]. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 062089, Sec. 11, adopted 6-21-89) 
ARTICLE 1.1200 - BOWIE HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1.1201 - Creation, Name 
    It is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority, to be comprised of the territory included within the boundaries of the city. Such hospital authority is hereby created and the same shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of Bowie Hospital Authority, which is hereby designated as the name by which such authority shall be known. 
(Ord. No. 1050, Sec. 1, adopted 1-28-63) 
Sec. 1.1202 - Board of Directors 
    The hospital authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven (7) members. Each director shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or indenture in connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in the Hospital Authority Act, serve for a term of two (2) years and until their successors have been appointed by the city council and have duly qualified. Each of the directors shall qualify by executing oath of office required of appointed officials of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1050, Sec. 2, adopted 1-28-63) 
State constitution reference- Official oath, Art. XVI, 1. 
State Law reference- Hospital Authority Act, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Sec. 262.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE 1.1300 - LAKE AMON G. CARTER AREA[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- The date of adoption of Ord. No. 1203 is unknown. 

Sec. 1.1301 - Temporary Restriction of Activities Due to Pollution 
    If it should be determined from the ruling of the city council that pollution is occurring so as to endanger the water in Lake Amon G. Carter for public consumption, or so as to endanger the city keeping a state-approved water supply under the rules set up by the state, then upon action of the city council all activities affecting such pollution upon such lake and surrounding same, including fishing, boating, water skiing, camping, etc., shall be prohibited until such danger is past. Notices will be posted at the roadway entrance to Lake Amon G. Carter proclaiming such ruling of the city council. Any violation of the ruling of the city council regarding such restrictions shall be subject to the penalties provided for the violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 1) 
Sec. 1.1302 - Construction Permit 
(a)  Any person desiring to erect any structure around Lake Amon G. Carter shall present an application to the city health officer for approval as complying with sanitary ordinances drawn up by the city council for Lake Amon G. Carter. Upon approval, [a] permit shall be issued for the erection of such structure. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until application is made upon form furnished by the city, and no structure shall be erected without such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 2) 
Sec. 1.1303 - Installation of Septic Tanks; Toilets; Privies Prohibited 
(a)  All habitations located along the marginal lands adjacent to Lake Amon G. Carter shall be provided with a septic tank having sufficient and properly constructed subsurface disposal systems, and which shall be connected to public sewerage system having adequate facilities. All septic tank systems and toilets shall be constructed and installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by and available through the city. All such toilet facilities shall be maintained and operated in such a manner that no effluent therefrom shall enter the water of Lake Amon G. Carter by drainage, seepage or otherwise. 
(b)  No toilet or septic tank for the use of any structure where the public is invited or allowed to congregate shall be placed within two hundred (200) feet of the high water mark (elevation nine hundred thirty (930) feet above sea level) of Lake Amon G. Carter. All structures shall be termed a place where the public is invited or allowed to congregate, except such structures used solely as a private residence to be occupied only by the owner or tenant and his family. 
(c)  No toilet or septic tank or lateral line for a private residence shall be placed within seventy-five (75) feet of the high-water mark of Lake Amon G. Carter. 
(d)  No privy shall be allowed in the territory regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 3) 
Sec. 1.1304 - Activities Prohibited Near Intake 
(a)  No fishing, boating, picnicking or hunting or other recreational activities shall be allowed within one-fourth mile of any water intake. 
(b)  No bathing or swimming shall be allowed within one-half mile of any water intake. 
(c)  All water intakes and boundaries of areas described above will be kept plainly marked by the city at all times. Intake is meant that location in Lake Amon G. Carter where its waters are taken into conduit pipes for transmission to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 4) 
Sec. 1.1305 - Restriction of Industrial Activities 
    If industries are contemplated to be established within thirty (30) miles upstream from the dam belonging to the city, approval of the proposed project by the State Department of Health concerning the treatment of wastes is deemed necessary to prevent undesirable conditions from occurring. No slaughterhouses, markets, or meat shops where hogs, beeves, or other animals or fowl are slaughtered shall be located where any refuse, discharge, or contents thereof of any nature whatsoever shall be discharged into the lake, its drains, streams or tributaries. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 5) 
Sec. 1.1306 - Disposal of Solid Wastes 
    All garbage and trash shall be collected and removed from the lake shore by [the] owner or tenant at least once weekly; provided, however, all trash susceptible to being burned may be incinerated so long as such trash is not allowed to enter the lake. No dead animals or any part thereof, fish, decayed vegetable, food, ashes, garbage, offal, rubbish, or filth of any kind, liquid or otherwise which by its decay or putrefaction could or would become offensive shall be placed or permitted to be placed or situated in such a manner that it will drain or reach the lake, its drains, streams, or tributaries. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 6) 
Sec. 1.1307 - Camping Limited 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon the grounds surrounding Lake Amon G. Carter except at a campsite equipped with a toilet conforming to the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1203, Sec. 7) 
Sec. 1.1308 - Restricted Areas 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorboat on Lake Amon G. A Carter and Lake Amon G. Carter Extension within a restricted area which has been clearly marked in accordance to Title 31, Section 55.304 Texas Administrative Code; provided, that this section shall not apply to peace officers or search and rescue motorboats. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted as follows: 
(1)  "NO WAKE" markers at Selma Park boat dock; 
(2)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Selma Park boat ramp area; 
(3)  "NO BOATS ALLOWED" in restricted area at Hudspeth Beach swimming area; 
(4)  "NO WAKE" markers at Country Club Cove; 
(5)  "NO WAKE" markers at tunnel under FM 1125; 
(6)  No boat shall anchor or tie up within 50' either side of tunnel under dam; 
(7)  "NO FISHING" 50' either side of tunnel on top of dam; 
(8)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Amon G. Carter Lake Extension boat ramp area. 
(Ord. No. 97-9 adopted 9-16-97) 
ARTICLE 1.1400 - BOATS ON LAKE AMON G. CARTER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Lights on boats, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.064; life preserving devices, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.066; boating regulations, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.091 et seq.; coast guard rules, V.T.C.A., Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.093. 

Sec. 1.1401 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means any vessel (such as rafts, canoes, skiffs, dinghies, rowboats, sailing vessels, or motorboats) less than twenty (20) feet in overall length. 
    Motorboat means any vessel propelled in whole or part by machinery, including vessels temporarily equipped with detachable motors, less than twenty-six (26) feet in overall length. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, company, association or joint-stock association, including any trustee, administrator, executor, receiver, assignee or other personal representative thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 3, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1402 - Application; Conflict with Other Laws 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all boats navigating the waters of Lake Amon G. Carter, except where inconsistent with any laws or regulations of any higher governing authority, in which case such laws or regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 2, adopted 6-24-57) 
State Law reference- Water safety, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1.1403 - License for Rental Boats 
(a)  Required. Each year prior to September first, every person who shall rent or offer to rent any boat, or furnish the same for use upon the waters of Lake Amon G. Carter, shall first apply for a license so to do from the police department, upon forms furnished by such department. No boat shall be rented or offered for rent until such license has been granted and the boat marked as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for a license required by this section shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each boat specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Determination of passenger capacity. The police department shall prescribe methods of inspection to determine passenger capacity for each rental boat and to determine that such boat is of suitable structure for the service in which it is to be employed and is in a condition to warrant the belief that it may be used in navigation with safety to life. 
(d)  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the police department to cause boats coming under this section to be inspected upon application of license, and to see that all boats comply with the prescribed standards. Whenever it shall be found that any boat so inspected does not comply with such standards, it shall be the duty of the police department to notify the owner, proprietor or agent in charge of any such boat, to comply with such standards and with the provisions of this section prior to further use of such boat. 
(e)  Identification. With the license herein provided for there shall be issued a durable tag or disc for each boat, showing the year of such inspection and such other matters as the police department may deem necessary, which tag or disc must be affixed to some prominent place at bow of boat. There shall also be painted conspicuously on the after quarter the number of passengers authorized to be carried therein, and no owner, his agent or lessor, shall knowingly permit more than that number of passengers to occupy such boat at any time. 
(f)  Disposition of proceeds. All monies received under this article shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be credited to the general revenue fund. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 4, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1404 - Operation Generally 
(a)  Careful, prudent manner. Every operator of a motorboat shall at all times navigate the same in a careful and prudent manner and at such rate of speed as not to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(b)  Reckless operation. Reckless operation of a motorboat shall include operating the same in a manner which unnecessarily interferes with the free and proper use of the navigable waters of Lake Amon G. Carter or unnecessarily endangers other boats therein, or the life and limb of any person. 
(c)  Speed. No person shall operate a motorboat at a rate of speed greater than will permit him in the exercise of reasonable care to bring the motorboat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(d)  Exceptions. Nothing in the provisions of this article should be construed to mean that the operator of a motorboat actually competing in a race or regatta which is sanctioned by an appropriate government agency shall not attempt to attain high speeds on a marked racing course. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 7, adopted 6-24-57) 
State Law reference- Reckless or negligent operation, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.094; excessive speed, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 31.095. 
Sec. 1.1405 - Rules of the Road 
(a)  Passing. When two (2) boats are approaching each other "head on" or nearly so (so as to risk collision) it shall be the duty of each boat to bear to the right and pass the other boat on its left side. 
(b)  Crossing. When boats approach each other obliquely or at right angles, the boat approaching on the right side has the right-of-way. 
(c)  Overtaking. One (1) boat may overtake another on either side, but must grant right-of-way to the overtaken boat. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 8, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1406 - Anchoring Restricted 
    No person shall anchor a boat for fishing or other purposes on any body of water over which the city has jurisdiction in such a position as to obstruct a passageway ordinarily used by other boats. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 9(A), adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1407 - Prohibited in Swimming Areas 
    No person shall operate a boat within a water area which is clearly marked by buoys or some other distinguishing device as a bathing or swimming area. 
(Ord. No. 1201. Sec. 9, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1408 - Loading Beyond Capacity 
    No boat shall be loaded with cargo or passengers beyond its safe carrying capacity, taking into consideration weather and other normal operating conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 10, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1409 - Toilet Facilities 
    No boat shall be equipped with bath or toilet facilities, nor shall any person discharge garbage or sewerage disposal into or near the waters of Lake Amon G. Carter, except in places provided for such disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 14, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1410 - Water Skiing 
    Water skiing shall be restricted to the lake section lying east of a line on the REA poles at the Old Selma Crossing. 
(Ord. No. 1201, Sec. 18, adopted 6-24-57) 
Sec. 1.1411 - Restricted Activities 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorboat on Lake Amon G. A Carter and Lake Amon G. Carter Extension within a restricted area which has been clearly marked in accordance to Title 31, Section 55.304 Texas Administrative Code; provided, that this section shall not apply to peace officers or search and rescue motorboats. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted as follows: 
(1)  "NO WAKE" markers at Selma Park boat dock; 
(2)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Selma Park boat ramp area; 
(3)  "NO BOATS ALLOWED" in restricted area at Hudspeth Beach swimming area; 
(4)  "NO WAKE" markers at Country Club Cove; 
(5)  "NO WAKE" markers at tunnel under FM 1125; 
(6)  No boat shall anchor or tie up within 50' either side of tunnel under dam; 
(7)  "NO FISHING" 50' either side of tunnel on top of dam; 
(8)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Amon G. Carter Lake Extension boat ramp area. 
(Ord. No. 97-9 adopted 9-16-97) 
ARTICLE 1.1500. - FISHING IN BOWIE LAKE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Fish, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 66.001 et seq. 

Sec. 1.1501 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "Bowie Lake" shall mean the artificial lake located in the county, which served as the source of water supply to the city on April 11, 1939. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 1, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1502 - Fishing Permitted 
    The waters of the Bowie Lake shall be open for fishing purposes subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 2, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1503 - Prohibited Devices 
    No trot lines shall be used in fishing in the Bowie Lake; provided, trot lines shall include any line with more than one (1) hook. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 10, adopted 4-11-39) 
State Law reference- Placing prohibited devices in public water, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Sec. 66.102. 
Sec. 1.1504 - Seining for Minnows 
(a)  No seining for minnows for commercial use shall be allowed in Bowie Lake. 
(b)  Seining for minnows for personal use shall be permitted with a regulation minnow seine not exceeding twenty (20) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 10, 11, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1505 - Daily Bag Limit 
    No person shall be permitted to catch, retain, or possess in any one (1) day more than an aggregate of fifteen (15) fish. The size and number of fish of any particular kind shall be in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 12, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1506 - Lake Custodian-Appointment, Bond 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the office of lake custodian is hereby created. 
(b)  The lake custodian shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The lake custodian shall have full powers of a police officer of the city. 
(c)  Upon his appointment, the lake custodian shall take the oath of office as required by the constitution and laws of the state, and give and furnish a good and sufficient bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city, conditioned that he will faithfully perform all of the duties of the office as required of him by the terms of this article. If the lake custodian furnishes a bond with personal sureties, the same shall be signed by two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties; if he furnishes a surety bond, the same shall be signed by a reliable and substantial surety company, authorized to do business in the state. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 13, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1507 - Lake Custodian-Compensation 
    The compensation to be paid the lake custodian shall be fixed at such amount as shall be deemed advisable by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 16, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1508 - Lake Custodian-Disposition of Receipts 
    All fees collected by the lake custodian and/or city collector shall be remitted to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 14, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1509 - Penalty for Violations 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code]. His permit to fish in the waters of the Bowie Lake shall also be taken up and canceled. 
(Ord. No. 1200, Sec. 16, adopted 4-11-39) 
Sec. 1.1510 - Restricted Activities 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorboat on Lake Amon G. A Carter and Lake Amon G. Carter Extension within a restricted area which has been clearly marked in accordance to Title 31, Section 55.304 Texas Administrative Code; provided, that this section shall not apply to peace officers or search and rescue motorboats. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted as follows: 
(1)  "NO WAKE" markers at Selma Park boat dock; 
(2)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Selma Park boat ramp area; 
(3)  "NO BOATS ALLOWED" in restricted area at Hudspeth Beach swimming area; 
(4)  "NO WAKE" markers at Country Club Cove; 
(5)  "NO WAKE" markers at tunnel under FM 1125; 
(6)  No boat shall anchor or tie up within 50' either side of tunnel under dam; 
(7)  "NO FISHING" 50' either side of tunnel on top of dam; 
(8)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Amon G. Carter Lake Extension boat ramp area. 
(Ord. No. 97-9 adopted 9-16-97) 
ARTICLE 1.1600 - BOWIE RESERVOIR AREA 

Sec. 1.1601 - Scope of Article 
    The Amon G. Carter Lake Extension (Bowie Reservoir) shall be open for public purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article and any further regulatory requirements enacted at some future point in time. All signs and postings on and around the lake will be strictly enforced and be subject to the fine and penalty provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 8, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1602 - Structures Restricted 
(a)  No structure of any type shall be allowed to be constructed, erected or relocated onto the lands within the nine hundred thirty (930) elevation level of the Amon G. Carter Lake Extension (Bowie Reservoir) or within a line measured within one hundred (100) horizontal feet of such elevation. 
(b)  All structures within a one-mile radius of the lake must receive plat approval from the city planning commission and the city council, and must present building plans that conform to the most current building code in effect with the city with respect to structures, and comply with the plumbing and electrical codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 1, 2, adopted 8-19-86; Ord. No. 2003-15, Sec. 1, adopted 12-16-03) 
Sec. 1.1603 - Prohibited Activities 
    No skiing, bathing, or speedboat uses will be permitted on the Amon G. Carter Lake Extension. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 3, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1604 - Boating Generally 
    All boat traffic will proceed with minimum wake disturbance throughout the Amon G. Carter Lake Extension area. No activity will be allowed within two hundred (200) feet of those areas marked by buoys surrounding the intake and spillway towers by the new dam structure. These areas are off limits and trespassers will be prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 4, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1605 - Obstruction of Boat Ramps 
    Vehicles and trailers are prohibited from blocking the ingress and/or egress of the boat ramp or the entrance thereto. All violators will be subject to citation, fine and removal of such vehicles and trailers by wrecker services. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 5, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1606 - Fishing Generally 
(a)  All fishing activities on the Amon G. Carter Lake Extension are subject to regulation and enforcement by the city, when deemed necessary. 
(b)  No trot lines shall be allowed within five hundred (500) feet of those areas designated for swimming. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 3, 6, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1607 - Federal, State Laws Applicable 
    All federal and state regulations are in full force and effect and shall be subject to enforcement by local, state and federal officials with respect to fish and wildlife game laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 7, adopted 8-19-86) 
State Law reference- Wildlife conservation, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, Ch. 41 et seq. 
Sec. 1.1608 - Regulation of Tournaments 
    The city reserves the right to regulate tournaments and to recover fees for such regulation and stock recovery of the lake. At such time as the city adopts and/or changes such regulation with due notice by posting and publication in a local newspaper, any violators of such regulation will be subject to penalty as provided for the violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 9, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1609 - Dedication of Water Rights 
    All water rights of the lake are specifically reserved and dedicated to the city for municipal water use purposes. It is a violation for any person to withdraw water from the lake without a properly executed agreement attesting to same. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 10, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1610 - Accumulation of Solid Waste 
    Anyone found to contribute or cause the accumulation of rubbish, trash, and/or garbage to enter into the lake or an inbound tributary thereof within thirty (30) miles of such water supply shall be guilty of a health violation as well as a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 11, adopted 8-19-86) 
Sec. 1.1611 - Pollution Violations 
    Anyone found to contribute or cause the pollution of the lake through the discharge of any solid or liquid matter onto the lake or inbound tributaries shall be found to be in violation of regulations pertaining to public health and welfare as well as a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 082286, Sec. 12, adopted 8-19-86; Ord. No. 2003-15,  1, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 1.1612 - Restricted Activities 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorboat on Lake Amon G. A Carter and Lake Amon G. Carter Extension within a restricted area which has been clearly marked in accordance to Title 31, Section 55.304 Texas Administrative Code; provided, that this section shall not apply to peace officers or search and rescue motorboats. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted as follows: 
(1)  "NO WAKE" markers at Selma Park boat dock; 
(2)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Selma Park boat ramp area; 
(3)  "NO BOATS ALLOWED" in restricted area at Hudspeth Beach swimming area; 
(4)  "NO WAKE" markers at Country Club Cove; 
(5)  "NO WAKE" markers at tunnel under FM 1125; 
(6)  No boat shall anchor or tie up within 50' either side of tunnel under dam; 
(7)  "NO FISHING" 50' either side of tunnel on top of dam; 
(8)  "NO SWIMMING ALLOWED" in Amon G. Carter Lake Extension boat ramp area. 
(Ord. No. 97-9 adopted 9-16-97) 
ARTICLE 1.1700. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 1.1701 - Organization 
    There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Bowie, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of Bowie shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
Sec. 1.1702 - Emergency Management Director-Powers and Duties 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct and on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Bowie, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the City of Bowie Emergency Management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal, emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could by used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Texas Government Code Chapter 418. 
Sec. 1.1703 - Emergency Management Plan 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of the article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
Sec. 1.1704 - Interjurisdictional Program 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Bowie in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Montague and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Bowie. 
Sec. 1.1705 - Override 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
Sec. 1.1706 - Liability 
    This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the City of Bowie, the agents and representative of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity;. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Bowie a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
Sec. 1.1707 - Commitment of Funds 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
Sec. 1.1708 - Offenses; Penalties 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Bowie, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provision of this article shall be punishable by fine to exceed on thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 99-8 adopted 9-7-99) 
ARTICLE 1.1800 - TERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Boundaries of the city, Sec. 1.02 et seq. 

Sec. 1.1801 - Official Boundary of the City. 
    The plat of record, recorded in the records of Montague County, Texas in Volume 8, page 45, is hereby adopted as the official boundary of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, Sec. 1, adopted 5-8-01) 
ARTICLE 1.1900 - RULES OF ETHICAL CONDUCT 
Division 1. - Statement of Purpose and Principles 

Sec. 1.1901 - General Statement 
    It is the policy of the city council of the City of Bowie to hold its members and the city's other appointed officials to the highest standards of ethical conduct. The city council believes that it has a responsibility to make every reasonable effort to assure the citizens of Bowie that their elected and appointed officials will always place the public's interest above their own. To that end, the city council has concluded that current state laws regulating the conduct of local public officials should be supplemented by adopting additional regulations for the city's elected and appointed officials and that city staff should be directed to provide, at least once a calendar year, educational programs to the city's elected and appointed officials on their legal and ethical obligations under state and local law, including, particularly, their obligation to avoid conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1902 - Ethical Values 
    It is the official policy of the City that: 
(a)  City officials shall be independent, impartial, and responsible to the citizens of the city; 
(b)  City officials shall not have a financial interest, and shall not engage in any business, transaction, or professional activity, or incur any obligation, that conflicts with the proper discharge of their duties for the city in the public interest. 
(c)  The principles of personal conduct and ethical behavior that should guide the behavior of city officials include: 
(1)  A commitment to the public welfare; 
(2)  Respect for the value and dignity of all individuals; 
(3)  Accountability to the citizens of the city; 
(4)  Truthfulness; and 
(5)  Fairness. 
(d)  Under such principles of conduct and ethical behavior, city officials should: 
(1)  Conduct themselves with integrity and in a manner that merits the trust and support of the public; 
(2)  Be responsible stewards of the taxpayers' resources; and 
(3)  Take no official actions that would result in personal benefit in conflict with the best interests of the city. 
(e)  To implement the purpose and principles set out in this Division 1, the city council has determined that it is advisable to enact rules of ethical conduct to govern city officials. It is the purpose and intent of city council to assure a fair opportunity for all of the city's citizens to participate in government, to adopt standards of disclosure and transparency in government, and to promote public trust in government. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1903 - Purpose and Effect 
    The statements of purpose and principles contained in this Division 1 are for guidance only. They are not intended to create binding obligations, to serve as a basis for disciplinary action, or to create any private cause of action. The rules of ethical conduct contained in Division 3 below, are intended not only to serve as a guide for official conduct, but also as a basis for discipline of city officials who do not abide by them. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Division 2. - Rules of Ethical Conduct. 

Sec. 1.1904 - Definitions 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Administrative Board means any board, commission, or other organized body: 
(1)  That has, by law, final decision-making authority on matters within its jurisdiction and that is either: (a) established under the city charter or by city ordinance, or (b) whose members are all council members or are appointed or confirmed by the city council; or 
(2)  Created as a non-profit economic development corporation by the city council under the authority of the Development Corporation Act of 1979, as amended. 
    Advisory board means a board, commission, or other organized body other than an administrative board, that was created by an act of the city council whose members are appointed or confirmed by the city council and are charged with making recommendations to the city council on matters within its jurisdiction. 
    City official means a member of the city council, an administrative board, or an advisory board. 
    Review panel means the body charged with reviewing and acting on complaints and requests for declaratory relief filed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1905 - Covered Officials 
    The rules of ethical conduct contained in this Division 2 apply generally to city officials and in certain defined circumstances to candidates for city council and former city officials. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1906 - Conflicts of Interest, Generally 
(a)  A city official shall abstain from participation in discussion of and any vote on a matter, and shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of his or her interest in a matter, if action on the matter by the body on which the city official serves will have a special economic effect that is distinguishable from its effect on the public on any of the following: 
(1)  The city official; 
(2)  The city official's outside employer or client; 
(3)  The city official's spouse, parent, or child; or 
(4)  A public or private business entity for which the city official, or his or her spouse, parent, or child serves as a director, general partner, or officer, or in any other policy making position. 
(b)  A city official shall abstain from participation in, discussion of, and any vote on a matter involving a person if, within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the vote, the city official has filed a conflicts disclosure statement under Chapter 176 of the Local Government Code relating to that person. 
(c)  A city official shall abstain from participation in, discussion of, and any vote on a matter involving a business entity if: 
(1)  The city official has a substantial interest in another business entity that has had one or more business transactions with the business entity involved in the matter to be voted on; 
(2)  The business transaction or transactions occurred within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the matter to be voted on; and 
(3)  The business transaction or transactions resulted in a payment or payments totaling more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
A city official required to abstain from voting under the preceding paragraph (c) must file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the interest in the business entity. For purposes of the preceding paragraph (c), a "business entity" and "substantial interest in business entity" have the meanings respectively provided for in Section 171.001 (2) and Section 171.002 (a) of the Local Government Code, as amended. 
(d)  Affidavits of conflict of interest filed pursuant to the requirements of this section or state law shall be filed with the city secretary before any vote on the matter and as soon as possible after the city official becomes aware of the need to file the affidavit. 
(e)  The abstention of a city official, pursuant to the requirements of this section or State law, shall be recorded in the minutes or audio recording of the meeting of the respective body on which he or she serves. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1907 - Council Member Prohibited from Doing Business with the City. 
(a)  Except as provided below, no council member shall have a financial interest in any significant contract or transaction involving the sale or lease of goods, real estate, or services, or the lending of credit, to the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the ownership by a council member or his or her spouse, parent or child of the stock or instruments of debt of a publicly traded company does not give the council member a financial interest in any contracts or transactions that company has with the city, provided that the value of the interest held is less than five (5) percent of the value of the company. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a contract or transaction is significant only if the total payments made by the city pursuant to the contract or transaction exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate. 
(d)  This section does not apply to the city's acquisition by eminent domain proceedings of an interest in land owned by a council member. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1908 - Disclosure of Certain Gifts to City Officials 
(a)  Except as provided below, a city official who receives as a guest, a gift of food, lodging, transportation, or entertainment that reasonably appears to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in value shall file with the city secretary within thirty calendar days after receiving the gift a written disclosure statement containing the following information: 
(1)  A description of the gift of food, lodging, transportation, or entertainment that was received; 
(2)  The date or dates on which the gift was received; 
(3)  The name of the host who paid for, or provided, the gift; and 
(4)  A statement that the aggregate value of the gift is believed to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  The requirements of (a), above, do not apply to a gift or other benefit conferred on account of kinship or a personal, professional, or business relationship independent of the status of the recipient as a city official. 
(c)  This section does not apply to any gift that is required to be and is reported under any other state law, including a required election campaign filing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1909 - Appearance on Behalf of Private Interests of Others. 
(a)  A member of the city council shall not appear before the city council or any administrative board or advisory board for the purpose of representing the private interests of another person or entity. However, a member of the city council may, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, appear before any such body to represent the member's own interests or the interests of the member's spouse or minor children. 
(b)  A city official who is not a member of the city council shall not appear before the body on which he or she serves for the purpose of representing the private interests of another person or entity, and shall not appear before any other body for the purpose of representing the private interests of another person or entity in connection with an appeal from a decision of the body on which the city official serves. However, the city official may, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, appear before any such body to represent the city official's own interests or the interests of the city official's spouse or minor children. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1910 - Misuse and Disclosure of Confidential Information 
(a)  It is a violation of this ethics code for a city official to violate Section 39.06 (Misuse of Official Information) of the Texas Penal Code, as amended. 
(b)  A city official shall not disclose to the public any information that is deemed confidential under any federal, state, local law, or council rules. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1911 - Restrictions on Political Activity and Political Contributions 
(a)  No city official or candidate for city council shall meet with any employee or group of employees of the city for political campaign purposes while such employees are on duty unless part of an approved city council activity. 
(b)  No city official shall, directly or indirectly, coerce or attempt to coerce any city employee to: 
(1)  Participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate or political committee, or engage in any other political activity relating to a particular party, candidate, or issue; or 
(2)  Refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity. 
(c)  The following actions by city officials are not prohibited by this section: 
(1)  The making of a general statement encouraging another person to vote in an election; 
(2)  A solicitation of contributions or other support that is directed to the general public or to an association or organization; and 
(3)  The acceptance of a campaign contribution from a city employee. 
(d)  No city official shall use, request, or permit the use of city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for the creation or distribution of materials to be used in a political campaign or for any other purpose in support of a political campaign. However, meeting rooms and other city facilities that are made available for use by the public may be used for political purposes by city officials under the same terms and conditions as they are made available for other public uses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1912 - Regulations Applicable to Former City Officials. 
(a)  A former member of city council shall not use or disclose confidential government information acquired during the member's service on the city council. A former member of city council is not prohibited from disclosing information if: 
(1)  The information is no longer confidential; 
(2)  The information involves reports of illegal or unethical conduct and is disclosed to a law enforcement agency; or 
(3)  The disclosure is necessary to further public safety and is not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(b)  No former member of city council shall have a financial interest in a significant contract with the city, within the meaning of Section 1.1907 of this article within thirteen (13) months following the expiration of the former member's most recent term of office. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1-1913 - Officials Required to Comply with Both State and Local Law. 
    Where a city official's conduct is regulated by a provision of this article and a similar provision of State law, and it is possible to comply with the requirements of both, a city official shall comply with both. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1914 - City Attorney's Opinions. 
    The city attorney is authorized and directed to issue to any city official, upon reasonable request, formal written opinions regarding the applicability of the provisions of this article or texas law to an action the city official, a former city official, or a candidate for city council is considering taking in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1915 - Education. 
    The city shall provide training and educational materials to city officials on their ethical obligations under state law and this article. Such training shall include at least one formal classroom session in each calendar year. All city officials shall attend the formal training session offered by the city or equivalent training sessions conducted by the Texas Municipal League or similar organizations. The city also shall prepare and distribute brochures and other written materials on the subject to each city official at the time of his or her election or appointment to office. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Division 3. - Complaint Procedures. 

Sec. 1.1916 - Detailed Written Complaints Required 
    A complaint alleging a violation of any of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article must be made in writing, signed by the complainant, sworn to before a notary public, and filed with the city secretary, and must contain the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person making the complaint; 
(b)  The name of, and office held by, the person against whom the complaint is directed; 
(c)  The specific provision of this article that is alleged to have been violated; 
(d)  For each violation alleged, a detailed description of the facts that are alleged to constitute the violation, including the date or dates on which the violation is alleged to have occurred; 
(e)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any witnesses to the violations; and 
(f)  Copies or descriptions of any documents that substantiate the allegations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1917 - Time for Filing Complaints 
    A complaint must be filed on or before the 365th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred or the 90th day after the violation was discovered, whichever date is earlier. A complaint may be filed against a city official who is no longer in office if the complaint relates to conduct of the former city official that violates this article and is otherwise timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1918 - Preliminary Review of Complaints. 
(a)  The city secretary shall provide copies of each complaint to the person or persons accused, to the city attorney, and to the members of the review panel, as soon as practicable. 
(b)  The city attorney shall, within five business days of receiving the complaint, provide a written report to the review panel. The report shall state whether, in the city attorney's opinion, the written complaint: (1) was filed timely; (2) alleges misconduct by a person whose conduct is regulated under this article; (3) alleges the occurrence of conduct that might reasonably constitute a violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article; and (4) is signed and sworn to by the person filing the complaint. Additionally, the report shall recommend whether the review panel should dismiss the complaint or conduct further proceedings. 
(c)  The city attorney shall also advise the review panel whether the city attorney has issued a written opinion or opinions to the accused official that relate to the conduct at issue and whether, in the city attorney's opinion, the conduct was undertaken in good faith reliance on a written opinion that concluded the conduct was not in violation of this article. Where the city attorney concludes that the conduct was undertaken in good faith reliance on a written opinion, the city attorney shall recommend that the review panel dismiss the complaint without a hearing. 
(d)  The city attorney's recommendation that the review panel conduct further proceedings does not mean that any of the allegations of the complaint are true or false or that any current or former city official or candidate for city council has violated or has not violated this article. The review panel will make that determination. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1919 - Review Panel 
(a)  The city council shall act as the review panel for any ethics complaints filed against city officials, including members of the city council, former city officials, and candidates for the city council. 
(b)  A member of the city council shall be disqualified from serving on a review panel to consider a complaint if the complaint was filed: 
(1)  Against the member; 
(2)  By the member; or 
(3)  Against a candidate for election to the member's place on city council where the member has filed for or is eligible for reelection. 
The remaining qualified members of the city council shall act as the review panel where one (1) or more members are disqualified from serving. For the purposes of this provision, a complaint filed against a member of the city council for alleged misconduct related to the member's service on any other city-created entity shall be treated the same as a complaint related to the member's service on the city council. 
(c)  The city secretary shall act as the secretary for the review panel. Meetings of the city council, when acting as a review panel, shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1920 - Review Panel Procedures. 
(a)  Within ten (10) business days after a review panel receives a report and recommendation from the city attorney, it shall render a decision as to whether the complaint should be dismissed as insufficient or because the subject conduct was undertaken in good faith reliance on a formal written opinion of the city attorney, or whether an investigation into the complaint should be made. The city secretary shall promptly notify the complainant and the accused of the review panel's decision. 
(b)  Where a review panel determines that an investigation should be made, it shall proceed with such investigation using such procedures as are appropriate considering the nature and circumstances of the particular complaint. 
(c)  A review panel may not sustain a complaint or impose sanctions on an accused city official, former city official, or candidate for city council without holding a hearing on the complaint. The city council or review panel has adopted written rules of procedure to govern the hearing as it deems appropriate that will provide a fair hearing on the complaint. See Attached Exhibit "A". 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" has been set out at the end of this article. 
(d)  A review panel may conduct hearings and other proceedings on a complaint in closed executive session if permitted by state law, but any decision must be rendered during an open public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1921 - Sanctions for Violations of this Article 
    In the event a review panel determines that a city official, former city official, or candidate for the city council has committed a violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article, it shall impose sanctions against the accused as follows: 
(a)  Where a review panel finds that the accused has committed a minor violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article, the violation was unintentional, and the accused fully cooperated in the investigation, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the accused. The notice shall be titled "Notice of Minor Violation" and shall state the findings of the review panel. 
(b)  Where a review panel finds that the accused has committed a minor violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article, and either: 1) the violation was committed knowingly, or 2) the accused has failed to fully cooperate in the investigation, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the accused. The notice shall be entitled "Letter of Admonition" and shall state the findings of the review panel, including the finding that the accused acted intentionally and/or failed to fully cooperate in the investigation. 
(c)  Where a review panel finds that the accused has committed a major violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the accused. The notice shall be entitled "Notice of Public Censure," shall announce the review panel's findings, including the finding that the accused has committed a major violation and any finding that the accused acted intentionally and/or failed to cooperate in the investigation, and shall express the review panel's strong condemnation of the person's actions. 
(d)  Where the accused person is a current or former member of an administrative board or advisory board, the review panel may, where appropriate, issue in addition to any written notice of violation, a decision suspending or removing such member from office. 
(e)  In addition to any other sanction imposed, the review panel may issue a decision requiring the accused to cease the violation and to file any affidavits, reports, disclosures, or other documents required by law. 
(f)  The review panel shall act by majority vote. Any decision or decisions by a review panel on an ethics complaint filed under this article shall be issued in writing and filed as a public record in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1922 - Name Clearing Proceedings. 
    Where informal allegations of a potential violation of the rules of ethical conduct contained in this article have been made against a current or former city official and the accused person desires an investigation of such allegations in order to clear his or her name, the accused person may file a written request for declaratory relief, which shall contain the information described in Section 1-1916, and which shall state that the filer denies the allegations and is filing the request for declaratory relief solely for the purpose of clearing his or her name. A request for declaratory relief filed under authority of this section shall be handled in the same manner and in accordance with the same procedures as complaints received from third parties and must be filed no later than the 90th day after the public official first learned of the allegations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Sec. 1.1923 - Penalty for Filing False Complaint or Giving False Testimony 
    It is unlawful for a person to intentionally file a complaint under this article that the person knows contains false information or by making reasonable inquiry should know that it contains false information. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally give false testimony under oath in any hearing before a review panel held under this article. Any person found guilty of violating this section will be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-3-08) 
Exhibit A 
(1)  A complaint alleging a violation(s) of Bowie Code of Ordinance article 1.1900 shall specify the provision(s) of the Code of Ordinances alleged to have been violated, and shall name the party against whom allegations are being made as required by article 1.1900. 
(2)  Upon the aforesaid complaint of any person being filed with the city secretary's office, or on its own initiative, the city council shall consider possible violations of the Bowie Code of Ordinances by any party to whom the Code of Ordinances article 1.1900, is applicable. A complaint shall not be deemed to be filed on the initiative of the city council, save and except the complaint be signed and sworn by two (2) members of the city council, after consultation with the city attorney. A complaint filed by an individual member of the city council shall be deemed to have been filed in the city council member's capacity as a private citizen and, in such event, the member of the city council filing the complaint shall not thereafter participate in that portion of the meeting at which such complaint is considered, save and except, the city council member filing the complaint may participate as a complainant at such meeting. 
(3)  A complaint alleging a violation of this article must be filed with the city secretary within the time required by article 1.1900. 
(4)  After the city secretary receives a complaint, the city secretary shall acknowledge the receipt of the complaint to the complainant, and provide a copy of the complaint to the city attorney, the city council, and the person against whom the complaint was alleged in accordance with article 1.1900. The mayor, with advice of the city attorney as necessary, shall review the complaint to ensure compliance with article 1.1900 within five (5) days of receipt of the complaint. If the complaint does not comply with the requirements of article 1.1900 it shall be returned to the complainant with a written explanation of noncompliance. If the complaint does comply with the requirements of article 1.1900, it shall be tendered for review by the city council in accordance with article 1.1900. If the city council determines that further action is necessary, the procedures set forth in Bowie Code of Ordinances section 1.1920 will be followed. Nothing herein shall be intended to disallow the re-filing of a complaint that was returned to the complainant for non-compliance, as may be allowed by Bowie Code of Ordinances section 1.917. 
(5)  The city council may consider possible violations on its own initiative. Within seven (7) working days of the city council's decision to consider a possible violation of the Bowie Code of Ordinances, the city council shall draft a written complaint specifying the provision(s) of this article alleged to have been violated and shall file a copy with the city secretary, provide a copy to the city attorney and the person against whom the complaint was alleged. Not later than fifteen (15) days after the drafting of the complaint, the city council shall notify in writing the person against whom the complaint was alleged of the date for the preliminary hearing. 
(6)  After a complaint has been filed, and during the pending hearing of a complaint before the city council, a member of the city council may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except at a meeting of the city council; provided that the mayor or person who will be the person chairing the hearing may consult and coordinate with legal counsel and staff. 
(7)  As soon as reasonably possible, but in no event more than ninety (90) days after receiving a complaint, the city council shall conduct a hearing. 
(A)  The issue at the hearing shall be the existence of reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred. The person filing a complaint, or the designee of the city council in cases considered upon the city council's own initiative, shall state the alleged violation. 
(B)  Statements at a hearing shall be under oath, and there shall be cross-examination and the presentation of evidence, as deemed necessary by the city council. Members of the city council may question the complainant, the person named in the complaint, and any other persons as deemed necessary by the city council. The city council may request witnesses to attend and testify, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and request the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence needed for the performance of the city council's duties or exercise of its powers, including its duties and powers of investigation. The city council may consult with the city attorney in executive session as allowed by law. 
(C)  The person named in the complaint shall have the opportunity to respond, but is not required to attend or make any statement. If the person named in the complaint agrees that a violation has occurred, he or she may so state and the commission may consider the appropriate sanction. 
(D)  The complainant and the person named in the complaint shall have the right to representation by counsel. 
(E)  At the conclusion of the hearing the city council will determine whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred. The city council shall make its determination based on clear and convincing evidence in the record. 
(F)  If the city council determines that a violation has occurred, it shall state its findings in writing, shall identify the particular provision(s) of Bowie Code of Ordinances article 1.1900 which are found to have been violated, and within ten (10) business days shall deliver a copy of the findings to the complainant, if any, the person named in the complaint, and the city secretary. 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A," as stated in subsection 1.1920(c), was approved by the city council Aug. 20, 2013. 
CHAPTER 2 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-09,  1, adopted Sept. 20, 2005, repealed former Ch. 2, Arts. 2.100-Arts. 2.2400, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for a listing of ordinances amending former ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, Sec. 141.001 et seq.; permitting a head of cattle or a domestic turkey to run at large in certain counties, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, Sec. 143.082; local regulation of public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 121 et seq.; health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 821 et seq.; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 42.09; dogfighting, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 42.10; keeping vicious dog, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Sec. 822.041 certain tax exemptions for charitable organizations, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 11.18. 

ARTICLE 2.1 - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2.100 - Title; Purpose 
    This chapter shall be known as the Bowie Animal Code. This chapter has been established for the purpose of promoting the general welfare, health, and safety of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.101 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means leaving an animal in any place without providing reasonable and necessary care including, but not limited to, air, food, water, or protection from heat, cold, or other elements of nature. 
    Animal means any living creature, including but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, bird, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings. 
    Animal control manager means the person designated by the city manager to supervise all aspects of animal control or his authorized representative. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the city manager to represent and act for the city to receive reports of animal bites, investigate bite reports, ensure quarantine of possibly rabid animals, and carry out and enforce the general regulations of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means a facility operated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
    Bee means any common domestic honeybee (apis mellifera). 
    Dangerous animals means: 
(1)  Any animal that when unprovoked inflicts bites on or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property or, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private grounds or places; 
(2)  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or animals; or 
(3)  Any animal suspected of being a dangerous animal if the owner, keeper or harborer of such animal fails or refuses to make such animal available for inspection by an animal control officer. 
    Dangerous propensities means any one, or a combination, of the animal behaviors of biting, snarling, charging aggressively toward a person or another animal, growling with curled lips, popping of teeth, or barking with raised hackles. 
    Dog means a domesticated member of the family canidae, but shall not include a wolf, jackal, coyote, fox or other wild animal of this family or hybrid thereof. 
    Exotic animals means nonnative species of animal including, but not limited to, nonpoisonous reptiles which, when mature, are over six (6) feet in length, ostriches, any member of the Ratite family or exotic livestock as defined by the state animal health commission. 
    Fowl means all of those birds commonly called poultry including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guinea fowl, turkeys, pigeons and all the relatives of those birds which can be in pens, coops, cages or enclosures of any kind. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of five (5) days. 
    Humanely euthanized means to cause the death of an animal by a method which: 
(1)  Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress; or 
(2)  Utilizes anesthesia produced by an approved agent, which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death following such loss of consciousness. 
    Humane trap means a box cage for catching animals in a humane manner. 
    Impound means to seize and hold in the custody of the animal control division. 
    Kennel means any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises wherein six (6) or more animals, four (4) months of age or older, are kept or maintained for the purpose of breeding, training, boarding, or raising for profit or pleasure. 
    Livestock means horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep and swine regardless of age, sex, size or breed. 
    Owner means any person having title to any animal, or a person who has, harbors or keeps, or who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation. 
    Prohibited animal means any animal, except birds kept in a cage or aviary that is not regulated by international, federal or state law, or common domestic species which include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs or laboratory mice or rats, and regardless of state or duration of captivity, that poses a potential physical or disease threat to the public or that is protected by international, federal or state regulations, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Class Reptilia: Family Helodermatidea (venomous lizards); Family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, copperheads, cottonmouths, other pit vipers and true vipers); Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, mambas, and other elapids); the following listed species of Family Colubridae-Dispholidus typus (Boomslang), Hyrodynastes gigas (water cobra), Boiga (mangrove snake), and Thelotornis (African twig snake) only; Order Phidia, Family Boidae (racers, boas, water snakes, and pythons); and Order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gavials); 
(2)  Class Aves: Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles, and vultures); Subdivision Ratitae (such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus); and Order Strigiforms (such as owls); 
(3)  Class Mammalia: Order Carnivora, Family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards, and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; Family Canidae (such as wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, dingos, coyotes, and jackals), except domesticated dogs; Family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, martens, mink, and badgers), except ferrets; Family Procyonidae (raccoon); Family Ursidae (such as bears); Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and common opossums); Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters, and armadillos); Order Proboscidea (elephants); Order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, and gorillas); Order Rodentia (such as porcupines); and Order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison, and camels); and 
(4)  Animals not listed: The animal control officer may declare any species of animal not listed in this subsection as "prohibited" if the confinement of the animal within the city can be shown to constitute a threat to public health and safety. 
    Rabies vaccination means an injection of United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered every twelve (12) months under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
    Running at large means not completely confined by a building, wall or fence of sufficient strength or function to restrain the animal, except when such animal is either on a leash, or held in the hands of the owner or keeper. An animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall not be deemed to be at large. 
    Secure enclosure means a house or a building, or in the case of a dangerous animal being kept outdoors, the kennel/pen shall include a roof, which is fastened to all vertical walls, which are submerged in a subpervious material. The kennel/pen must be at least six (6) feet in height and have the minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet. The kennel/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children, and must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. The enclosure shall be securely locked at all times. The kennel/pen will provide protection from the elements and allow for daily removal of waste as approved by the animal control manager or representative. 
    Spay/neuter means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
    Veterinarian means a doctor of veterinary medicine who holds a valid license to practice his profession in the state. 
    Vicious animal means any individual animal that has on two (2) previous occasions, without provocation, attacked or bitten any person or other animal; or any individual animal which the police department or animal control division has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals. 
    Wild animals means any poisonous or dangerous reptile, or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild state, not normally capable of being domesticated including, but not limited to, foxes, leopards, lions, lynx monkeys (nonhuman primates), panthers, raccoons, skunks and also includes offspring of domesticated canine and wild canine cross-breeds such as coyote or wolf hybrids. This shall apply regardless of duration of captivity. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.102 - Enforcement 
(a)  Generally. The animal control manager is hereby designated the local health authority and the appointed rabies authority officer for the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter. His duties shall officers of the city, and aiding the state board of health in the enforcement of area quarantines, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826. 
(b)  Citations; authorized. Any animal control officer of the city shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter and any other power or duty stated within the terms of this chapter. If the person being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid. 
(c)  Enforcement interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(d)  Pursuit of animals. For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter, or other applicable laws, and to enforce the same, the animal control officer may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law, which shall include, but not be limited to, entry upon private unfenced property, except dwellings located thereon, when in pursuit of any animal which he has reason to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws. 
(e)  Tranquilizer gun. Animal control officers shall have the authority to use a tranquilizer gun in the lawful discharge of their duties. 
(f)  Euthanization or destruction. Any animal control officer or police officer shall have the authority to humanely euthanize and/or destroy any animal in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.103 - Running at Large; Authority to Impound 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to cause, permit, suffer or allow the animal to run at large. 
(b)  Any animal control officer or police officer is authorized to impound such animals running at large. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.104. - Euthanasia Fee 
    The animal control division shall charge a fee as listed in Appendix A to this chapter per animal for a requested euthanasia of an animal. The owner or requestor shall reside or be located within the city limits at the time of the request for euthanasia, and the animal shall not have bitten anyone within the last ten (10) days of the request. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.105 - Limitation on Number of Animals 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult animal means any animal that is more than six (6) months of age. 
    Litter means one (1) or more newborn animals less than six (6) months of age. 
(b)  Animal limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city, in any residential district, more than four (4) adult animals on a residential lot of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less; provided, however, that such person may keep one (1) additional adult animal for each additional five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area. Each residence owner or occupant shall be permitted to keep one litter only. 
(c)  Special permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any person who desires to keep additional animals in a residential area shall apply to the animal control manager for a special permit to keep the same. The applicant shall provide the animal control manager with satisfactory proof from the joining property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet that they have no objection to the issuance of the special permit. The applicant shall pay a fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances for such permit. The special permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of its issuance. The animal control manager shall promulgate rules and regulations that govern the issuance of such special permits. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.106 - Animal Nuisance 
(a)  Noise. A person commits an offense if he knowingly harbors an animal that unreasonably barks, howls, crows or makes other unreasonable noise near a private residence that disturbs the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensibility. 
(1)  A person who is disturbed by an animal that unreasonably barks, howls, crows or makes other unreasonable noise near a private residence may file a complaint with the animal control division. A complaint must include the name and address of the complainant, the exact address of the disturbance, the type of animal causing the disturbance and the times that the animal is causing the disturbance. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall hand deliver or mail the owner or harborer of the animal a notice that a disturbance complaint has been received. If a notice has been mailed to the owner of the animal causing the disturbance, a copy of the letter will also be mailed to the complainant. 
(3)  If an owner or harborer continues to allow his animal to cause a disturbance after ten (10) days, the complainant may file a complaint in writing with the municipal court. 
(b)  Animals defecating/urinating in public places. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise care and control, any such dog or animal to urinate or defecate upon the sidewalk or parkway or any public street, or upon the floor of any common hall in any entranceway, stairway or upon any wall of any public place or building and any private property not his own, and it shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove any animal waste deposited by his animal. 
(c)  Animal waste. It shall be unlawful and considered a public nuisance for any person to allow any house, building, business, lot, pen, enclosure, yard or similar place used for the keeping of animals to become unsanitary, offensive by reason of odor, or disagreeable to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity thereof or to the public at large. Any condition injurious to public health caused by improper waste disposal will be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Cats. Cats running at large to such a degree that it causes an unreasonable disturbance to a person of ordinary sensibilities are prohibited. 
(e)  Wild; wild-hybrid; prohibited animals. It shall be unlawful to own, possess, keep or harbor any wild, wild-hybrid, or prohibited animal within the city. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. 
(f)  Slaughtering of animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter, skin or defeather an animal within the city whereby it is in the view of the public, unless as part of a bona fide, licensed business. It shall further be unlawful for any person to butcher or display the carcass of an animal on residential property within the city whereby it is in the view of the public, except an animal carcass actually cooking over a barbecue pit, or a dead animal being prepared by a taxidermist for the purpose of display. 
(g)  Dead animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the carcass of any dead animal to be, or remain, upon any property under his control for more than twenty-four (24) hours after the death of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.107 - Animal Care Guidelines 
(a)  Provisions of food, shelter, and care. No person shall fail to provide his/her animal, as determined by animal control, with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(b)  Tying dogs and other animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or tether a dog or other animal to a stationary object for a period of time or in a location, so as to create an unhealthy situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian as determined by the animal control manager. 
(c)  Fenced enclosures. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog within a fenced enclosure in which the fence is in a state of disrepair. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.108 - Protection of Animals 
(a)  Poisonous substances. No person shall knowingly expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same may be eaten by any pet or domestic animal. 
(b)  Abuse of animal; fighting. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animal and humans. 
(c)  Abandonment. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. 
(d)  Striking with a vehicle. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report the accident to the animal control division or police department. 
(e)  Leaving animals in parked vehicles. It shall be unlawful to leave an animal in a standing or parked vehicle without providing the animal with adequate air and protection from the heat or cold. An animal left under such conditions may be impounded. 
(f)  Leaving animals unattended. No person shall keep, harbor or allow an animal to remain for more than forty-eight (48) hours at a residential dwelling that does not have water service. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the owner has arranged for regular care and feeding of the animal during the owner's absence at a residential dwelling that has functional water service. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.2 - ANIMAL SHELTER 

Sec. 2.200 - Removal of Animals from City Animal Shelter 
    A person commits an offense if he removes or attempts to remove an animal from the city animal shelter without paying all impoundments, daily housing and other redemption fees assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.201 - Records to be Kept 
    The animal control officer(s) shall keep a record giving the description of all animals impounded, the date of impoundment, and the disposition for each such animal along with the name of the owner or adopter. These records shall be maintained for a period as set out by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.3. - REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 2.300. - Required 
    No owner shall have within the city any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older unless such dog or cat is currently registered with the animal control division. Before a city registration certificate will be issued, the owner of any dog or cat must present a copy of a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies within the preceding twelve (12) months. No dog or cat shall be registered until proof of vaccination has been made. An exception to this proof of vaccination may be made if the owner presents written recommendation from a licensed veterinarian stating that such rabies vaccination would be detrimental to the health of the animal. A current metal registration certificate, issued by the animal control division, city clerk, or veterinarian authorized to issue such registrations, must be affixed to a collar or harness and must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.301 - Application 
    Application for initial issuance or renewals of each registration must be made by the owner in writing or in person, and be accompanied by a fee listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances unless the dog or cat being registered has been neutered or spayed, and proof of such surgical sterilization can be shown to the animal control manager, city clerk, or a veterinarian authorized to issue such registrations; then the fee will be as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances. Animals may be exempted from the sterilization provision upon written recommendation from a veterinarian that such alteration would be harmful or dangerous to the animal and would qualify the owner for sterilization fee. Animals less than six (6) months of age shall be charged a fee as listed in Appendix C attached to this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.302 - Duplicate Certificates 
    If the original current metal registration certificate is lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain a duplicate registration from the animal control manager by paying the fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.303 - Expiration 
    A registration and tag shall be valid only for the animal for which it was originally issued. The registration period will be within thirty (30) days following receipt of the rabies vaccination of any dog or cat. The registration and tag will be renewed on an annual basis and will be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.304 - Change of Ownership 
    If there is a change in ownership of a registered dog or cat, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to his name. There shall be no charge for such transfer. Application for such transfer shall be made to the animal control manager in writing or in person. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.305 - Exempt Registrations 
    Fee exempt registrations may be issued for the following: 
(1)  Dogs trained to assist the auditorially, visually, or other physically impaired persons. 
(2)  Police or sheriff's department dogs. 
(3)  Animals living on property annexed into the city. However, this exemption from registration fees shall expire twelve (12) months after adoption of an annexation ordinance for that property. 
(4)  Spayed or neutered animals legally owned by city residents sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(5)  Eligibility for fee-exempt registration does not relieve the owner of his responsibility under other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.306 - Verification Programs 
    The animal control division shall have the authority to conduct random or citywide verification programs in a manner calculated to determine compliance with the license and rabies vaccination requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.307 - Nonregistration Fee 
    For the purpose of this article, a fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances may be assessed when an animal is impounded or otherwise complained upon and found to be under the following conditions: 
(1)  The owner has failed to obtain a license for the animal within ten (10) days of that animal reaching four (4) months of age. 
(2)  The owner has failed to renew a license within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the current license. 
(3)  The owner has failed to obtain a license within thirty (30) days of the animal taking up residence in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.308 - Revocation 
    The animal control manager or a records clerk may refuse to register a cat or dog, or revoke a permit issued to any person who has been convicted in any duly authorized court of jurisdiction in the state, or resides with any person so convicted of any of the following: 
(1)  Cruelty to animal as defined in the V.T.C.A., Penal Code art. 42.11, inhumane treatment or negligence to an animal; or 
(2)  Conviction of three (3) or more separate and distinct violations of an animal control ordinance of a municipality in the state within any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.309 - Appeal Process 
    Any person denied such registration may appeal the refusal to the municipal court judge. The municipal court judge shall uphold or overturn the animal control manager's or records clerk's refusal to issue a registration. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.4. - BEES, FOWL, RABBITS, REPTILES, FARM ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 2.400 - Livestock Regulations 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow livestock to be at large on private or public property. Any livestock at large, within the city limits shall be reported to the sheriff of Montague County or the animal control as soon as reasonably possible, in accordance with county and state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock in an area zoned residential on any lot having an area less than one (1) acre. A minimum of one-third ( 1/3 ) of that acre shall be set aside for exclusive use by the livestock and no more than two (2) livestock shall be kept in that area. For each one (1) additional livestock an owner must have an additional five thousand (5,000) square feet of available space and this additional square footage will be in addition to the one (1) acre required for keeping livestock. 
(c)  Livestock must not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet distance from any person's living quarters, other than his own, unless located on a lot of at least two (2) acres. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to livestock kept on property adjacent to any newly constructed development, provided that the owner can substantiate to the animal control manager that livestock was maintained on the property prior to construction of the new development and so long as the livestock are continuously maintained after construction. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on their premises any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from escaping and/or damaging neighboring flowers, trees, shrubbery and/or other property located on adjacent property. 
(f)  The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not become applicable to property or acreage annexed into the city for a period of twelve (12) months after adoption of an annexation ordinance on that property. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a veterinarian, to keep any live swine within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.401 - Nonpoisonous Reptiles 
(a)  Snakes. Nonpoisonous snakes that do not exceed six (6) feet in length at maturity may be kept in the city. 
(b)  Lizards. Adult lizards that do not exceed three (3) feet in length at maturity may be kept in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.402 - Fowl 
(a)  Generally. The keeping of fowl such as roosters, ducks, turkeys, geese, peacocks, guineas, or other such loud fowl within the city limits, in any pen, coop or enclosure that is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residence (other than the owner's), business or school shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Chickens. No person shall keep more than two (2) hens in an area zoned residential within the city, and shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest inhabited dwelling, other than that of the owner. 
(c)  Secure pen or enclosure. Any fowl kept within the city limits shall be in a secure pen, coop or enclosure, and such structure shall be of such construction and strength to keep such animals from running at large. 
(d)  Exceptions. Public parklands and lakes shall be exempt from the fowl ordinance, as shall property or acreage annexed into the city for a period of twelve (12) months from adoption of an annexation ordinance on that property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.403 - Pigeons 
(a)  Generally. Pigeons shall be kept in an enclosure or coop that is located no closer than thirty (30) feet from any residential dwelling, other than that of the owner and no closer than fifty (50) feet from any swimming pool on an adjoining or adjacent lot. 
(b)  Supervised exercise. When an owner allows his pigeons to exercise outside of their enclosure or coop, he shall ensure that his pigeons do not roost on or about a neighbor's dwelling nor interfere with a neighbor's enjoyment of his property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.404 - Rabbits 
    Rabbits shall be kept in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least thirty (30) feet from an inhabited dwelling, other than that of the owner. Rabbit enclosures shall be of a design that prohibits waste material dropping to the ground and such construction and strength to keep such animal from running at large. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.405 - Bees 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, person, or beekeeper to keep any colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of other, or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.5 - VICIOUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 2.500 - Running at Large 
    Any vicious animal found running at large and endangering the safety of persons or property may be destroyed by the local health authority, any peace officer, or animal control officer in the interest of public safety if such danger is imminent and a real or apparent necessity exists to destroy such vicious animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.501 - Impoundment; Notice; Destruction 
    No person shall own or harbor a vicious animal within the city. Such an animal may be impounded in the interest of public safety. If an attempt is made to impound a vicious animal from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner will be given twenty-four (24) hours' notice that if that animal is not surrendered to the animal control division for impoundment within the twenty-four-hour period, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this notice, the vicious animal may be destroyed during an attempt to impound, if impoundment cannot be made with safety, wherever the impoundment is attempted. Notice under this section may be verbal or in writing. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the vicious animal is harbored will be considered valid notice under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.502 - Determination 
    A determination that an animal is a vicious animal shall be based on the following: 
(1)  An animal is automatically determined to be a vicious animal if it commits acts as defined in the definition of the term "vicious animal" found in section 2.101; 
(2)  The owner of a determined dangerous animal under article 2.6 of this chapter, cannot or will not comply with the requirements set out in this article for keeping of a dangerous animal; or 
(3)  If the animal control manager determines that the animal is vicious, he shall make a disposition determination based on the necessity to preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the community. This determination shall be one of the following: 
a.  Humane destruction of the vicious animal. 
b.  Order any owner or person having care, custody, or control of any vicious animal to take such animal permanently from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.503 - Notification and Appeal of a Vicious Animal Designation 
(a)  Within five (5) working days of determining an animal vicious, the animal control manager will notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a vicious animal. The notice shall contain a statement that the owner/harborer has a right to appeal. If certified mail cannot be delivered or is refused, the animal control manager may give notice by ordinary mail to the last known address of owner. Written notification may also be delivered by the animal control division in person to the owner/harborer of the animal in question. 
(b)  If the animal in question is determined to be vicious under this article, the owner may appeal the decision of the animal control manager to the municipal court within ten (10) days of notification. Failure to appeal the determination of vicious animal shall result in the animal control manager's determination becoming final. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.504 - Status of Animal Pending Appeal 
    Pending the outcome of the appeal to municipal court, the animal must be confined at the city animal shelter, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner. If the animal in question is not in the care and custody of the animal control division at the time of the declaration, the owner must surrender the animal to the animal control division when ordered to do so by any animal control officer or police officer. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the animal, the animal control division shall have the right to take the animal into its possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the animal may be found within the city limits. If the animal cannot be taken into custody by the animal control division, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant issued by the municipal judge in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.505 - Disposition 
(a)  If the municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control manager, the court shall order the vicious animal to be euthanized in a safe and humane manner at the city animal shelter. 
(b)  The court may uphold the determination by the animal control manager and order the vicious animal be removed from the city limits permanently. 
(c)  If the owner or harborer of a vicious animal agrees with the determination of the animal control manager to remove the vicious animal from the city limits, or the court upholds the animal control manager's determination, the owner or harborer will not be returned custody of the animal until written information is provided to the animal control division of the location where the vicious animal will be taken, and the owner reimburses the city for any veterinary medical treatment administered to such animal while in the custody of the animal control division. 
(d)  If the owner has met the requirements as described in subsection (c) of this section, the vicious animal shall be released to its owner, and the owner shall immediately remove such animal from the city limits. A city police officer may follow the owner to the city limits to ensure that the vicious animal is taken from the city. 
(e)  If the municipal court reverses or modifies the determination, the animal in question shall be released to its owner, provided that the owner reimburses any shelter fees or veterinary expenses while such animal was in custody of the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.506 - Penalties for Violation of Article 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the owner of a vicious animal fails to remove such animal as provided for in sections 2.502(1)-(3), 2.503(b) and 2.505(c) or after an unsuccessful appeal. Each day after the owner or harborer fails to remove the animal from the city limits constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the owner of a vicious animal fails to report in writing within ten (10) days of the determination the disposition and relocation of such animal. Each day thereafter that such information is not provided shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.6 - DANGEROUS ANIMALS [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  822.041 et seq. 

Sec. 2.600 - Owner's Knowledge 
    For purposes of this article, a person learns that he is the owner of a dangerous animal when: 
(a)  The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of the term "dangerous animal"; or 
(b)  The owner is notified by the animal control manager that the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.601 - Reporting 
(a)  The animal control manager may receive a report concerning a dangerous animal. Such a report and supporting witness statement shall be in writing and sworn to on a form prescribed by the animal control manager. 
(b)  The animal control manager shall cause to have investigated all reports under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.602 - Determination 
    If the animal control manager determines that the animal is dangerous, he shall make a disposition determination based on the necessity to preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the community. This determination shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Humane destruction of the dangerous animal. 
(2)  Declared vicious and order that the vicious animal be taken away from the city permanently. 
(3)  Secure confinement of the dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.603 - Notification and Appeal 
(a)  If, after investigating a report of a dangerous animal, the animal control manager determines the animal is a dangerous animal, he shall notify the owner of that fact, as well as any known victim of the dangerous animal. 
(b)  The notice shall be in writing and shall contain a statement that the owner has a right to appeal. 
(c)  Notice shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known mailing address, or delivered in person. If certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control division may then give notice by ordinary mail. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the dangerous animal is harbored will also be considered valid notice under this article. 
(d)  An owner or victim, not later than ten (10) days after the date the owner or victim is notified that an animal owned by him is a dangerous animal or notified that a determination has been made that the animal is not dangerous, may appeal the determination of the animal control manager to the city's municipal court. 
(e)  Failure to appeal the determination of the animal control manager within ten (10) days of the notification shall result in his determination as becoming final. 
(f)  If the municipal court reverses that determination, the animal in question shall be returned to or released to its owner, provided that the owner reimburses the city for any veterinary medical treatment administered to such animal while in the custody of the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.604 - Status of Animal During the Appeal Period 
(a)  Pending the outcome of the appeal, the animal must be confined at a veterinary clinic or at the city animal shelter, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the animal in question. 
(b)  If the animal in question is not in the possession of the animal control or a veterinary clinic at the time of the determination, the owner must surrender the animal to the animal control division when ordered to do so by any animal control officer or police officer. 
(c)  If the owner fails to surrender the animal, the animal control division shall have the right to take the animal into its possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the animal may be found within the city limits. 
(d)  If the animal cannot be taken into custody by the animal control division, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant issued by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.605 - Humane Destruction 
(a)  If the dangerous animal is in the care and custody of a veterinarian clinic, the owner will have forty-eight (48) hours to surrender the dangerous animal to the animal control division after an unsuccessful appeal. 
(b)  If the owner of the dangerous animal fails to surrender such animal as provided for by the order of the animal control manager or the court, such animal may be impounded and humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.606 - Declared Vicious; Order that Animal be Removed from City Limits Permanently 
    If the animal control manager declares the animal as vicious, the guidelines set forth under section 2.502 shall be followed in ordering the vicious animal from the city permanently. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.607 - Confinement 
    The owner of a dangerous animal shall comply with the following requirements within ten (10) days of such notification by the animal control manager, or within forty-eight (48) hours of an unsuccessful appeal: 
(1)  Present proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal which causes bodily injury to a person; 
(2)  Present proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal; 
(3)  Pay a registration fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances; 
(4)  Present proof that the animal has been altered so as to prevent reproduction; 
(5)  Present proof satisfactory to the animal control manager or representative that the enclosure in which the animal will be kept is a secure enclosure. The term "secure enclosure" shall mean a house or a building, or in the case of a dangerous animal being kept outdoors the kennel/pen shall include a roof which is fastened to all vertical walls, which are submerged in a subpervious material. The kennel/pen must be at least six (6) feet in height and have the minimum dimensions of five feet by ten (10) feet. The kennel/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children, and must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. The enclosure shall be securely locked at all times. The kennel/pen shall provide protection from the elements and allowed for daily removal of waste as approved by the animal control manager or representative. 
(6)  The animal control manager shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous animal, a dangerous animal registration tag. Such tag shall be of a bright distinguishing color, shall contain the year of registration engraved on its face, and shall be larger than a normal license tag issued to dogs and cats. A dangerous animal registration shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(7)  The owner of a registered dangerous animal shall attach the tag to the animal's collar or similar device, and shall place such collar or device on the animal. 
(8)  The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the street. This sign will be provided by animal control. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning, understandable by small children, of the presence of a dangerous animal. 
(9)  On an annual basis, the proof of liability insurance, vaccination and secure enclosure shall be provided to the animal control manager a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to registration expiration, along with an annual reregistration fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.608 - Muzzling and Restraint 
    When the dangerous animal is taken outside the approved proper enclosure, the animal must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting a person or other animal, and the animal must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of one thousand (1,000) pounds and not to exceed six (6) feet in length and be under the direct control or supervision of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.609 - Sale or Moving 
    Prior to selling or moving the registered dangerous animal either inside or outside the city limits, the owner must notify the animal control division of his intentions. If the animal is moved permanently outside the city limits, the owner must comply with the state law in notifying the animal control authority in control of the area into which the animal has been moved. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.610 - Attacks; Notification of Animal Control 
    The owner of a dangerous animal shall immediately notify the animal control division of all attacks made by the animal on humans or domestic animals, or if animal is at large. For the purposes of this article, the term "immediate" shall mean within thirty (30) minutes of the owner becoming aware of the attacks or the animal being at large. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.611 - Animal Determined Dangerous in Another Jurisdiction 
    The owner of an animal that has been determined to be dangerous by another jurisdiction is prohibited from having such animal within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.612 - Penalties for Violation of this Article 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the animal's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person whether or not the animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the animal escaped without fault of the owner. 
(b)  A person commits an offense of this article if the person is an owner of a dangerous animal and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl while such animal was outside the animal's secure enclosure, and the attack causes bodily injury or death to the domestic animal or domestic fowl whether or not the animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the animal escaped without fault of the owner. 
(c)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal commits an offense to this article if the person fails to comply with the requirements for owners of dangerous animals. 
(d)  A person commits an offense of this article if he owns, keeps custody, or control of a dangerous animal without having such animal currently registered as a dangerous animal with the city. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous animal commits an offense of this article if he fails to comply with the notification of attacks requirement. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous animal commits an offense of this article if he sells or gives the animal to another person and fails to notify the animal control division. 
(g)  The owner of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense of this article if he fails to display on such animal a current dangerous animal registration tag issued by the city animal control division. 
(h)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this article, the court may order the animal control manager to impound and humanely destroy the animal immediately. 
(i)  The animal control manager shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe any requirements of this article are being violated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.613 - Defense to Prosecution for Violation of Registered Dangerous Animal 
    It is a defense to prosecution of this article that the person is: 
(1)  A veterinarian, peace officer, employee of the city in the performance of his duties; or 
(2)  An employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.7 - RABIES CONTROL [3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2.700 - Vaccination of Dogs and Cats 
    Every owner of a dog or cat three (3) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. All such dogs or cats shall be revaccinated at three-year intervals thereafter. Any person establishing residence within the city shall comply with this article within ten (10) days of establishing such residency. If the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person, within the last ten (10) days, the owner of such dog or cat shall report such fact to a veterinarian, and no rabies vaccine shall be administered until after a ten-day observation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.701 - Certificate of Vaccination 
    Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof a certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat; 
(2)  Animal identification; species, sex (including neutered if applicable), approximate age, size (pounds), predominant breed, and colors; 
(3)  Vaccine used: producer, expiration date, and serial number; 
(4)  The date of vaccination; 
(5)  The year and number of the rabies tag; and 
(6)  The veterinarian's address, signature or signature stamp, and license number. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.702 - Rabies Tags 
    Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 2.701, the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog or cat a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number, bearing the year of issuance and the name of the veterinarian and his address. The owner shall cause the collar or harness with the attached metal tag to be worn by his dog or cat at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.703 - Duplicate Tags 
    In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in section 2.702, the owner of the dog or cat shall obtain a duplicate tag. Vaccination certificates (and tags) shall be valid only for the animal for which they were originally issued. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.704 - Proof 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.705 - Harboring Unvaccinated Animals 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided in this article, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.706 - Animals Exposed to Rabies 
(a)  Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been, or suspected of being, exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge to the animal control division, giving any information that may be required. 
(b)  For any animal to have been, or suspected of being, exposed to rabies, the following rules must apply: 
(1)  Animal having a current vaccination must be revaccinated immediately and confined at the owner's expense according to the method prescribed by the animal control manager for a period of not less than forty-five (45) days. 
(2)  Animals not having a current vaccination should be humanely destroyed. However, if the owner of such an animal elects, he may, at his expense and in a manner prescribed by the animal control officer, confine such animal. Such animal must be vaccinated immediately following exposure and confined for not less than three (3) months. A revaccination shall be administered on the third and eighth week prior to release from confinement. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.707 - Declaration of Quarantine 
    Should a potential outbreak of rabies within the city be suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid animals be reasonably imminent, the local rabies authority is hereby authorized to issue a quarantine proclamation, ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring dogs or other animals to muzzle the same or confine them in such quarantine proclamation by local newspaper. Persons owning or harboring such animals shall confine them to the premises unless they are effectively muzzled and under the control of an adult person by leash, cord, chain, or rope. Animals found at large in violation of this section may be destroyed by an animal control officer or police officer of the city if such officer is unable, with reasonable effort, to apprehend such animal for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a 3.09. 
Sec. 2.708 - Reporting Animal Bites 
(a)  Generally. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person for any animal bite, or any person having knowledge of an animal bite, shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, report such treatment to the animal control division giving the name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten person and such other information as the officer or agency may require. 
(b)  Reporting forms. The animal control division will investigate each bite incident, utilizing standardized reporting forms provided by the Bowie Police Department and approved by the state department of health. 
(c)  Bite exclusions. Human bites from rodents, rabbits, birds, and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.709 - Animal Quarantine 
(a)  Authority to quarantine. The local rabies authority may order the quarantine of any animal that has bitten a person or another animal or that is suspected of having a zoonotic disease. 
(b)  Disposition of biting animals. Any owned dog or cat, which has bitten a person, shall be observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the investigating officer or responsible agency, in compliance with state law. If the dog or cat is not confined on the owner's premises, confinement shall be by impoundment at the animal shelter, or at a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at owner's expense. Stray dogs and cats, or those animals whose owners cannot be located, shall be quarantined at the animal shelter for a period of ten (10) days. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall on demand produce such dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this article. Refusal to produce such dog or cat constitutes a violation of this section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation. 
(c)  Home quarantine. An owner of a dog or cat that has bitten may request permission from an animal control officer to home quarantine his animal if the following criteria can be met: 
(1)  Secure facilities must be available at the home of the animal's owner and must be approved by the animal control manager. 
(2)  The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies. 
(3)  The animal was not running at large at the time the bite occurred. 
(4)  The animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian must observe the animal at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the animal control officer must be notified by the person having possession of the animal. At the end of the observation period the release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing. 
(5)  If the animal cannot be maintained in a secured quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted to a state department of health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
(d)  Interruption. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the ten-day observation period. 
(e)  Wild animals. No wild animal will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals or hybrid thereof involved in biting incidents will be humanely euthanized in such a manner that the brain shall be submitted to a state department of health certified laboratory for rabies testing. 
(f)  Disposition. The owner of an animal that is quarantined under this article shall pay to the animal shelter the reasonable costs of the quarantine, care, treatment, and disposition of the animal, and the animal control manager shall be authorized to humanely euthanize any animal that the owner or custodian does not take possession of on or before the third day following the final day of quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
ARTICLE 2.8 - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 2.800 - Generally 
    Any animals violating any provision of this chapter may be impounded as follows: 
(1)  Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of registration; 
(2)  Any animal infected with a zoonotic disease including, but not limited to, any animal suspected of having been infected by rabies or exposed to rabies; 
(3)  Any animal that creates a nuisance; 
(4)  Any animal running at large; 
(5)  Any animal kept under conditions or treated in a manner which the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe is cruel or inhumane; 
(6)  Any animal that has bitten a person; and 
(7)  Any animal violating any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.801 - Right to Confine 
    If any of the animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner until he can notify an animal control officer to come and impound such animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to have such animal impounded as provided in this article. The use of steel jaw traps, a spring trap with teeth, or any type of trap designed to reasonably ensure cutting, slicing, or tearing to capture animals is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.802 - Interfering with Humane Trapping 
    A person commits an offense if the person interferes, removes, alters, damages or otherwise tampers with equipment belonging to or set out by the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.803 - Notification 
    The animal control division shall make reasonable effort to contact the owner of any impounded animal that is wearing a current registration tag; however, final responsibility for locating and reclaiming an impounded animal is that of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.804 - Redemption 
    An owner or harborer can regain possession of any impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling fees and any veterinarian bills incurred by the animal control division for the welfare of the animal and upon compliance with vaccination and registration provisions of this article. Any person owning any animal impounded under this article shall be allowed to take such animal from the animal shelter or other place where impounded upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Payment to the City of an impoundment fee as described in section 2.811 herein, plus an amount listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances per day or fractional part thereof for boarding fees for each day impounded. 
(2)  If the owner cannot provide proof of a current rabies vaccination, the animal must be vaccinated within view of the animal control officer; the owner produce a receipt from a licensed veterinarian stating a vaccination has been paid in advance; or the owner purchase a rabies coupon and redeem the coupon within fifteen (15) days with a licensed veterinarian. Animals less than twelve (12) weeks of age will not require a rabies vaccination in order to be released. 
(3)  The owner reclaiming any animal impounded that resides within the city must provide proof of the current city license. If the owner is not able to provide proof or if the animal is not currently registered with the animal control division (s)he will pay a late fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances in order to secure that they will be in compliance with the license requirement as provided in this chapter. Animals less than twelve (12) weeks of age will not require a city registration in order to be released. 
(4)  When an animal has been impounded for the first time, the owner of the animal is eligible for a one-time impoundment fee rebate as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances upon submission, within thirty (30) days of the animal being redeemed, of written documentation that the animal has been spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.805 - Disposition 
    Any animal unclaimed at the expiration of the prescribed period shall become the property of the city and disposed of at the discretion of the city. If the owner has not redeemed such impounded animal within five (5) days from its capture and impoundment, the animal may be given to a nonprofit humane organization, placed for adoption, or humanely destroyed. Animals wearing a current city license tag will be held for seven (7) days prior to their disposition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.806 - Owner Relinquishing Responsibility 
    An owner who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal, or does not desire to regain possession of an impounded animal may, upon signing a waiver in a form provided by the animal control manager, allow the animal to be placed for adoption, given to a humane nonprofit organization, or humanely destroyed; provided, however, that the animal has not bitten a human within the last ten (10) days of the owner wanting to relinquish his responsibility of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.807 - Sick or Injured Animals 
    Any impounded animal which has been seriously injured or is seriously ill may be euthanized immediately to prevent suffering, or given to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determined by the animal control manager. The animal shelter shall not be responsible for providing veterinary care for any sick or injured animal. 
State Law reference- Restraint and impoundment of dogs and cats, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a, 3.08. 
Sec. 2.808 - Disposition of Wild Animals 
    Any impounded wild animal, unless there is a reason to believe that it has an owner, may be immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.809 - Baby Animals 
    Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious meals may be immediately euthanized to prevent suffering or given to an individual or to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of caring for such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.810 - Disposition of Animals Treated Inhumanely 
    The final disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the animal control manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05) 
Sec. 2.811 - Impoundment Fees 
(a)  Generally. The fees listed in Appendix A to this chapter for first, second and third impoundments within a twelve-month period shall be collected. 
(b)  Daily shelter fee. A daily shelter fee as listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances shall be charged for every day or fraction thereof after the first day of impoundment that an animal is at the animal shelter in addition to the impoundment fee. 
(c)  Quarantine fee. The owner of the cat, dog or ferret held in quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged an amount listed in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances for every day or fraction of a day that an animal is quarantined. This is in addition to any impoundment fee. 
(d)  Payment of fees. It shall be a violation of this article to fail to pay all fees due in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
Sec. 2.812 - Adoption of Animals 
(a)  A person may adopt an animal from the animal shelter under the following conditions: 
(1)  Pay an adoption and alteration fee as designated in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  Pay any license fee if required; and 
(3)  Have the animal vaccinated for rabies, (when required) within five (5) days after adoption; and 
(4)  Have the animal spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days after adoption, providing the animal is of the proper age for such procedure; and 
(5)  Any person desiring adoption shall also sign a promise in writing that the animal will be vaccinated and spayed or neutered within the time periods as outlined in subsections (3) and (4). The animal control officer shall keep the statement on file and, upon failure to receive proof of vaccination and spay or neuter within thirty (30) days, shall file a complaint with the municipal court. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall make the final determination whether an animal is healthy enough for adoption. However, such a decision by the animal control officer to permit adoption of a particular animal shall not constitute a warranty, expressed or implied, of the health or age of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17) 
CHAPTER THREE 
ARTICLE 3.100 - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 3.101 - Fire Limits Described 
    The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits of the city: 
BEGINNING at the northwest boundary of Tarrant Street at the Alley midway between Smythe Street and Cummins Street; thence along the centerline of said alley southwest to its intersection with the northeast boundary line of Montague Street; thence along the northeasterly boundary line of Montague Street to its intersection with the alley (or assumed alley) midway between North Mason Street and Lindsey Street; thence along the northwest centerline of said alley northwest to its intersection with the southwestern boundary line of Tarrant Street; thence along the southwestern boundary line of Tarrant Street to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 97-6 adopted 5-20-97) 
Sec. 3.102 - 2012 and Other International Codes Adopted and National Electrical Code 
    The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  2012 International Building Code including appendix D, H & I 
(2)  2012 International Existing Building Code 
(3)  2012 International Fire Code including all appendices 
(4)  2012 International Fuel Gas Code including appendix A, B, C, D 
(5)  2012 International Mechanical Code including appendix A 
(6)  2012 International Plumbing Code including appendix C, D, E, F 
(7)  2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code including appendix A, B 
(8)  2012 International Residential Code including appendix A, B, C, D, E, G, H, I, J, M, N, O, P 
(9)  2012 International Energy Conservation Code 
(10)  2011 National Electric Code 
(Ord. No. 96-11 adopted 9-17-96; Ord. 99-5 adopted 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2000-15 adopted 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-04, Sec. 1, adopted 8-7-01; Ord. No. 2003-10, Sec. 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2003-10, Sec. 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2003-16, Sec. 1, adopted 1-6-04; Ord. No. 2005-04, Sec. 1, adopted 4-5-05; Ord. No. 2007-03, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07; Ord. No. 2010-04, Sec. 1, adopted 4-6-10; Ord. No. 2014-02, Sec. 1, adopted 2-4-14) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-02, adopted Feb. 4, 2014, changed the title of sec. 3.102 from 2009 and Other International Codes Adopted" to "2012 and Other International Codes Adopted and National Electrical Code." 
Sec. 3.103 - Amendments to Model Codes 
Building: 
B101 Total Valuation Fee Section (1) $1,000 and less $25.00 Section (2) $1,001 to $50,000 $25.00 for the first $1,000 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000. Section (3) $50,001 to $100,000 $160.00 for the first $50,000 plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000. Section (4) $100,001 to $500,000 $260.00 for the first $$100,000 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000. Section (5) $500,001 and up $860.00 for the first $500,000 plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.  
B102 Penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by code is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties. 
B103 Plan Review Fees. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $1,000.00 and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be equal to the building permit fee. Such plan review fee is in addition to the building permit fee. 
B104. Inspection fees shall be $15.00 for each inspection. 
B105. Moving permit fee shall read-For the moving of any building or structures, the fee shall be $50.00. 
B106. Demolition permit fee shall read-For the demolition of any building or structures, the fee shall be $50.00. 
B107. Building contractors license fee shall be $25.00 annually. 
B108. Building contractors bond shall be a minimum of $10,000.00. 
B109. Certificate of Occupancy inspection fee shall be $75.00. 
B110. Curb and street cut permit fee shall be $30.00. 
B111. Fire protection permit fee shall be $40.00. 
Fire: (International Fire Code and Appendices) 
Amending the International Fire Code, restricting open burning in residential locations to: 
a.  Prohibit all ground fires. 
b.  Allow burning in commercial type devices. 
c.  Any open burning will be in accordance with the Texas Clean Air Act. 
d.  Land clearing operations shall be conducted in accordance with state law. 
Mechanical: 
M101 Total Valuation Fee $0-$500 $25.00 $501-$1,000 $35.00 $1,001-$2,500 $45.00 $2,501-$5,000 $55.00 $5,001-$25,000 $55.00 or .75% of CV-whichever is greater $25,001-$100,000 $200.00 or .5% of CV-whichever is greater $100,001-$250,000 $525.00 or .25% of CV-whichever is greater $250,001-and up $650.00 or .15% of CV-whichever is greater  
M102. Mechanical contractors registration fee shall be $25.00 annually. 
Electrical: 
E101 Total Valuation Fee $0-$500 $25.00 $501-$1,000 $35.00 $1,001-$2,500 $45.00 $2,501-$5,000 $55.00 $5,001-$25,000 $55.00 or .75% of CV-whichever is greater $25,001-$100,000 $200.00 or .5% of CV-whichever is greater $100,001-$250,000 $525.00 or .25% of CV-whichever is greater $250,001-and up $650.00 or .15% of CV-whichever is greater  
E102. Temporary service pole permit fee shall be $30.00. 
E103. Service entrance permit shall be $40.00. 
E104. Electrical license fee shall be $25.00 annually. 
E105. Connection to transformer pad fee shall be $145.00. 
Plumbing: 
P101 Total Valuation Fee $0-$500 $25.00 $501-$1,000 $35.00 $1,001-$2,500 $45.00 $2,501-$5,000 $55.00 $5,001-$25,000 $55.00 or .75% of CV-whichever is greater $25,001-$100,000 $200.00 or .5% of CV-whichever is greater $100,001-$250,000 $525.00 or .25% of CV-whichever is greater $250,001-and up $650.00 or .15% of CV-whichever is greater  
(Ord. No. 96-13 adopted 10-22-96; Ord. No. 97-1 adopted 2-4-97; Ord. No. 97-4 adopted 2-18-97; Ord. No. 98-12 adopted 10-20-98; Ord. No. 2001-04, Sec. 1, adopted 8-7-01; Ord. No. 2006-05, Sec. 1, adopted 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2009-02, Sec. 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2010-04, Sec. 2, adopted 4-6-10; Ord. No. 2018-02, Sec. 1, adopted 5-14-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-02,  1, adopted May 14, 2018, changed the title of  3.103 from "Amendments to Standard Codes" to read as herein set out. 
ARTICLE 3.200 - SUBSTANDARD AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 3.201 - Statutory Authority 
    This article is intended to adopt and implement in the broadest possible terms the powers, duties, and authorities set out in Subchapters B and C to Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, Sections 214.001 and 214.003 of Subchapter A to Chapter 214 of the Texas Local Government Code, and Texas Government Code Section 29.003 (d), as said statutes apply to the subject matter of this article, and as otherwise stated herein, as well as the home rule powers granted the city as a home rule city by its Charter and state law. Provisions of this article shall not be narrowly construed, but shall be broadly applied to accomplish the stated purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Charter reference- Charter  1.05. 
Sec. 3.202 - Definitions 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(1)  Code enforcement officer shall mean the person or persons designated by the city manager to investigate and report violations of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Dangerous building or structure: All buildings or structures, which have any of the following defects or lack of facilities, shall be deemed dangerous buildings or structures: 
a.  All buildings or structures that have become deteriorated through natural causes or by damage through exposure to the elements, especially wind, hail or rain, or damage through fire, flood, earthquake or other cause to the extent that the roof, windows or doors, or portions of the house, building or structure which protect the interior from the weather, would no longer reasonably protect from the weather. 
b.  All buildings or structures that are so structurally deteriorated that they are in danger of collapse, or which cannot be expected to withstand the forces of nature. 
c.  All buildings or structures not wired so as to provide in operating condition electrical circuits sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixtures. 
d.  All buildings or structures of which the floors, walls, ceilings, and all supporting members are not capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
e.  All buildings or structures so deteriorated or constructed or permitted to be constructed as to constitute a menace to the health or safety, including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease-carrying animals or insects, reasonably calculated to spread disease, and including such conditions hazardous to safety as inadequate bracing or use of deteriorated materials. 
f.  All buildings or structures which constitute or in which are maintained fire hazards as that term is defined by the ordinances of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
g.  All buildings or structures substantially in noncompliance with the requirements of the city's building code, electrical code, plumbing code, fire code, or other applicable codes of the City of Bowie such that said buildings or structures constitute a menace or hazard to the public health or safety. 
h.  All buildings or structures so dilapidated or substandard as to be unfit for human habitation. 
i.  All buildings or structures which, because of activities involving the sale, use, or abuse on said premises of illicit drugs or alcohol or other similar activities as certified to by the chief of police, or the fire marshal, or their designee, constitute a fire hazard or a menace to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Bowie. 
j.  All buildings or structures of which any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
k.  All buildings or structures of which any means of egress or portion thereof, such as but not limited to fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
l.  All buildings or structures of which the stress in any material, member or portion thereof due to all imposed loads including dead load exceeds the stresses allowed in the Standard Building Code for new buildings; 
m.  All buildings or structures of which any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Standard Building Code for new buildings; 
n.  All buildings or structures of which the building, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse; 
o.  All buildings or structures of which the building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the Standard Codes or of a city, county or state law; 
p.  All buildings, structures or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life or, which, in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
q.  All buildings or structures that, regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
r.  All buildings or structures that, boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
i.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
ii.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building described in subdivision k. above. 
(3)  Building and standards commission: Pursuant to the authority vested in the city under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C, the Board of Adjustment created pursuant to Ordinance No. 00-02 on January 25, 2000, shall act as the building and standards commission to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violation(s) of ordinances under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.203 - Public Nuisance Declared 
    All dangerous buildings or structures which shall constitute a hazard to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of their occupants or of the general public are declared to be public nuisances and shall be ordered to be vacated, removed, repaired, secured, or demolished as hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.204 - Authority of Buildings and Standards Commission 
(1)  The building and standards commission shall have all powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by state law, it being the intent of the city to fully implement Texas Local Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C, including specifically the authority to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violation(s) of this article. 
a.  For the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances, or exits; 
b.  Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design, or width of entrances or exits; or 
c.  Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements. 
(2)  The building and standards commission as created and provided for under the provisions of state law shall, in addition to the statutory duties and responsibilities, have such additional duties and responsibilities as shall be from time to time delegated by the city council and shall, in addition, determine such issues and render decisions in accordance therewith which may be from time to time required of an appellate body. In such cases, a simple majority of the members of the building and standards commission shall be sufficient to take action, unless by other law or ordinance a greater majority shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.205 - Procedures 
(1)  The building and standards commission shall adopt rules and procedures in accordance with this article governing the conduct of hearings before the building and standards commission, providing ample opportunity for the presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges brought by the city, acting through the code enforcement officer relating to the violation of this code and any other ordinance of the city. 
(2)  The building and standards commission as created and provided for under the provisions of state law shall, in addition to the statutory duties and responsibilities, have such additional duties and responsibilities as shall be from time to time delegated by the city council and shall, in addition, determine such issues and render decisions in accordance therewith which may be from time to time required of an appellate body. In such cases, a simple majority of the members of the building and standards commission shall be sufficient to take action, unless by other law or ordinance a greater majority shall be required. 
(3)  If the building and standards commission finds after a public hearing that a violation has occurred, the commission may: 
a.  Order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings found to be in violation of a provision of this Code or any applicable ordinance of the city; 
b.  Declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C; 
c.  Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the removal of persons or property if it is determined that the conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate or remove any substandard building found to exist; 
d.  Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the police chief, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the building and standards commission; and 
e.  Determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty the city may recover in an amount permitted by state law. 
f.  If the building and standards commission finds that the building or structure is a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 3.202 of this article, the commission shall issue an order to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure, as appropriate. As necessary, the building and standards commission may also issue an order authorizing the city to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure as appropriate, after the time has expired for the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder to take the ordered actions. 
g.  In addition to written findings of fact as required herein, the building and standards commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and official actions. 
(4)  Procedures for removal of substandard structures. Following notice and hearing, the building and standards commission may: 
a.  Declare a building dangerous in accordance with the standards set out in this article; 
b.  Upon a proper showing as set out herein, issue an order specifying a reasonable time for the building or other structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner or upon the refusal of the owner to comply, by the mortgagee or lienholder. The building and standards commission may issue an order authorizing the city to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure as appropriate after the time has expired for the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder to take the ordered actions; or 
c.  Upon a finding that the owner was actually notified of the provisions of this article and any other applicable city building standards, and a further finding that after the owner received notice of the article's provisions, the owner committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article, the commission then may determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty which the city may be entitled to recover for such violations, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation of this article. 
(5)  Standards. The following standards shall be applied by the building and standards commission in determining whether or not to order a building or structure repaired, removed, vacated, demolished, or secured, or a combination of such remedies: 
a.  If the dangerous building or structure can be reasonably repaired so that it will no longer be in a condition which is in violation of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
b.  If the dangerous building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants or of the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
c.  In any case where a dangerous building or structure is so damaged or destroyed that it cannot be repaired so that its existence will no longer be in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered demolished or removed. 
d.  If open to the public such as to constitute a threat to public health or safety, the building and standards commission may order such building secured by such means as the commission shall deem appropriate. 
e.  If the building and standards commission finds that the building or structure is unoccupied and is a dangerous building or structure as defined herein, the commission shall issue an order and/or warrant ordering the termination of utility service. 
(6)  In cases involving the condemnation or removal of substandard structures, the code enforcement officer shall request, and the building and standards commission shall conduct, a public hearing prior to ordering the removal of a structure. The commission shall hold an initial public hearing not less than ten (10) days after notification to the required parties that a building is to be considered as a substandard structure, and a notice to that effect has been posted on the structure. 
(7)  At the initial public hearing, if removal of the substandard structure is contested by any party of record with an interest in the property, the building and standards commission shall, if it finds that the structure should be condemned, order the property owner to appear at a second public hearing, not less than twenty-eight (28) days from the date of the first hearing, and show cause why the commission shall not order the removal of the substandard structure. 
(8)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the commission is necessary to take any action under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C. 
(9)  All cases to be heard by the commission must be heard by at least four (4) members. 
(10)  The building and standards commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the commission as public record. 
(11)  Meetings of the building and standards commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson, the code enforcement officer and at other times as determined by the commission. All of the meetings shall be open to the public. The chairperson or in the chairperson's absence the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(12)  A diligent search, using best efforts, or making a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee shall be conducted by: 
a.  Searching the county real property records in the county in which the building is located; 
b.  Searching appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
c.  Searching the records of the secretary of state; 
d.  Searching the assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
e.  Searching the tax records of the municipality; 
f.  Searching the utility records of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.206 - Hearing Procedures 
(1)  Notice. 
a.  Unless other requirements are specified herein, notice of all proceedings before the building and standards commission must be given as follows: 
i.  The code enforcement officer or a designated representative shall give notice of all proceedings before the building and standards commission by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected property, and to each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected property is located if the address of the mortgagee or lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or from other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; 
ii.  The code enforcement officer or a designated representative shall give notice of all proceedings before the building and standards commission to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable; and 
iii.  The code enforcement officer or a designated representative shall mail and post each required notice at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing before the commission. The code enforcement officer or a designated representative shall also cause to be published at one (1) occasion, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
iv.  By filing the notice in the official public record of real property in the county in which the property is located. 
b.  The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day before the date of the proceeding before the commission and must state the date, time, and place of the proceeding. In addition, the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
c.  Notice required to be mailed, posted or published under this section shall state the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice may be in the form of a charging instrument, and shall contain: 
i.  The name of the owner(s), occupant(s), and other persons interested in the building; 
ii.  The street address and/or an identification of the property, which is not required to be a legal description, of the premises; 
iii.  A general description of the improvements; 
iv.  A list of defects on the property; 
v.  A brief statement of the action to be considered by the building and standards commission; 
vi.  A description of the violation of city codes or articles that exist at the building; 
vii.  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, repair, remove, or demolish the building if ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time; and 
viii.  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(2)  Following each proceeding, the building and standards commission shall issue an order containing provisions as set out herein, which shall be mailed, filed, and published in accordance with section 3.206 of this article. Each such order shall specify the action to be taken as part of the notice and shall specify a reasonable time within which the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lienholder is to take such action. The order shall provide further notice and specify an additional reasonable time within which any mortgagee or lienholder may undertake the ordered action in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time specified for action by the owner. The city shall not be required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. The city may immediately proceed with actions authorized in the order; provided, however, that the city may obtain a warrant for any such actions and shall obtain a warrant for any actions for which a warrant is required by law. The building and standards commission may issue any and all warrants that the commission has authority to issue under state and federal law. 
(3)  The building and standards commission shall, upon due notice as set out herein, conduct public proceedings to implement and enforce provisions of this article. 
(4)  The city attorney's office shall present all cases before the building and standards commission. 
(5)  In the conduct of all proceedings before the building and standards commission, the purpose of such proceedings shall be to determine whether or not a building or structure complies with the standards set out in this article. Precedent to any such proceedings the city shall make a diligent effort to identify the owner or owners of the building or structure under review and likewise shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder. Before conducting the proceedings, the city shall notify each owner or owners of the building or structure under review as well as each mortgagee and lienholder which the city could reasonably identify and shall give an opportunity to both the owner and the mortgagee or lienholder to appear at the proceeding. Any order issued by the building and standards commission pursuant to said proceeding shall specify a reasonable time for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an additional reasonable time for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the timeframe provided for action by the owner. The city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. Subsequent to each proceeding, the building and standards commission shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the building or structure under review is in fact a dangerous building as that term is defined herein. 
(6)  If the building and standards commission finds that the building or structure is a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 3.202 of this article, the commission shall issue an order to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure, as appropriate. As necessary, the building and standards commission may also authorizing the city to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure as appropriate, after the time has expired for the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder to take the ordered actions. 
(7)  In addition to written findings of fact as required herein, the building and standards commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and official actions. 
(8)  Following notice and hearing, the building and standards commission may: 
a.  Declare a building dangerous in accordance with the standards set out in this article; 
b.  Upon a proper showing as set out herein, issue an order specifying a reasonable time for the building or other structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner or upon the refusal of the owner to comply, by the mortgagee or lienholder. The building and standards commission may also issue an order authorizing the city to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish said building or structure as appropriate after the time has expired for the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder to take the ordered actions; or 
c.  If the building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the building and standards commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the building and standards commission. 
d.  The building and standards commission may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee: 
i.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
ii.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
e.  If the building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the building and standards commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the commission to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the building and standards commission or the commission's designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the municipal boundaries that exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in total value, the building and standards commission may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing or demolishing a building under this article. In lieu of a bond, the building and standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the building and standards commission. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the thirtieth day after the date the building and standards commission issues the order. 
(9)  Upon a finding that the owner was actually notified of the provisions of this article and any other applicable city building standards, and a further finding that after the owner received notice of the article's provisions, the owner committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article, the commission then may determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty which the city may be entitled to recover for such violations, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation of this article. 
(10)  Notice of order. Within ten (10) days after the date of the public hearing and order issued by the building and standards commission, the following shall be done by the code enforcement officer: 
a.  File a copy of the order with the city secretary; 
b.  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing the street address or legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the hearing and subsequent order issued and instruction stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; 
c.  Notice of order shall be mailed to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the United States Postal Service returns notice marked as "refused" or "unclaimed" the validity of the notice is not affected and shall be deemed delivered. 
(11)  Standards. The following standards shall be applied by the building and standards commission in determining whether or not to order a building or structure repaired, removed, vacated, demolished, or secured, or a combination of such remedies: 
a.  If the dangerous building or structure can be reasonably repaired so that it will no longer be in a condition which is in violation of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
b.  If the dangerous building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants or of the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
c.  In any case where a dangerous building or structure is so damaged or destroyed that it cannot be repaired so that its existence will no longer be in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered demolished or removed. 
d.  If open to the public such as to constitute a threat to public health or safety, the building and standards commission may order such building secured by such means as the commission shall deem appropriate. 
e.  If the building and standards commission finds that the building or structure is unoccupied and is a dangerous building or structure as defined herein, the commission shall issue an order and/or warrant ordering the termination of utility service. 
f.  In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this ordinance, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.207 - Finality of Decisions 
    In each case, the code enforcement officer or a designated representative shall mail by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, to all parties entitled to notice of the original hearing, a copy of the final decision of the commission. All persons aggrieved of a decision of the building and standards commission may present a petition to any district court in Montague County, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. A petition of review must be presented to a district court within thirty (30) calendar days of the date copies of the final decision are sent to interested parties. If no appeals are taken from a decision of the building and standards commission within the required period, the decision of the building and standards commission is, in all things, final and binding. 
    An assessment of a civil penalty by the building and standards commission as provided in this article is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment as provided elsewhere herein. 
    To enforce any civil penalty as assessed hereunder, the city secretary shall file with the district clerk of the appropriate county wherein the property is located a certified copy of the building and standards commission's order establishing the amount and duration of the civil penalty. No other proof is required for a district court to enter final judgment on said penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.208 - Judicial Review of Decisions 
(1)  Any persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the building and standards commission may present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be presented to the district court within thirty (30) calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision and order of the building and standards commission is mailed by first class mail, certified, return receipt requested, to all persons entitled to receive notice as provided herein. The building and standards commission shall mail that copy promptly after the decision becomes final. In addition, a copy shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy as provided herein, and a copy shall also be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  On presentation of the petition, the district court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the building and standards commission to review the decision rendered by the commission if that hearing was conducted with less than all of the members that comprised the building and standards commission on the date of the hearing, and shall prescribe in the writ the time, which may not be less than ten (10) days, within which a return on the writ must be made and served on the relator or the relator's attorney. 
(3)  The building and standards commission may not be required to return the original papers acted on by it. It is sufficient for the building and standards commission to return certified or sworn copies of the papers or parts of the papers as may be called for by the writ. 
(4)  The return must concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds for the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(5)  The allowance of the writ does not stay proceedings on the decision appealed from, but the district court and for due cause shown, may grant a restraining order or injunction. 
(6)  If, on a hearing by the district court, it appears to the district court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, the district court may take evidence or appoint a referee to take evidence as it may direct and report the evidence to the district court with the referee's findings of fact and conclusions of law, which constitute a part of the proceedings on which the determination of the district court shall be made. The district court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(7)  Costs may not be allowed against the city unless it appears to the district court that the city acted with gross negligence, in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(8)  If the decision of the building and standards commission is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall allow to the city all attorneys fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it and shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered against the property owners as well as all persons found to be in occupation of the property subject to the proceedings before the building and standards commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.209 - Lien; Abstract 
(1)  An abstract of judgment shall be issued against all parties found to be the owners of the subject property or in possession of the property. 
(2)  A lienholder shall not have standing to bring a judicial review as provided herein on the grounds that the lienholder was not notified of the proceedings before the civil municipal commission or was unaware of the condition of the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the civil municipal commission and entered an appearance in opposition to the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.210 - Criminal Penalties in Municipal Court 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 105 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Any person or persons, firm or corporation which violates any of the provisions of article 3.200 et seq. shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for each of the days and shall be punishable as such. 
(3)  Any person or persons, firm or corporation which violates any of the provisions of article [section] 3.212 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty dollares ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for each of the days and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.211 - Actions by the City 
    Noncompliance with order. 
(1)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense; provided, however, that the city may obtain a warrant for any such action and shall obtain a warrant where so required by state of federal law. 
(2)  If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city and the balance due. 
(3)  If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the tenants of the building or to repair, remove or demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by this subchapter, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.212 - Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer 
    The code enforcement officer shall 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected any building or structure situated within the city in which the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that conditions exist that render such structure a dangerous building as that term is defined herein. 
(2)  If, upon inspection and investigation, the code enforcement officer finds that the building or structure is a dangerous building as that term is defined herein, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice, which such notice shall in all things comply with the terms and provisions of section 3.204(g) of this article, advising any person interested in such dangerous building or structure, or his or her authorized agent or representative, and all lienholders of notice, to appear and show cause why the commission should not issue an order for action against such building or structure in accordance with this article. 
The code enforcement officer, the fire official and other authorized representatives are authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The code enforcement officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected any building, structure or portion thereof which is or may be unsafe. After the code enforcement officer has inspected or caused to be inspected a building, structure or portion thereof and has determined that such building, structure or portion thereof is unsafe, he or she shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the condition by repair, vacation or demolition or combination thereof. 
(3)  Place a notice on said dangerous building or structure to read substantially as follows: 
"NOTICE - DANGEROUS BUILDING. 
    The city has deemed this building to be unsafe for occupancy or use. Do not remove this notice. Removal of this notice is punishable by a maximum fine of TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ($2,000.00)." 
(4)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the building and standards commission, testify as to the condition of dangerous or substandard buildings at such hearings, and perform all other staff-related functions in support of the activities of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.213 - Authority of the City Attorney 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized and it shall be the duty of the city attorney of the city without further authorization of the city council to undertake, by all legal means appropriate or necessary, the enforcement of this article, including, but not limited to enforcement in municipal court, filing of appropriate civil actions in courts of appropriate jurisdiction to seek compliance with said orders, or defending the city from suit if suit is taken to appeal any action of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
Sec. 3.214 - Remedies and Enforcement 
(1)  Nonexclusive. The remedies and penalties set out herein are intended to be non-exclusive; that is, they shall be construed to not exclude the city from seeking any and all remedies at law or equity to which the city may be entitled under state law or otherwise, and the remedies as set out herein shall be considered in addition to and cumulative of such remedies as set out under state law. 
(2)  Criminal penalties in municipal court. 
a.  The owner, occupant, lessee, agent, or any other person subject to any notice and order issued by the court under this article who shall fail to comply with said order to repair, remove, demolish, or secure such building or structure, or any person who shall willfully refuse or fail to leave a building which has been ordered vacated under the terms of this article or who shall enter an area around such building that the court has declared to be dangerous, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1.105 of this Code. Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
b.  In case the owner or occupant of any dangerous building or structure ordered vacated, repaired, removed, demolished, or secured under the terms of this article shall be a corporation and shall violate any of the provisions of this article, the president, the vice president, the secretary, or treasurer of such corporation or any manager or agent of such corporation shall be severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
c.  Any person removing the notice provided for in this article from the building or structure shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1.105 of this Code. 
(3)  Civil action authorized. 
a.  Remedies authorized. The city attorney may in his or her discretion seek any and all remedies authorized under state law, including without limitation the provisions of Chapters 54 and 214 of the Local Government Code. Such remedies may include, but are not limited to injunctive relief, enforcement and collection of civil penalties authorized under this article, an action to compel the repair, demolition, or securing of any building or structure, recovery of all costs of the city, including court costs and attorneys fees, appointment of a receiver to administer any non-compliant property in accordance with Section 214.003 of the Local Government Code, and any and all other remedies actionable to the city under law or equity. 
b  Lis pendens authorized. The city attorney may file a notice of lis pendens in the office of the county clerk regarding such action. If the city files such notice, a subsequent purchaser or mortgagee who acquires an interest in the non-compliant property takes the property subject to the enforcement proceeding of the city and subsequent orders of any court. 
c.  Buildings or structures secured by the city. For any building or structure which the city itself wishes to secure in accordance with this article, following such securing of said building or structure the city shall undertake the following procedure: 
i.  Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the owner of said property by: 
A.  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
B.  Depositing the notice in the U.S. mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
C.  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
D.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown. 
ii.  The notice must contain: 
A.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
B.  A description of the violation of this article that is present on the premises; 
C.  A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building or other structure; and 
D.  An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building. 
iii.  The city shall conduct a hearing before the building and standards commission at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building if, before the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. The building and standards commission shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days after such a request is filed. After the hearing, if the commission finds that the building is a dangerous building, as defined in this article, the commission may issue an order to secure said building. If the building and standards commission finds that the building is not a dangerous building, as defined in this article, and if so requested by the owner, the building and standards commission shall issue an order to the city to unsecure the building. 
iv.  The building and standards commission may issue orders for the securing of buildings either before or after the hearing described in this section has been conducted; provided, however, that the city shall comply with any and all requirements of state and/or federal law applicable to the procurement and issuance of such warrants. 
v.  The city has the same authority to assess expenses under this section as it has to assess expenses under section 3.205 herein. A lien is created under this section in the same manner that a lien is created under section 3.205 and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under that section. 
v.  The city may provide the notice required by this section and the building and standards commission may conduct the hearing required herein before securing a dangerous building or structure and both shall do so if required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, adopted 4-19-05) 
ARTICLE 3.500 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitation and health standards, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Ch. 341; Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.A.C.S., Art. 5221f. 
Cross reference- Also see flood damage prevention regulations in this chapter pertaining to mobile homes, Art. 3.900. 

Sec. 3.501 - Mobile Home Defined 
    As used in this article, "mobile home" means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping and for living quarters for one (1) or more persons or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts. A mobile home may include one (1) or more units which may be telescoped or joined into one (1) unit. The term "mobile homes" as used herein shall be interpreted to mean and include "manufactured homes." 
(Ord. No. 3710, Sec. 1, adopted 4-4-78) 
Sec. 3.502 - Proximity to Other Structures 
    No mobile home shall be placed nearer than fifteen (15) feet from any other mobile home or other permanent structure located on the same or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 3710, Sec. 2, adopted 4-4-78) 
Sec. 3.503 - Application of Technical Codes 
    All permanent connections of any public utility service to a mobile home shall be made to conform fully to applicable plumbing, housing, and electrical codes/ordinances that may now, or hereafter, be existing. 
(Ord. No. 3710, Sec. 3, adopted 4-4-78) 
ARTICLE 3.600 - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Subsurface excavations, V.T.C.A., Water Code, Sec. 31.001 et. seq.; use of sidewalks and streets for private purposes, V.A.C.S., Art. 1085b; municipal regulation of obstructions on streets, etc., V.A.C.S., Art. 1175(5). 

Sec. 3.601 - Permit Required 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in the streets or alleys of the city without first having obtained a permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1155, Sec. 1, adopted 10-13-25) 
Sec. 3.602 - Application for Permit; Issuance; Contents 
    Any person desiring to make an excavation in the streets or alleys of the city shall first obtain a permit to do so by making application to the city manager, stating in such application the purpose of such excavation to be made. The permit, when issued, shall be signed by the designee of the city manager and attested by the city secretary with the city seal. The permit shall specify the streets or alleys on which such excavations are to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1155, Sec. 2, adopted 10-13-25) 
Sec. 3.603 - Restoration of Streets or Alleys 
    Any person making an excavation in the streets or alleys of the city shall, after the completion of such excavation, restore the streets or alleys to their former condition without unnecessary delay. Such person, in restoring such streets or alleys to their condition shall be required to water tamp the streets or alleys so as to prevent the streets or alleys from having ridges or holes where such excavations were made, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1155, Sec. 3, adopted 10-13-25) 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, city clerk was changed to city manager throughout this article. 
ARTICLE 3.700 - SWIMMING POOLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 214.101 

Sec. 3.701 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enclosure means a fence, wall or solid structure having a minimum height of forty-eight (48) inches and constructed as to prevent the passage of any object of greater than six (6) inches in diameter through the structure except through a gate. 
    Gate means an opening through the enclosure for the purpose of providing ingress and egress. The gate is to be constructed of similar materials as the enclosure and shall conform to the height and opening requirements of the enclosure. All gates shall be of permanent construction and attached to the enclosure. 
    Permit means authorization from the city for the purposes of swimming pool construction. 
    Swimming pool means any structure or contrivance intended to be used for the purpose of swimming, wading or bathing by human beings and having a depth of greater than one (1) foot. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 4, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.702 - Scope of Article 
    This article shall govern the requirements of fences to enclose swimming pools of any kind which are kept or maintained partly or wholly within the city. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 3, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.703 - Enclosures Required 
    Every swimming pool located within the city shall be enclosed with an enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec 5, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.704 - Specifications for Gates 
    All gates that provide ingress or egress to a swimming pool shall be self-closing and shall be self-latching. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 6, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.705 - Permit Required; Plot Plan 
    Any person desiring to construct a swimming pool within the city shall be required to acquire a permit before the commencement of any construction. The information necessary for the city to issue such permit shall include a plot plan of the property to contain the swimming pool. The plot plan shall include, but not be limited to, all relevant information necessary to determine the location of the pool in respect to permanent structures, property boundaries, easements, utility locations and enclosure locations. The plot plan shall be prepared by a licensed and registered surveyor of the state. The cost of the plot plan shall be the responsibility of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 7, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.706 - Permit Fee 
    The fee for the issuance of a swimming pool construction permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 8, adopted 8-16-88) 
ARTICLE 3.800 - FENCES REQUIRED FOR PONDS AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER 

Sec. 3.801 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate fence means a fence of at least four (4) strands of barbed wire, with the top strand at least four (4) feet above the ground. Each strand shall be stretched taut with good ranch fence practice. The fence shall have line posts spaced every sixteen (16) feet or closer. 
    Pond means any body of water, other than a swimming pool, having a maximum depth of one (1) foot or more. 
(Ord. No. 062188-A, Sec. 2, adopted 6-21-88) 
Sec. 3.802 - Scope 
    This article shall govern the requirements of fences to surround all ponds and other bodies of water of any kind which are kept or maintained partly or wholly within the city. 
(Ord. No. 081688-A, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-88) 
Sec. 3.803 - Fence Required 
    Every pond located partly or wholly within the city shall be enclosed by an adequate fence. Such adequate fence may contain a gate if the gate is a metal "farm type" gate, or better, and is at least four (4) feet in height. If a gate is installed, the gate must be kept locked except when the owner is using the gate for entering or leaving the fenced area. Such adequate fence must be no closer to the edge of the pond than fifty (50) feet. The fence shall have "no trespassing" signs no more than three hundred (300) feet apart and attached to the top wire of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 062188-A, Sec. 3.2, adopted 6-21-88) 
Sec. 3.804 - Nonconforming Fences 
    Any fences which enclose ponds and which are in existence on the effective date of Ordinance No. 062188-A but which are not in compliance with this article because such fence is closer than fifty feet (50') to the edge of the pond must be brought into compliance with this article at such time as that fence is rebuilt or replaced unless such distance exceeds owner's property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 062188-A, Sec. 3.2, adopted 6-21-81) 
Sec. 3.805 - Continuing Violations 
    If a violation of this article continues for more than twenty-four (24) hours, each calendar day during which the violation occurs or persists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 062188-A, Sec. 4.2, adopted 6-21-88) 
ARTICLE 3.900 - FENCES 

Sec. 3.901 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, and maintenance of all fences within the boundaries of the city in order to provide a practical safeguarding of life, health, and property from hazards that may arise from improper construction of such installations. However, this article shall not apply to fences erected or maintained in districts within the city which are zoned agricultural. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.902 - Reserved 
Sec. 3.903 - Reserved 
Sec. 3.904 - Permit to Install or Alter 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to permit any person to install a fence, or to make any alterations, additions or changes to a fence, without first having procured a permit to do so from the building official. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit shall not be required for alterations, additions or changes if repairs do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the fence over a twelve-month period. 
(b)  When installing a new fence parallel to and within three (3) feet of an existing fence on the same lot, the existing fence shall be removed. The term "parallel" is defined as a corresponding fence that runs in the same direction as the existing fence but does not have to maintain a precise constant distance from one another. 
(c)  The fee for permit required by this section shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) and shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.905 - Electric Fences 
    Single-strand wires designed to conduct electricity through an approved low-voltage regulator shall be allowed only along the interior base line of an otherwise permitted fence. No permit shall be required for the erection and maintenance of such single-strand electric wires. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.906 - Location on or Protrusion over City Property 
    No privately owned fence or guy wires, braces or any other part of a privately owned fence shall be constructed upon or caused to protrude over property owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.907 - Fence Material 
    In no event shall barbed wire be permitted except on arms in heavy industrial and light industrial zoning districts. All fences erected shall be of approved fence material, which is designed for this purpose. Material shall be approved by the code official prior to issuance of permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.908 - Inspection of New Fences 
    When any fence for which a permit has been issued under this article is completed, it must be inspected. The chief building official's office shall be notified upon completion of the fence. The chief building official will issue a notice of acceptance if the fence complies with the provisions of this article or reject the fence if it does not comply. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.909 - Maintenance 
    All fences constructed under the provisions of this article shall be maintained so as to comply with the requirements of this article at all times. Such requirements include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following maintenance standards: 
(1)  The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. Except, however, for fencing four (4) feet or less in height, the vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
(2)  Any and all broken, loose, damaged, insect damaged, or missing parts (i.e., slats, posts, wood rails, bricks, panels) having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more of said fences shall be replaced or repaired within sixty (60) days of notification of non-compliance. Fences enclosing swimming pools or spas must be repaired immediately. 
Repairs of any nature shall be made with materials of comparable composition, color, size, shape, and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. Products manufactured for other uses such as plywood, corrugated steel, or fiberglass panels are prohibited as fencing materials. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit the complete removal of a fence, unless such fence encloses a swimming pool or spa. 
(3)  No fencing material and/or supports shall be located within a street or alley right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.910 - Reserved 
Sec. 3.911 - Drainage Easements 
    No fences shall be constructed within any drainage easement in the corporate limits of the city unless the city engineer shall have first determined and advised the chief building official, in writing, that he believes such fence shall, in all probability, not interfere with or impair the natural flow of water across the drainage easement. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.912 - Residential Districts-Rear Yard of Alley Line 
    No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding eight (8) feet along the rear yard or alley line in residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.913 - Same-Vertical Fences on Side Yard Line 
    No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding six (6) feet on any side yard line in residential districts up to the building line of the house proper. All such fences constructed on side yard lines in residential districts must be vertical. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.914 - Same-Front Yard 
    No fence over three (3) feet in height shall be erected in residential districts from the front building line to the property line. A berm may be used in conjunction with a fence in a front yard provided their aggregate height does not exceed the maximum allowed by the section. All fences which do not have fifty (50) percent through vision are prohibited in any front yards. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.915 - Industrial Districts 
    No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding ten (10) feet in heavy industrial or light industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.916 - Penalty 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 3.917 - Appeals 
    Any appeal from a decision of the code official under the terms of this article shall be made in writing to the board of adjustment and appeals board. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
ARTICLE 3.1000 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS; ASSESSMENTS[4] 
    Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Art. 1105b is hereby adopted and made a part of the organic laws of the city. Street improvements in the city shall be constructed in accordance with its powers, terms and provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1106, adopted 12-3-41) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal streets, alleys, etc., V.A.C.S., Art. 1016; street improvements, V.A.C.S., Art. 1086 et seq.; municipal home rule powers, V.A.C.S., Art. 1175; street lighting system, V.A.C.S., Art. 1221 et seq.; improvement districts in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 372.041. 

ARTICLE 3.1100 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, 
PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-03, Arts. 1-5, adopted April 19, 2011, has been treated by the editor as superseding former Art. 3.1100 which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-10, Arts. 1-5, adopted Aug. 1, 2006. 

Sec. 3.1101 - Statutory Authorization 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Bowie, Texas does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 1, Sec. A, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1102 - Findings of Fact 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of City of Bowie are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 1, Sec. B, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1103 - Statement of Purpose 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 1, Sec. C, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1104 - Methods of Reducing Flood Losses 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 1, Sec. D, adopted 4-19-11) 
DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 3.1105 - Terms Defined 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year-also called the "base flood." 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall - means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building - means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (Firm) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (Fis) See "flood elevation study." 
Floodplain or flooprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway See "regulatory floodway." 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area See "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 2, adopted 4-19-11) 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 3.1106 - Lands to Which this Article Applies 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. A, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1107 - Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Montague County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated August 16, 2011 with Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated August 16, 2011; and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. B, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1108 - Establishment of Development Permit 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. C, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1109 - Compliance 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. D, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1110 - Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. E, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1111 - Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. F, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1112 - Warning and Disclaimer or Liability 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 3, Sec. G, adopted 4-19-11) 
ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 3.1113 - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 4, Sec. A, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1114 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with 3.1107, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 3.1117-3.1123. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 4, Sec. B, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1115 - Permit Procedures 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 3.1118(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 3.1114(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 4, Sec. C, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1116 - Variance Procedures 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 3.1115(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 3.1103). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsections 3.1116(a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 4, Sec. D, adopted 4-19-11) 
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sec. 3.1117 - General Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. A, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1118 - Specific Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 3.1107, (ii) subsection 3.1114(8), or (iii) subsection 3.119(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential Construction - New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (feet) above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 3.1115(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential Construction - New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (feet) above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures - New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured Homes 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 3.1115(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. B, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1119 - Standards for Subdivision Proposals 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 3.1102-3.1104. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.1108, section 3.1115 and the provisions of sections 3.1117-3.1123 of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsection 3.1114(8). 
(d)  Base flood elevation data, with the establishment of a floodway, shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. C, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1120 - Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones) 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.1107, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.1115 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. D, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1121 - Floodways 
    Floodways-located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.1107, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection 3.1121(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 3.1117-3.1123. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. E, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1122 - Severability 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. F, adopted 4-19-11) 
Sec. 3.1123 - Penalties for Noncompliance 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Bowie from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, Art. 5, Sec. G, adopted 4-19-11) 
CHAPTER 4 - BUSINESS & COMMERCE 
ARTICLE 4.100: - VENDORS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-03,  1, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed Art. 4.100 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. 4.100 pertained to vending stands on public ways, and derived from Ord. No. 3706,  4, 5, adopted May 31, 1892; and Ord. No. 6006,  1-3, adopted Oct. 9, 1967. 

Sec. 4.101 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    "Door-to-door selling" shall mean going to one (1) or more residence within the city in person or by the agent for the purpose of peddling, soliciting, or vending, who engages in a business of selling or offering for sale, food, beverages, goods, services, wares and merchandise or engages in soliciting orders for the sale of goods, services, wares and merchandise for future delivery. 
    Merchandise is used in its broadest sense and shall include property of every kind. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle used for the displaying, storing, or transportation of articles for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed and registered by the state department of motor vehicles. This term is to include, but not be limited to, trailers, trucks, buses, and automobiles. 
    Peddler, solicitor, and vendor shall mean any person firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a business of selling or offering for sale, food, beverages, goods, services, wares and merchandise or engages in soliciting orders for the sale of goods, services, wares and merchandise for future delivery and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any stand, motor vehicle, tent, or from his or her person. This article does not apply to Second Monday events as delineated in article 4.400 "second monday regulations." 
    Public place shall mean any public road, street, alley, park, building, or other property of the city or any other place to which people commonly congregate for the purpose of business, recreation, or amusement. 
    Services is used in its broadest sense and shall include any work done for the benefit of another person. 
    Special event shall mean any occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows, exhibitions, citywide celebrations, festivals, and etc., within a specifically defined area of the city for a period of time not to exceed five (5) days. 
    Stand shall mean any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and registered by the department of motor vehicles, and is used for the display, storage, or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
    Temporary shall mean any such business for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one (1) month, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.102 - License Required 
    It shall be unlawful for any vendor or solicitor to engage in the business of selling, displaying, or offering for sale any food, beverage, goods, services or merchandise at any public place within the city without first obtaining a license from the code enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.103 - Application 
    Every person desiring to engage in the business of a vendor as defined in section 4.101 above shall apply for a license from the code enforcement office. The application must include the following: 
(1)  The full name, home address, permanent business address (if any), telephone number, driver's license number or identification card number, and valid, unexpired photographic proof of identity; 
(2)  A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of the food, beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold; 
(3)  The specific location, if any, in which the vendor intends to conduct business; 
(4)  If the vendor is employed by or is an agent of another, the name and business address of the principal/hiring person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation; 
(5)  If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a description of the vehicle, together with the motor vehicle registration number, license number, and a copy of the vehicle's current proof of liability insurance; 
(6)  A copy of the vendor's current State of Texas Sales Tax Permit together with written documentation from the state comptroller that all sales taxes that may be due and owing by the vendor have been fully paid; 
(7)  A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to applicant by the city within the past five (5) years; 
(8)  A written statement from the property owner consenting to applicant's use of his/her property for the sales activities indicated in the permit application including the start and end dates of the permitted use. 
(9)  The inclusive dates for which a license is sought to be issued, which dates shall not exceed a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.104 - Health Permit 
    The application of any vendor engaged in the sale or distribution of food or beverages that is not operating as a "mobile food unit" as defined in article 4.200 shall also be required to provide confirmation of a valid health permit or applicant will be referred to the Texas Department of State Health Services whose area of service includes the City of Bowie. The health permit shall be required in addition to the vending license required by this article. Such vendor's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the code enforcement office at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.105 - Issuance of License and Payment of Fees 
    Not later than ten (10) business days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's license, the applicant shall be notified by the code enforcement office of the decision on the issuance or denial of the license. If it is found that the applicant has fully complied with all provisions of this article, said applicant will be required to pay a license fee and any permit shall be issued subject to the terms of the fee schedule adopted by the Bowie City Council. The purpose of the fee is to partly defray the expenses of surveillance and inspection of the premises and property of the licensee, and the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.106 - License Not Transferable 
    The license provided for in this article shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one (1) person to sell or exhibit food, beverages, goods, wares and merchandise either by agent or clerk or in any other way than his own proper person, but any person having obtained such license may have the assistance of one (1) or more persons in conducting the sale or exhibit who shall have the authority to aid that principal but not to act for or without him. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.107 - Duration of License; Display and Identification Badge 
    The license provided for in this article shall continue so long as the licensee is conducting business in the city, but in no event shall it continue for more than one (1) year from the date of its issuance. Such license shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where business is being conducted. Further, each licensee and each assistant, if any, must obtain an identification card from the code enforcement office, or their authorized representative, showing the individual's name, the address wherein the vending business is to be conducted, and the effective period of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.108 - Insurance or Bond Required 
    Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the application shall be accompanied by a bond or insurance policy in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), in general liability coverage, acceptable to the code enforcement office to cover any and all property damage, injuries, including injury resulting in death, or wrongful fraudulent or illegal conduct of the vendor while conducting business in the city. The bond or insurance policy shall remain in full force and effect during the entire duration of the license as provided in this article and one (1) year thereafter. 
Sec. 4.109 - Temporary Vending License-Special Events 
    Vendors wishing to conduct business at any special event shall apply to the city for a temporary vending license. Application for such a license must be made at least seven (7) days prior to the beginning of the event. The license is valid only for the duration of the special event or the expiration of five (5) days, whichever comes first. The fee for issuance of a temporary vending license shall be subject to the terms of the fee schedule adopted by the Bowie City Council and tendered to the code enforcement office at the time of issuance. Vendors granted a temporary license shall be subject to the same application and operating regulations as other vendors, except where otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.110 - Exemptions 
    The following vendors are exempt from the fee provisions of section 4.105 together with sections 4.108 and 4.109 of this article but shall otherwise be required to comply with all other provisions. 
(1)  Religious, non-profit, philanthropic and/or charitable organizations including, but not limited to, public or private schools and service organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.111 - Restrictions Applicable to all Vendors 
(a)  Stands. Vendor stands shall not: 
(1)  Exceed thirty-five (35) feet in length, ten (10) feet in width or thirteen (13) feet in height; 
(2)  Impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent building; 
(3)  Occupy more than half of the available sidewalk width or twenty (20) feet of such sidewalk, whichever is less. 
(b)  Hours of operation. Except for the vending of food or drinks from a motor vehicle or other non-stationary means within construction, manufacturing or similar areas in the manner specified in subsection (g) below, vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. All vending stands must be removed during non-vending hours. When temporary vending permits are issued for special events under the provisions of sections 4.108 and 4.109 above, the applicant may request from the city an exception to the usual hours of operation. All stands and other vending operations must be removed during non-operating hours. 
(c)  Handicapped areas. No vendor shall conduct business within fifty (50) feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp. 
(d)  Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within fifty (50) feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in an authorized trash container. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
(e)  Prohibited areas. A vending license issued pursuant to this article is valid only on specified public ways or in public places of the city. The city shall prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways or in public places if it determines such prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health and safety. Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, loading zone, or the driveway of a fire station, police station or hospital. 
(f)  Noise. No vendor may sound any device, which produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. Except as otherwise limited by state law and/or city codes, a vendor shall be allowed amplified music as long as such music shall not violate the "unreasonable" definition of noise established by V.T.C.A., Penal Code Sec. 42.10, and/or the Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Motor vehicles. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park the vehicle within fifty (50) feet of any intersection, driveway, fire lane or ADA accessible sidewalks or sidewalk access ramps and within any other prohibited area, or during prohibited hours; 
(2)  Conduct business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.112 - Denial, Suspension or Revocation of License 
(a)  Any license issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked at any time for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application or this license; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending; 
(3)  Conducting the business of vending in any way contrary to the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(5)  Conviction of any felony offense or any misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude while holding a vending license from the city or for a period of five (5) years prior to the date of the application for a vending license: 
(6)  Suspension or cancellation of health department authorization for a food and beverage vending unit. 
(b)  Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice to the applicant/license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the applicant/license holder's place of business or mailed to the applicant/license holder's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.113 - Renewals 
    Licenses may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the code enforcement office no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The code enforcement office shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this article. If the code enforcement office finds that the application meets the above requirements, the code enforcement office shall renew said license for a period of one (1) year upon payment of all applicable license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.114 - Appeals 
    Any person who is denied a license or whose license has been suspended or revoked may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal to the Bowie City Council. All appeals must be filed with the city secretary and/or code enforcement office within ten (10) days after notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a license. The appeal shall be heard by the Bowie City Council within thirty (30) days after receipt. At least five (5) days' notice of the date of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, license holder. Based on the hearing of the appeal and the facts relative thereto, the city council will either sustain or reverse the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.115 - Penalties 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with chapter 7, "offenses and nuisances," article 7.800 "criminal enforcement," section 7.812, "penalty," Bowie Code of Ordinances and as may be amended. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. However, an offense related to any provision of this chapter which also constitutes an offense to state law shall be punishable in accordance with the applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
ARTICLE 4.200 - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-03,  1, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed Art. 4.200 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. 4.200 pertained to itinerant vendors, and derived from Ord. No. 6011,  1-5, adopted Jan. 1, 1984. 

Sec. 4.201 - Definitions 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Mobile food unit means a self-contained movable trailer and/or motorized vehicle that is licensed, which is temporarily stored on a privately owned lot where food and/or beverage items are cooked, processed or portioned for service, sales, and are sold to the general public. 
    Parcel means a tract or portion of land which may be in an area represented by a unified grouping of tenants, uses, or owners located in a shopping center, office complex, or industrial complex which utilizes common parking lots, landscaped areas, fire lanes, entrances, and/or signage. Said unified grouping may be located on multiple and separate platted lots or lots of record but may function under a single management system sharing amenities. This may also include individual private lots, whether or not vacant, and other areas not represented by a unified grouping of tenants, uses or owners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.202 - Mobile Food Units 
    Mobile food units are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Location. 
a.  All mobile food units must be located on a parcel which is appropriately zoned for industrial or commercial development and which shall be not less than fifty (50) feet from the boundary of a property zoned as residential. 
b.  Mobile food units may be located on an individual private parcel which has a gravel and/or hard surface area on which the mobile food vendor may set up and which is approved by the code enforcement office. 
c.  Mobile food units shall provide the city with a copy of written permission from the property owner on an annual basis to allow the operation of a mobile food unit for a time period that coincides with the term of the permit issued by the city. 
d.  A mobile food unit shall submit a site plan depicting the location of the mobile food unit, seating areas, canopies, sunshades, and awnings, if any, on the property; shall secure a current mobile food unit permit; and shall supply a copy of food handler training certificate(s) issued by the appropriate agency/department for each food handler to the city. 
e.  Mobile food units shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of an entrance of a primary building that holds the certificate of occupancy and specifically which contains a commercially plumbed public restroom. 
f.  No mobile food units, their merchandise, advertising, or seating shall obscure traffic sight visibility. 
g.  No mobile food units operating under this regulation shall be allowed to sell or serve food on any public street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way unless specifically approved in writing by the code enforcement office. 
h.  Mobile food units shall not operate in driveways, fire lanes, or ADA accessible sidewalks or sidewalk access ramps or within any other prohibited area. 
i.  Mobile food units, including any applicable seating, may operate in parking spaces in a commercial or industrial zoned individual property, parcel, tract or platted lot, if the required parking for the area/center remains in compliance with the parking code located in the City of Bowie Code of Ordinances, chapter 12 exhibit "A," zoning ordinance, section 25.2., a site plan indicating the specific location is required. 
j.  Mobile food units shall be removed from the parcel on a daily basis and may not be parked for a period that exceeds sixteen (16) hours in a twenty-four-hour period. 
(2)  Vehicle. All mobile food units shall have a valid vehicle registration, motor vehicle operator's license, proof of vehicle liability insurance, and be readily movable. 
(3)  Required permits, certificates rules and regulations. 
a.  Texas sales tax permit; 
b.  Food handler's certificate for each food handler; 
c.  Proof of liability insurance coverage as set forth herein; 
d.  Compliance with Texas Food Establishment Rules, 25 TAC Sec. 228 and as may be amended. 
(4)  Operational issues . 
a.  A drive-through is not permitted in conjunction with the mobile food unit and shall not provide a drive-through service of any kind. 
b.  All mobile food units shall be equipped with a self-closing lidded, trash receptacle. The trash receptacle must be placed outside next to the mobile food units for use by the patrons of the unit. The area around the mobile food units shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, and debris. 
c.  Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water shall be from an internal tank, and electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical outlet via a portable cord that is in conformity with the electrical code as adopted by the city. In the event that the mobile food unit is powered by a generator, a 2A 10BC (dry chemical) fire extinguisher must be accessible for use. 
d.  The wastewater/greywater tank must be at least forty-two (42) gallons and fifteen (15) percent larger than the freshwater tank. The connections to the wastewater/greywater tank must be easy to connect/disconnect and must not leak. 
e.  Except as otherwise limited by the City of Bowie Code of Ordinances, or other city codes, a mobile food unit may utilize outside seating consisting of a portable table and a seating capacity not to exceed ten (10) persons. 
f.  Except as otherwise limited by state law and/or city codes, a mobile food unit shall be allowed amplified music as long as such music shall not violate the "unreasonable" definition of noise established by V.T.C.A., Penal Code  42.10, and/or the Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
g.  In order to serve alcoholic beverages, a mobile food vendor shall comply with and follow all necessary Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission rules and regulations and City of Bowie Code of Ordinances article 6.400. 
h.  A hold-harmless agreement is required to be completed with the city if the mobile food unit is to be located on city property. 
i.  Owners of any mobile food unit must sign a notarized statement that they acknowledge and accept a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in general liability insurance, that covers the mobile food unit, must be maintained at all times and that proof of such insurance coverage can be demanded to be provided to the city upon three (3) working days' notice to the owner. 
j.  No mobile food unit shall operate before first obtaining a permit from the city. 
k.  The maximum allowable number of mobile food units that may be located on a parcel at any one (1) time shall be determined by the city, but in no event shall the mobile food units be less than fifteen (15) feet apart on a parcel, no mobile food units shall be at the same location for consecutive weeks unless one (1) of the following occurs: 
1.  Additional mobile food units may be considered through Second Monday/Civic Events and/or Special Events per article 4.400 (Second Monday) and article 13.700 (Bowie Community Center) of the City of Bowie Code Ordinances. Staff will consider the reason for the request; the number of available parking spaces on the lot; whether an increased number of mobile food units would be compatible with the existing use and permitted development of adjacent properties; and any other issues staff considers to be relevant; and/or the owner of the primary business establishes through staff permission with the city a list of specific dates within a calendar year in which multiple food units may be allowed on the property. This request shall include a site plan and documentation showing: 
(i)  Indication of appropriate level of parking; 
(ii)  Safe areas for seating for patrons of the mobile food units; 
(iii)  Appropriate documentation of permission of use, adequate access to restroom facilities and valid certificate of occupancy of the primary business owner, if applicable; and 
(iv)  City sponsored Second Monday/Civic Events and Special Events may have more than one (1) mobile unit allowed, and may not be required to get code enforcement approval. 
2.  If approved by staff, a property owner initiated request shall be valid for ninety (90) days. If there have been no previous outstanding code violations; a renewal after ninety (90) days may be possible. 
l.  Mobile food unit permits shall be issued subject to the terms of the fee schedule adopted by the Bowie City Council. 
(5)  Exemptions. All events, activities, and festivals specifically approved by the city council are exempt from these regulations, but shall comply with appropriate regulations of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
Sec. 4.203 - Penalty for Violation 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with chapter 7, "offenses and nuisances," article 7.800 "criminal enforcement," section 7.812, "penalty," Bowie Code of Ordinances and as may be amended. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. However, an offense related to any provision of this chapter which also constitutes an offense to state law shall be punishable in accordance with the applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, Sec. 1, adopted 6-7-16) 
FEE SCHEDULE 
    Bowie Code of Ordinances chapter 4 "business and commerce" article 4.100 "vendors and solicitors" and article 4.200 "mobile food units." 
Permits Fee Vendors and solicitors permits -Includes up to five (5) individual sales associates 90 days $200.00 Additional sales associates 50.00 Application fee 50.00 Special events permits 50.00 Mobile food unit permits 90 days 150.00 180 days 250.00 One year 375.00 Application fee 50.00 Special events permits 50.00  
    Exemptions from this fee schedule are Main Street and Chamber of Commerce-sponsored events. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, adopted 6-7-16) 
ARTICLE 4.300 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, Ch. 51, 81, 91 et seq.; lease of municipal oil, gas or mineral land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 253.005; municipal regulation of exploration and development of mineral interests, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, Sec. 92.007. 

Sec. 4.301 - Compliance with Article; License or Permit Required 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or operate, or cause or permit to be drilled or operated, or cause or permit to be commenced to be drilled or operated any oil and/or gas well within the city without first complying with the provisions of this article and making application for and obtaining a license or permit to do as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1500, Sec. 1, adopted 12-22-50) 
Sec. 4.302 - Application 
    Any person desiring to drill or operate a well for oil and/or gas within the city shall first make application therefor to the city manager, which application shall set forth the following provisions: 
"That there is hereby granted to _______ hereinafter sometimes called Grantee, his successors and/or assigns, the right, privilege and franchise to erect a derrick and drilling rig and to conduct operations, prospecting for oil, gas and/or other minerals within the corporate limits of the City of Bowie, Texas, said operations to start within thirty (30) days after taking effect of this agreement, said operations being restricted to premises described as follows, to-wit: 
(Here set out description of premises)" 
In consideration of the granting of the franchise required by this article, the applicant therefor shall agree that it will: 
(1)  Construct its derrick and carry on its operations in a location so as not to unreasonably interfere with the building lines as established by the city. 
(2)  Pay to the city as a permit fee, the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  That it will within thirty (30) days after a well has been completed take down and cart away its drilling rig. 
(4)  That it will at the time the drilling has been completed to one hundred fifty (150) feet, set and cement surface casing from the depth of the hole to the surface; and that it will at the time the drilling has been completed through the water and sand used by the city as a water supply and found at about six hundred fifty (650) feet, set and cement a string of casing on top of oil-producing sand. 
(5)  That it will comply with all state laws in reference to fire walls and fire protection and locations. 
(6)  That it will, at all times, while drilling is in process and as long thereafter as oil, gas and/or other minerals are being produced from such premises, keep on the premises and maintain fire extinguishers of a type suitable to fight oil and/or gas fires, which requirements shall be with the unqualified approval of the fire chief. 
(7)  That it will comply with all provisions of this Code and ordinances passed by the city pertaining to fire protection and all ordinances passed relating to health and sanitation. 
(8)  That it will, at all times during the drilling operations and as long thereafter as oil, gas and/or other minerals are being produced from the premises, keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character to the satisfaction of the person appointed by the city manager. 
(9)  That it will make adequate provisions for the disposal of salt water and other impurities which it may bring to the surface of the earth in such a way as not to contaminate the water supply of the city or to stamp out vegetation. 
(10)  That it will not permit or allow any of its equipment or properties to extend into the streets or alleys of the city so that it may unreasonably interfere with the regular flow of traffic. That it will not make any excavations or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel without the express permission of the mayor and city council and then only in strict compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(11)  That it will, in the construction of all of its operations, hold the city harmless from all liability which may arise by any reason or act done or permitted to be done by the grantee, his successors or assigns. 
(12)  That all leases granted on municipal lands shall be liable to the conditions of the deeds from the donor's, or the subrogation of bond or revenue holders where indebtedness is involved or to the desecration of private graves in the cemetery and/or the free and unlimited use of the park for recreational facilities as set forth in their respective deeds. 
(13)  It is further provided that minimum spacing for each well shall be not less than twenty (20) acres or a normal group of eight (8) city blocks. 
(14)  That drilling for oil, gas, or other minerals within 500 feet from any commercial or residential structure, including buildings, driveways, and parking fields is prohibited. 
(15)  It shall be unlawful to drill a well for the purpose of exploring for or producing oil and/or gas, or to mine for any purpose within the limits of the Bowie Pelham Park. 
(Ord. No. 1500, Secs. 2, 3, adopted 12-22-50; Ord. No. 2003-14, Sec. 1, adopted 11-18-03; 2004-05, Sec. 1, 3-16-04) 
ARTICLE 4.400 - SECOND MONDAY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4.401 - Use of Public Property 
    The event commonly referred to as Second Monday in the city shall be allowed to use the public property in and around the rodeo grounds, the Pelham Park areas that are under fence and clearly prescribed and marked for this specific purpose and the community center areas that are clearly prescribed and designated for this specific purpose. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 1, adopted 12-6-83; Ord. No. 2015-07, Sec. 1, adopted 9-15-15) 
Sec. 4.402 - Days, Hours of Operation 
    The Second Monday event shall be limited to the Friday, Saturday and Sunday preceding the second Monday of each month and to the following hours of operation: 
(1)  Thursday. 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., the grounds will be open to accommodate those who travel and wish to preregister their spaces. No sales or bartering activity will be allowed prior to the Second Monday grounds being opened to the general public on Friday. 
(2)  Friday. 8:00 a.m. until darkness or when the Second Monday grounds manager notifies the vendors to cease their activities. This is the first day the event is open to the general public. 
(3)  Saturday. 8:00 a.m. until darkness or when the Second Monday grounds manager notifies the vendors to cease their activities. 
(4)  Sunday. 8:00 a.m. until darkness or when the Second Monday grounds manager notifies the vendors to cease their activities. 
(5)  Monday. Those vendors who wished to stay overnight on Sunday and paid their space and/or utility charges must vacate the grounds by 12:00 noon Monday. No bartering or sales activity is allowed and the grounds are not open to the general public on this day. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 2, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.403 - Appointment of Personnel 
    The city manager shall appoint a Second Monday grounds manager and assistant manager. The Second Monday grounds manager will have the final authority on decisions relating to Second Monday, its rules and interpretations. The Second Monday grounds assistant manager will serve with the same level of authority as the Second Monday grounds manager in his absence. The qualifications, job descriptions, pay and benefits, employment, discipline and termination will be subject to the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 3, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.404 - Vendor Activities Classification 
(a)  Vendor activities at the Second Monday event will be grouped under the following categories: 
(1)  General. Those activities for sale and trade of material goods not considered to fall under definition of perishables, edibles, living creatures, services and/or entertainment. 
(2)  Food. Those activities relating to sale and/or trade of consumable products intended for consumption on or about the grounds, including drinks. 
(3)  Animal. Those activities relating to the sale and/or trade of animals, bird, fowl, fish and anything living intended as pets, livestock or exotic creatures. 
(4)  Entertainment. Those activities related to compensation of some form in exchange for the entertainment, recreational engagement or form of service toward one (1) or more persons. 
(b)  The categorization of vending activities will be subject to the interpretation of the Second Monday grounds manager if in question. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Secs. 4, 4A, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.405 - Rate Schedule 
    The City of Bowie reserves the right to change, alter, amend or cancel the vendors fee rates from time to time, as it may deem necessary. 
    The "per day" rate fee schedule for the maintenance and regulation of the Second Monday Event are as follows: 
(1)  All vendors will pay for a trades days itinerant vendors permit which will be included in the fee schedules adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Rates and/or fees shall be established by a rate schedule duly authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 6, adopted 12-6-83; Ord. No. 111985-A, Sec. 1, adopted 12-3-85; Ord. No. 040390-D, Sec. 2, adopted 4-17-90; Ord. No. 92-24, Sec. 1, adopted 10-20-92; Ord. No. 2015-07, Sec. 1, adopted 9-15-15) 
Sec. 4.406 - Reservation of Lots 
    All vendors will be allowed to reserve one (1) or more lots one (1) month in advance by paying in advance for the lot desired. If reserved lots are not occupied by the person reserving same by 12:00 noon Saturday of the event, the lot will become eligible for rent to other vendors. The advance reservation fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 5A, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.407 - Use of Lots Restricted 
    No lots are allowed to be sublet or occupied for purposes other than originally specified. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 5B, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.408 - Overnight Charges 
    Overnight vendors will be charged at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) for each space occupied by their accommodations/vehicles. Electrical will be four dollars ($4.00) per living unit without electric air and/or heat, and eight dollars ($8.00) per living unit for those with electric air and/or heat. These charges will be in effect for all vendors staying overnight on the grounds for each and every night on a per living unit or vending activity basis. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 5C, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.409 - Regulations 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, all persons will be subject to the following regulations relating to the safety, health and sanitation standards for the Second Monday event, grounds and adjacent areas: 
(1)  No vehicles will be allowed on the Second Monday grounds except for those necessary to the vendors in the set-up and supply of their activity. Vehicle traffic will be kept to an absolute minimum and will not exceed a speed comparable to pedestrian walking traffic. Police and emergency vehicles are excepted. 
(2)  All users of electricity will be responsible for the safety of their wires and appliances and will be required to attest to this requirement by signature when applying for one (1) or more electrical connections. The city will not assume liability for losses and/or damage resulting from supplying vendors and/or overnight guests with electricity. 
(3)  All animal vendors will be responsible for the proper handling, caging, ventilation and care of their creatures. No animals will be allowed to stand and/or run at large or be without some type of adequate constraining device secured by the vendor. The Second Monday grounds manager has the authority to order the removal of any vendor and his animals that are considered to be of danger to the public or not being properly maintained. 
(4)  All food vendors will be responsible for maintaining standards consistent with local, county and state laws, rules and regulations required for these type activities and will submit to inspections by any and all persons in authority from any of the aforementioned agencies. This includes inspection by the Second Monday grounds manager. 
(5)  All vendors classified as entertainment whether the activity be for recreation, service and/or pure entertainment will be required to maintain all equipment and/or devices in good repair and have a responsible and suitably trained supervisor for the activity on site at all times during the course of the operation of such activity. In addition, the vendor will attest to indemnification of the city and its assigns and will furnish sufficient insurance or surety for any and all claims of damage and/or injury resulting from said activity. The city will not be liable for any claims from the aforementioned activities. 
(6)  All vendors will be responsible for picking up and disposing of all refuse and/or waste generated by their particular activity. All refuse/waste should be disposed of in plastic trash bags tied at the top or placed in other airtight containers or dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 6, adopted 12-6-83) 
Sec. 4.410 - Authority of Manager 
    The decisions and judgment of the Second Monday grounds manager shall be the final authority for all matters pertaining to the Second Monday event. All participants/vendors will submit their activity to inspections as required by this article and/or as requested by the Second Monday grounds manager. 
(Ord. No. 6010, Sec. 7, adopted 12-6-83) 
ARTICLE 4.500 - REGULATION OF FRANCHISES 

Sec. 4.501 - Required for Certain Services 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain or replace any pipes, poles, wires or equipment of any character situated on the streets or on the sidewalks of the city, or to use the same for the purpose of distributing electric current, water, gas or sewerage from and/or across the streets, except upon and pursuant to a valid and subsistent license or franchise granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1003, Sec. 1, adopted 1-25-34) 
Sec. 4.502 - Removal of Equipment After Expiration 
    Any person owning, maintaining or using pipes, poles, wires or equipment, in, on or under the streets and sidewalks under subsisting licenses or franchises, shall, within ninety (90) days after the expiration of such licenses or franchises, remove from such streets and sidewalks, such pipes, poles, wires and equipment, or such part thereof as are not required for any further operation under licenses or franchises which may still be subsisting under the original provisions thereof or any extensions thereof granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1003, Sec. 2, adopted 1-25-34) 
Sec. 4.503 - Declaration of Nuisance, Abatement 
    Upon failure of any person to remove any pipes, poles, wires or equipment, as required by this article, the same shall constitute and be considered to become both a public and private nuisance, which may be summarily abated by any of the officials or police officers of the city, or by any private person who may be inconvenienced thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1003, Sec. 3, adopted 1-25-34) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Article 7.200 
ARTICLE 4.600 - AMBULANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Sec. 773.001 et seq.; municipal regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Sec. 773.051. 

Sec. 4.601 - Statutory Authority 
    This chapter is enacted by the City Council of Bowie, Texas, pursuant to Section 773.051 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, which provides that municipalities may establish standards for ambulances, and to Section 791.001 of the Texas Government Code which provides that combinations of local governmental units may contract for the provision of governmental services. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15) 
Sec. 4.602 - General Purposes and Intent of Sections 4.601-4.605. 
    It is the purpose of these sections: 
(1)  To establish a regulated ambulance service system which can provide state-of-the-art clinical quality of care, with reasonable, reliable response time standards, and with the goal of furnishing the best possible chance of survival, without disability or preventable complication, to each ambulance patient. 
(2)  To establish a sole-provider ambulance system, because it is unreasonable to have unnecessarily high rates and/or unnecessarily high public subsidy to make needed improvements to ambulance service in the service area, when a more efficiently designed system can achieve the same results at lower cost. The most efficient design to achieve the goals of high-quality service, at the lowest cost, consistent with the quality of care required, is the implementation of the system described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15) 
Sec. 4.603 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Advanced life support ambulance. Any vehicle which is equipped to provide treatment of life-threatening emergencies through the use of advanced airway management, intravenous therapy, and other advanced pre-hospital care procedures, and which is equipped to transport sick or injured persons to or from health care facilities. 
    Aeromedical transportation unit. Any rotary wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support services and patient transportation originating from the scene of emergency incidents which occur within the service area. 
    Approved rate schedule. Those fees for ambulance services rendered which have been approved for this jurisdiction by the city council from contract billing provider. 
    Emergency medical technician ("EMT"). A person certified as an "emergency medical technician" as defined by Section 773.047, Texas Health and Safety Code. 
    EMS communications center. The facility(ies) designated by the City of Bowie Fire Department as the central communications center from which all ambulances operating in the service area shall be dispatched and controlled. 
    First responder. Any person, fire department vehicle, police vehicle, or other vehicle not normally used for purposes of patient transport, but which vehicle and on-board personnel are capable of providing first responder services in medical emergencies. 
    Medical director. The licensed physician appointed by the City of Bowie Fire Department to oversee medical personnel. 
    Medical protocol. Any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director as the normal standard of pre-hospital care for a given clinical condition. 
    Mutual aid agreement. A written agreement between the City of Bowie and one or more entities whereby the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance service to one another under conditions and pursuant to terms specified in the agreement as approved by the ambulance authority. 
    Paramedic. A person qualified as a certified "paramedic" as defined by Section 773.049, Texas Health and Safety Code. 
    Patient. An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated and is in need of or is at risk of needing medical care during transport to or from a health care facility. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Senior paramedic in charge. That person among the certified personnel assigned to an ambulance, not the driver, who is a certified paramedic designated as the individual in command of the ambulance. 
    Service area. That geographical area which is contained within the boundaries of the City of Bowie. 
    Special event. Any public event located within the service area, for which standby ambulance service is arranged in advance, and for which an ambulance (or ambulances) is hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party. 
    Specialized mobile intensive care unit. A vehicle which is specially constructed, equipped, staffed, and employed in the inter-facility transport of patients whose requirements for en route medical support are likely to exceed the clinical capabilities of an advance life support ambulance. 
    Wheelchair transport service. The transportation of a person (not a "patient" as defined herein) who is situated in a wheelchair and is capable of sitting in said wheelchair for at least one (1) hour, where no treatment is required or expected in route, and where the person and transporting vehicle have no medical equipment that requires adjustment or monitoring. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15) 
Sec. 4.604 - Violations 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To perform duties as an ambulance driver, or attendant (EMT or paramedic), without a current certification issued by the Texas Department of State Health Services; 
(2)  To permit a person to work as an ambulance driver, or attendant without a current license issued by the Texas Department of State Health Services; 
(3)  To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance service other than that of the City of Bowie Fire Department, except those services described in subsection (6) of this section; 
(4)  For any person, firm or organization to provide ambulance service within this jurisdiction other than the City of Bowie Fire Department; 
(5)  To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or aeromedical transportation unit; 
(6)  It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section 1-4 that the vehicle is being used solely in any of the following manners: 
a.  A privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting persons who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless. 
b.  A vehicle rendering service as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or extreme system overload when such condition is declared by the medical director, the director of the EMS service, or by an authorized representative of the City of Bowie Fire Department, and such assistance has been requested by the communication center. 
c.  Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government. 
d.  Any transport to a location within the service area, which transport originated from a point outside the service area. 
e.  Mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to a mutual aid agreement approved by the City of Bowie. 
f.  Special events coverage, so long as such service is provided without charge by an emergency medical services volunteer provider, as defined in Section 773.003(13) of the Texas Health and Safety Code, or when approved by the City of Bowie Fire Department. 
g.  Wheelchair transport services which are not provided on a point-to-point basis, but which provide pickup and delivery by way of regularly scheduled routes. 
h.  Medical transports by aeromedical where such transports originate outside the service area or at a hospital location within the service area. 
i.  Specialized MICU utilized for hospital to hospital transport (i.e. pediatric specialty). 
j.  A provider licensed through the Texas Department of State Health Services and contracted with and subsidized by Montague County, Texas, is transporting nursing home residents residing in nursing homes located in Bowie, Texas by EMS or any other transport to Nocona General Hospital, if such transfer is medically appropriate and the resident or his/her authorized representative has requested a transfer to Nocona General Hospital. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15; Ord. No. 2017-08, Sec. 1, adopted 6-20-17) 
Sec. 4.605 - Penalties 
    The following provisions for application of penalties for violation of this chapter shall apply: 
(1)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of chapter 4, section 4.604, subsections (1)-(5) shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). This does not serve to limit any other remedies available to this jurisdiction in law or equity. 
(2)  Each violation of this chapter that is committed shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15) 
Sec. 4.606 - Rates 
    The city council shall, from time to time as it may deem necessary, establish the fees for services rendered by or requested from the fire department ambulance service. 
(Ord. No. 101089-A, Sec. 1, adopted 10-10-89; Ord. No. 93-1, Sec. 1, adopted 2-9-93; Ord. No. 2000-17(A), Sec. 1, adopted 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-04, adopted March 17, 2015, amended, retitled and renumbered former  4.601, "Base rates," as new  4.606 to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 4.607 - Collection of Ambulance Service Fees 
    The City of Bowie, in its capacity as an ambulance service provider, and any agencies engaged in the collection of ambulance fees on the city's behalf, will bill residents of Bowie or their insurers, including federal healthcare programs, for any and all costs for ambulance service fees that may be incurred by those residents. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-05; Ord. No. 2015-04, Sec. 1, adopted 3-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-1-15) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-04, adopted March 17, 2015, renumbered former  4.602 as new  4.607. 
ARTICLE 4.700 - FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of fair housing ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.002 et seq. 

Sec. 4.701 - Declaration of Policy 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
    It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 1, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.702 - Definitions 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
    Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
    Director means the director of the human relations department or authorized assistant. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under this article. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
    Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    Physical or mental handicap means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Physical or mental impairment shall include: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems; neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
    Senior adult means a person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 2, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.703 - Interpretation and Effect 
    This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the court shall be guided by Federal Court Interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 3, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.704 - Discrimination In the Sale or Rental of Housing 
    Except as exempted, it shall be unlawful: 
(a)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable, or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(b)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(c)  To make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(d)  To represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(e)  To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 4, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.705 - Discrimination in the Housing Financing 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other person whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of such person or of such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 5, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.706 - Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 6, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.707 - Unlawful Intimidation 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual, group or business has complied with the provisions of this article or has exercised in good faith rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because such individual, group or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. 
(Ordinance 95-1, Section 7, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.708 - Exemptions and Exclusions 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single house sold or rented by an owner, provided that: 
(A)  Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single family houses at any one time; and 
(B)  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period. 
(C)  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single family houses at any one time; and 
(D)  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
(E)  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or, written notice in violation of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or, 
(2)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, which such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating, or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 8, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.709 - Violations 
    No person shall violate any provision of this article, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this article. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 9, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.710 - Enforcement 
    The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this article. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 10, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.711 - Complaints 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the "charging party") may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegation of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaints forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U. S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  All complaints shall be filed within one hundred and eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent") who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(d)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(e)  If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 11, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.712 - Investigation and Conciliation 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. 
(b)  If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to affect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and o obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)  Upon completion of the investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With such recommendation of the director and the referral of the human relations commission, the director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such compliant in municipal court. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 12, adopted 1-17-95) 
Sec. 4.713 - Penalty 
    If a discrimination housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case referred to municipal court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. 
(Ordinance No. 95-1, Section 13, adopted 1-17-95) 
ARTICLE 4.800 - CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Federal law reference- Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act, Public Law No. 102-385 (1992) 

Sec. 4.801 - Definitions 
    In this article: 
    Basic Cable Rate means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment. 
    Basic Service Tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television signals other than superstations. 
    Benchmark means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable. 
    Cable Act of 1992 means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
    Cable Operator means any person or group of persons: 
(A)  who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
(B)  who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Channel means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation. 
    Cost of Showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Initial Basic Cable Rates means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates. 
    Must-Carry Signal means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations which is required to be carried on the basic service tier). 
    PEG Channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
    Price Cap means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation. 
    Reasonable Rate Standard means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level. 
    Superstation means any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 1, adopted 1-4-94) 
Sec. 4.802 - Initial Review of Basic Cable Rates 
(a)  Notice. Upon the adoption of this article and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992. 
(b)  Cable operator response. Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city, its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates. 
(c)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the city council shall: 
(A)  hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
(B)  act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the City. 
(2)  If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect. 
(d)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination. 
(A)  Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or 
(B)  One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark. 
(2)  If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(e)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(f)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address. 
(g)  Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level. 
(2)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by ten (10) percent, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992 and the initial date of regulation. 
(3)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic cable rate above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992 rates minus ten (10) percent, will prescribe the cable operator's new rates. 
(i)  Decision. 
(1)  By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following: 
(A)  If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator or 
(B)  If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis. 
(2)  Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection (g) or (h) above, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payment), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(3)  Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city. 
(j)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 2, adopted 1-4-94) 
Sec. 4.803 - Review of Request for Increase in Basic Cable Rates 
(a)  Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates. 
(b)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall: 
(A)  hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; 
(B)  act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city. 
(2)  If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect. 
(c)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
(A)  90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and 
(B)  150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap. 
(2)  The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period. 
(3)  If the city council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150 day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(d)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(e)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address. 
(f)  Delayed determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase. 
(g)  Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates. 
(2)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate. 
(i)  Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city secretary to record the objection or may be submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. 
(j)  Refunds. 
(1)  The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if: 
(a)  the city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in subsection (c) above; and 
(b)  the cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and 
(c)  the city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase. 
(2)  The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(k)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 3, adopted 1-4-94) 
Sec. 4.804 - Cable Operator Information 
(a)  City may require: 
(1)  In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed, to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section. 
(2)  In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accordance with the standard. 
(b)  Request for confidentiality. 
(1)  A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies. 
(2)  If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(3)  Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based. 
(4)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered. 
(c)  City council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b) will be acted upon by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires, will the information be made available for public inspection. 
(2)  If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available for public inspection. 
(d)  Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 4, adopted 1-4-94) 
Sec. 4.805 - Automatic Rate Adjustments 
(a)  Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index. 
(b)  Other external costs. 
(1)  The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI. 
(2)  For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever comes first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6. 1994. 
(c)  Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 5, adopted 1-4-94) 
Sec. 4.806 - Enforcement 
(a)  Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or 
(2)  The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city. 
(b)  Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each day the cable operator fails to comply. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, Sec. 6, adopted 1-4-94) 
ARTICLE 4.900 - RIGHT-OF-WAY USE BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS 

Sec. 4.901 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of the rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers; 
(3)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and, 
(4)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Sec. 4.902 - Definitions 
    Whenever used in this article, the following terms, as well as their singulars, plurals and possessives, shall have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise: 
    Access Line. (1) Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of telecommunications service; (2) each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a person pursuant to an agreement under Section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996; and (3) each termination point of a non-switched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of non-switched telecommunications service within the city. 
    Cable Service. "Cable service" as defined in the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984", as amended, 47 U.S.C. (532 et seq. 
    City. The City of Bowie, Texas. 
    Direction of the City. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
    Facilities. Any and all of the duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated transmission media used for the provision of telecommunications service. 
    Line Fee. A monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the city as a rights-of-way fee. 
    Permit Holder. Any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
    Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
    Public Utility. A public utility as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Utilities Code Ann. (11.004, including municipally owned and/or operated utilities. 
    Rights-of-Way. All present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways within the city. 
    Rights-of-Way Fee. The total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
    Telecommunications Service. The transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes (interLATA and intraLATA) or any "wireless service" as defined by law. 
    Telecommunications Service Provider. Any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value. 
    Telecommunications Utility. "Telecommunications utility" as used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Utilities Code Ann. (51.002(11). 
    Transmission Media. Any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or placed by a permit holder to transmit and or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
    Use and Occupancy. The permit holder's acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
Sec. 4.903 - Requirement for Permit and Granting Clause 
    Any person that owns, places, or maintains facilities within the rights-of-way shall first obtain a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city under this article shall issue permits to telecommunications service providers for the purpose of regulating the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way in the city for the provision of access lines. By acceptance of the permit, the permit holder agrees to abide by the terms of this article in all its operations within the city, including all operations and facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of access lines in any newly annexed areas as specified in subsection 4.905(c) of this article. 
Sec. 4.904 - General Terms of the Article 
(a)  No rights agreed to in this article by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(b)  A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable-operator in the city under this article, but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. 
(c)  The initial term of each permit issued under this article shall be one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At the expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one (1) year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than ninety (90) days prior to the termination of the then current period by the city to permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period. 
(d)  The rights granted by this article inure to the benefit of the permit holder licensed hereunder. The ordinance rights granted by permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder without the express written consent of the city. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with permit holder. Any such consent by the city shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
Sec. 4.905 - Compensation 
    Rights-of-Way Fee: the permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate line fee to each access line owned, placed, or maintained by permit holder that is activated for use by an end-user or for another telecommunications service provider that uses permit holder's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service within the city. The line fee to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis shall be: 
Access Line       Monthly Fee per Access Line 
Residential ..... $ 0.79 
Non-Residential ..... $ 1.86 
(b)  Number of Access Lines: subject to city's agreement not to disclose this information, each permit holder must provide annually, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of each type of access line owned or placed and maintained by permit holder within the city that are activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications service providers at month's end for each of the preceding twelve (12) months. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying the number of the permit holder's access lines within the city that are activated for end-user customers and telecommunications service providers. Upon written request, the permit holder shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, produce to the city and permit inspection by the city of all non-customer-specific records and documents reasonably calculated to verify the information. For purposes of payment of fees for use of the rights-of-way, lines terminating at customer's premises that are billed as "Lifeline," "Tel-Assistance," or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated. 
(c)  Annexation and Disannexation: within thirty (30) days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish permit holder written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this article, a permit holder shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the permit holder's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the Comptroller of Public Accounts-Texas for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than thirty (30) days from the date the permit holder is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation. 
(d)  Confidential Records: if the permit holder notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information, reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the permit holder's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the permit holder of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings and will furnish the permit holder with copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the permit holder's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(e)  No Other Fees: the payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the permit holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of permit holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in the calculation of the rights-of-way fee. 
(f)  Timing of Payment: permit holder shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis. The payment shall be due on the forty-fifth (45th) day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated. 
(g)  Uncollectibles: city and permit holder understand and agree that permit holder has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. 
(h)  Facilities Provided to Other Telecommunications Service Providers: to the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate line fee, as specified in Section 4.905(a) above, to each access line created by rebundling services or facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the services for resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rights-of-way fee imposed herein can be applied on a non-discriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications services, if the telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to the city. If permit holder provides a copy of the signed statement to the city, then permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the services, unbundled network facilities, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications service for sale within the city. 
(i)  Fee Application to Leased Facilities: pursuant to Tex. Utilities Code (54.206, a permit holder may collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this article through a pro rata charge to the customers in the boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes it does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. If a person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, permit holders may bill the person on the basis of the information provided. Permit holder shall provide to the city any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as city first obtains written permission of such other person for permit holder to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, however, a permit holder shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses permit holder's service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers. 
Sec. 4.906 - Construction and Maintenance of Facilities 
(a)  The location and route of all facilities and transmission media placed and constructed in the rights-of-way shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement in the permit holder's facilities of any electric light or power wires or communications facilities or other systems not owned by the permit holder. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires, communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this article shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a telecommunications utility or authorized to offer cable service within the city. 
(c)  The surface of the rights-of-way disturbed by the permit holder in the construction or maintenance of its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The permit holder shall endeavor to minimize disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance and/or repair work. 
(d)  Upon request, the permit holder shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The permit holder shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. 
(e)  The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative. 
Sec. 4.907 - Relocation and Removal of Facilities 
(a)  In accordance with Tex. Utilities Code Ann. 54.203(c), upon thirty (30) days notice by the city, permit holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the widening or straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for the permit holder's facilities along the rights-of-way. 
(b)  The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such relocation itself. 
Sec. 4.908 - Indemnification 
    The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit holder shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the benefit of the permit holder and the city. 
Sec. 4.909 - Administration of Article 
(a)  The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights and obligations of this article, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(b)  Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Texas shall be provided to the city upon specific request. 
(c)  After reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city may establish, to the extent permitted by law, such reasonable and non-discriminatory rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this article and the construction of the permit holder's facilities in the rights-of-way, so long as those rules and regulations are competitively neutral. 
Sec. 4.910 - Future Contingency 
    In the event this article or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee provided for in this article, becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the city and all permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the authority's decision. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new compensation arrangement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this article, as long as that compensation is recoverable by permit holders in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this article. 
Sec. 4.911 - Governing Law 
    This article shall be construed in accordance with the city code in effect on the date of passage of this article to the extent that such code is not in conflict with or in violation of the constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. 
Sec. 4.912 - Non-Discrimination and Competitive Neutrality 
    The city hereby recognizes that it has the legal duty to obligate, on a going-forward basis, all permit holders to abide by the same terms and conditions imposed by this article, including, but not limited to, the payment of the line fee, and to apply substantively same requirements governing their use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
Sec. 4.913 - Permit 
    Any permit holder that owns facilities already located within the rights-of-way on the date this article is enacted is hereby granted a permit hereunder; however, within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this article all such permit holders shall provide to the city a notice of pre-existing facilities. All prospective permit holders shall file a permit application form at least thirty (30) days before placing any facilities in the rights-of-way. A permit application form will not be accepted and a permit granted unless the applicant provides on that form the name and address of the person to whom notices hereunder are to be sent, the date on which the applicant expects to begin providing service within the city, a 24-hour per day contact number for the applicant, and the certificate number of the applicant's certificate issued by the Public Utility Commission of Texas or a notarized statement from a principal or officer of the applicant that no certification by the public utility commission is required for the type of service to be offered by applicant. 
Sec. 4.914 - Issuance and Effective Date of Permit 
    The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of this article to the permit holder, along with a permit hereunder, within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice of pre-existing facilities or the permit application form. 
    The effective date for any permit shall be the date of issuance, however, the assessment of the line fee shall not begin until the first day of the second month after the date of issuance of the permit. Permit holders with pre-existing facilities may continue the pre-existing compensation arrangement until the first day of the second month following the issuance of the permit. 
Sec. 4.915 - Effective Date of Article 
    This article shall take effect and be in force immediately upon final passage by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-14 adopted 12-1-98) 
ARTICLE 4.1000 - OCCASIONAL OR GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 4.1001 - Definitions 
    Occasional Sales (Garage sales, including patio, yard and porch sales in a residential district). Sales of tangible personal property at retail, not to exceed two (2) in number during any twelve month period, by a person who does not hold himself out as engaging in, nor does not habitually engage in the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail; provided that: 
(1)  the tangible personal property shall be sold only on the premises of the owner or lessee of that property where the sale is conducted and said owner or lessee must be the legal owner of such tangible personal property at the time of such sale. 
(2)  the sales shall be confined to the garage, porch, patio or yard on the premises of the legal owner or lessee. 
(3)  no new merchandise (i.e., merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale) shall be sold at such occasional sales. 
(4)  the duration of each such sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days. 
Sec. 4.1002 - Signs 
    One (1) sign is permitted, not to exceed two (2) square feet upon the property where the sale is taking place. Any other signs at any location other than sale property are specifically prohibited. 
Sec. 4.1003 - Permit Required 
    Individuals desiring to conduct an occasional sale shall, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to said sale file with the code enforcement officer or his duly authorized agent a written statement of intent to conduct an occasional sale. Such statement shall set forth the name, age, and address of the registrant and shall contain a statement that the provisions regarding occasional sales has been read by the registrant and that he/she agrees to comply with those provisions. Such statement shall further contain the address and location of the proposed site of the occasional sale, proposed dates and times of the sale and the dates of all occasional sales conducted by the registrant in the preceding twelve (12) months. Any registrant who meets the requirements herein listed shall be issued a permit by the code enforcement officer only upon tendering payment of the permit fee. Said permit shall be kept at the location of said sale for inspection by city officials, if necessary. 
Sec. 4.1004 - Permit Fee 
    The occasional sales permit fee shall be three dollars ($3.00) per application. 
Sec. 4.1005 - Penalty 
    Persons failing to comply with any provision of this article and acting in violation thereof shall be subject to penalty. Said penalty shall be a fine of $25.00 for the first violation. The fine for the second violation shall be a fine of $50.00. The fine for the third violation will be a fine of $75.00. The fine for the fourth and all subsequent violations shall be $100.00 per each individual violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-15 adopted 1-4-00) 
ARTICLE 4.1100 - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4.1101 - Use of Airport Restricted 
    No person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the Airport for any commercial activity, unless approved by a written permit from the City Council or its duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1102 - General Rules and Regulations 
    The following rules and regulations shall be observed in the use, operation, and conduct of the airport: 
Rule 1. Federal Air Traffic Rules of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for aircraft operated within the United States, and presently or hereafter effective, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. 
Rule 2. Safeguard of Persons and Property. The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take necessary and legal actions to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment, or property at the airport. 
Rule 3. Hangars and other buildings or structures owned by the City may be leased to private individuals, companies, or corporations on a monthly or yearly basis for the storage of aircraft and ancillary equipment or to conduct a commercial fixed base operation (FBO). 
Rule 4. Lease of Airport Property. The city may lease property within the building area or other portions of the airport for the construction of hangars, buildings, lean-tos, aprons, taxiways, and auto parking lots. Aviation related use must be given priority in the use of all leased or privately owned property, buildings, or structures. If the aviation needs of the airport are sufficiently met, the city may authorize nonaviation use of any portion of the airport or any building on the airport on a case by case basis. Application of such nonaviation use shall be made to the city council. 
(A)  No leases will be written for a primary period in excess of twenty (20) years, without the written approval of the city council and then only for the length of a mortgage in excess of twenty (20) years obtained from a lending institution by the mortgagee/FBO to construct such building(s) or hangars(s) on the Airport for which the mortgage was obtained. 
(B)  Any privately owned structure or hangar not in use for aviation purposes for a period in excess of ninety (90) days or not available for lease or sublease for aviation purposes, unless so authorized for nonaviation use by the city council, must be removed after due notice to the owner in writing or the city council will consider such structures or hangars abandoned and will seek title to such structure or hangar. 
(C)  Leased land from which any building, hangar, or structure is removed, after due notice or expiration of the lease, will be cleared, cleaned, and put back in its original or acceptable condition. 
(D)  Leased property on the airport may be subleased by the lessee only with written approval of the city council. 
(E)  No hangar or structure may be erected within the building restriction line or in conflict with an approved airport layout plan. 
(F)  All construction must be authorized by the city council and must be of a compatible standard capable of withstanding winds of eighty-five (85) mph, with doors open or closed. Furthermore, all structures must comply with any and all city building codes, and applicable airport compatible land use or zoning ordinances, and an approved airport layout plan. 
(G)  Through the fence operation prohibited. No private individual, partnership, FBO, company, corporation, or body politic shall be permitted direct ground access to the airport by their aircraft, customers' aircraft, or private vehicle from property adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of the airport. Furthermore, no private individual, partnership, company, corporate, body politic, or customers' aircraft or vehicle shall be permitted direct ground access to property from the airport - a practice commonly known as a "through the fence operation." Under extenuating circumstances, the city council may allow certain through the fence operations on a case by case basis. 
Rule 5. Lien for Charges. To enforce the payment of any charge made for repairs, improvements, storage, or care of any personal property made or furnished by the city or its agents in connection with the operation of the airport, the city may have a lien upon such personal property, which shall be enforceable as provided by law. 
Rule 6. Lien Possessory Right. To enforce the payment of any such charge, the airport manager may retain possession of such personal property until all reasonable, customary, and usual compensation has been paid in full. 
Rule 7. Unauthorized Signs and Equipment. No signs, nonaeronautical equipment, portable buildings, or trailers may be erected, moved-in, or installed on the airport property, except as may specifically authorized by the city manager. 
Rule 8. Surreptitious Activities. Any person observing suspicious, unauthorized or criminal activities should report such activities immediately to the airport manager, local police, officers of the Texas Department of Public Safety, or other peace officers. 
Rule 9. Wrecked Aircraft. Every aircraft owner, his/her pilot, or agents, shall be responsible for notifying FAA and promptly removing disabled or wrecked aircraft from the operational areas of the airport, under the direction of the airport manager. 
Rule 10. Repairs to Aircraft. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing or takeoff area. All outside repairs shall be made only at places designated by the airport manager for such purpose. Major engine, airframe, or avionics repairs shall be conducted by a properly licensed, paid mechanic within a hangar or building rented, leased or owned for such commercial purposes. Any preventative maintenance authorized by FAR Part 43 may be made by the owner or operator of any aircraft, but only within a hangar leased or owned by that aircraft owner or operator or at places designated by the airport manager for such purpose. 
Rule 11. Agriculture Spraying Operations. Agricultural (Ag) spraying operations will be conducted in accordance with procedures approved by the airport manager and made known to all persons conducting agricultural spraying operations. Said operations shall be conducted only on the designated airport areas, and shall not include reckless flying or careless chemical handling. Chemicals used in agricultural operations shall be dispersed, maintained, and stored and the dispensing area shall be cleaned with all empty chemical containers stored and promptly disposed of in accordance with the label directions. Washing of Ag aircraft and flushing of ag aircraft spray tanks or hoppers will be accomplished in accordance with the standards of Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission in an area so designated by the airport manager. Each Ag operator shall carry liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) dollars, payable to the city for the cleanup of any hazardous chemical spills on airport property caused by the Ag operator. Ag aircraft operators shall not exceed the maximum gross hopper weight stamped on the Ag aircraft's hopper by the aircraft manufacturer or listed in the aircraft's specifications. Ag aircraft shall not take off or land on the dirt or grass between the runway lights and the property line fence(s), not take off or land down wind. Takeoff and landing procedures in accordance with Section 4, "Takeoff and Landing Rules" contained herein will be observed at all times. 
NOTE: Because of the hazard of such agricultural spraying operations, the city may require each agricultural spray operator to post a bond, the amount to be determined by the city considering the financial risk to which the city could be exposed by an Ag operator accident resulting in environmental damage, the number of Ag aircraft owned or leased and used by the Ag operator, etc. 
Rule 12. Damage to Airport. Any person, individual, or corporation or the owner of any aircraft causing damage of any kind to the Airport, whether through violation of any of these rules, through vandalism, or any act of negligence, shall be liable therefore in and to the city. 
Rule 13. Injury to Person. Persons entering upon the Airport ground side property by automobile, other vehicular conveyance, or pedestrian traffic (does not include persons in aircraft using approved air side facilities) do so at their own risk and with no liability incurring to the city for any injury or damage to person or property. Further, any person desiring to use the airport shall observe and obey all valid laws, resolutions, orders, rules, and regulations promulgated and enforced by the city or by any other authority having jurisdiction over the conduct and operation of the airport. 
Rule 14. Licensed Pilots. Only properly registered aircraft and persons holding current airman and medical certificates issued by the FAA shall be authorized to operate aircraft upon the airport except as provided in this article. This limitation shall not apply to students in training under licensed instructors nor to public aircraft of the federal government or of a state, territory, or political subdivision thereof, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign government with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. 
Note: Use of the airport by ultralight aircraft shall be subject to approval by the city council and shall be in accordance with FAR Part 103 and any other rules established by the city. 
Rule 15. Registration. Each person owning an aircraft based at the airport, employed, or receiving instructions at the airport shall register at the office of the airport manager their name, address, telephone number, aircraft model, aircraft registration "N" number, and the name, address, and telephone number of their next of kin or person to be notified in case of an accident or emergency. 
Rule 16. Intoxicants and Narcotics Prohibited. No person under the influence of any intoxicant, narcotic, or other illicit drug shall operate or fly in any aircraft upon or from the airport. Such prohibitions shall not apply to a passenger under the care of a medical doctor and accompanied by a doctor, nurse, or caretaker. 
Rule 17. Foreign Objects. No foreign objects, including bottles, cans, scrap, nuts, bolts, nails, or any object that may cause damage to an aircraft, shall be left upon the floor of any building or upon any part of the surface area of the airport. Individuals are encouraged to pick up such foreign objects when observed and place them in a trash receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1103 - Ground Operations 
Rule 18. Air and Ground Traffic-Vehicular Traffic. All vehicular traffic on the Airport shall be confined to streets, roads, and avenues of passage designated and provided for that purpose and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. Official vehicles only will be driven on the landing area. Such official vehicles will have a ground to air radio transceiver tuned to the local UNICOM frequency or common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) and a flashing beacon light mounted on the roof of the car or a checkered orange and white flag mounted on the front bumper of the vehicle. Special use vehicles such as an ambulance, hearse, or delivery van may be driven on the apron with the permission of the airport manager. An aircraft owner who rents, leases, or owns his/her private hangar may park his/her automobile in the hangar while on a trip in his/her aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Rule 19. Fueling of Aircraft. 
(A)  Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed place, except that an Ag spray aircraft on a fast turnaround may be fueled and loaded with chemicals with the aircraft engine idling if the airport manager has provided written authority to the Ag operator, the pilot remains at the controls, the aircraft's wheels are chocked, there are at least two (2) 20B fire extinguishers within fifty (50) feet of the aircraft being serviced, and a qualified ground crew member is present during the fueling operation. 
(B)  Prior to making any fueling connection to an aircraft, the fueling equipment (fuel pump, hydrant servicer, fuel truck) shall be bonded to the aircraft by use of a cable suitable for that purpose and approved by the local fire marshal. The bond shall be made prior to fueling and maintained until fueling is completed and fuel connections have been removed. In addition, when fueling overwing, the fueling nozzle shall be bonded with a nozzle bond cable having a clip or male plug to a metallic component of the aircraft that is metallically connected to the aircraft fuel tank filler port or a female receptacle designed to accommodate the male plug. If there is no plug receptacle or means for attaching a clip, the operator shall touch the filler cap with the nozzle spout before removing the cap so as to equalize the static electrical potential between the nozzle and the filler port. The nozzle spout shall be kept in contact with the filler neck until the fueling is completed. When a funnel is used in aircraft fueling, it shall be kept in contact with the filler neck as well as the fuel spout or the fuel supply container to avoid the possibility of a spark at the fill opening. Only metal funnels shall be used for fueling. Bonding and fueling connections shall be disconnected in the reverse order of connection after fueling is completed. 
(C)  All aircraft shall be fueled clear of all hangars, other buildings, and aircraft by at least twenty (20) feet. 
(D)  Fueling trucks shall not be parked within any building or hangar or within one hundred (100) feet of any building, hangar, or parked aircraft (the local fire marshal shall have final authority as to determining such distance.) Fuel trucks shall be parked with at least ten (10) feet separation between vehicles. 
(E)  Aircraft fuel storage tanks for below-ground or above-ground use will be constructed and installed, registered as required, monitored for leakage, operated, and maintained in accordance with federal and state statutes, rules, and regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
(F)  Aviation or auto fuels shall not be stored within a hangar or building except in small quantities and in approved containers manufactured and marked for such purpose and only with the approval of the local fire marshal. 
(G)  Persons or businesses wishing to supply or dispense aviation fuel for use in their privately owned aircraft shall not be denied; however, they must meet all requirements the city places on other fuel suppliers, public or private. Private fueling facilities located on leased or private property must be installed and the fuel dispensed in accordance with all rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire safety contained herein. 
(H)  Public sale of automobile gas for use in aircraft will not be permitted on the Airport without written approval of the airport manager. Aircraft authorized by the FAA to use auto gas may be privately fueled by the owner in a location designated by the airport manager in accordance with all rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire safety contained herein. 
(I)  All aviation fuel storage tanks, aviation fuel pumps, hydrant fuel services, aircraft fuel service vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned, shall have the type of aviation fuel dispensed printed in large block letters, including octane if aviation gasoline, plus the fuel I.D. number, and "NO SMOKING" signs. This information shall be printed on all sides of the fueling tanks, pumps, etc. so the information is visible from any direction on the ground. 
(J)  All aircraft fueling, fuel equipment, and procedures will be in accordance with Manual 407 "Aircraft Fuel Servicing, 1990," (or as revised) published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy MA 02269-9101. 
Rule 20. Tiedown of Aircraft. 
(A)  All aircraft not hangared shall be tied down and the wheels chocked at night and during inclement weather. 
(B)  All aircraft owners or their agents are responsible for the tiedown or security of their aircraft at all times and particularly during inclement weather. 
(C)  Aircraft parked overnight on the transient apron shall pay tie down fee of three dollars ($3.00) for each night, except that such fee may be waived upon purchase of fuel or services. 
Rule 21. Running Aircraft Engines. 
(A)  Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes shall not be started until the wheels have been set with chocks attached to ropes or other suitable means of removing them. 
(B)  No aircraft shall be hand propped, started, or left running without a qualified person at the controls. 
(C)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run inside any building or hangar. 
(D)  No engine shall be started, run up, or warmed up until and unless the aircraft is in such position that the propeller stream or jet blast will clear all buildings, other aircraft, and groups of people. 
Rule 22. Damage to Runway Lights. Any person damaging any runway or taxiway light or fixture by operation of an aircraft, or otherwise, shall immediately report such damage to the airport manager. Persons causing damage to runway and taxiway lights as a result of negligent operation of an aircraft or willful acts will be liable for replacement cost of the light(s) and/or fixture(s) and may be charged with a misdemeanor as provided in section 4.1108 hereunder. 
Rule 23. Taxiing Aircraft. 
(A)  No person shall taxi an aircraft until he/she has reasonably ascertained there will be no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area. 
(B)  Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed and in such manner as to be under the control of the pilot at all times. 
(C)  Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes will not taxied near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant (wing-walker) is at a wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot. 
(D)  Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and taxiway area if there is an aircraft approaching to land or on the ground in takeoff position. Aircraft waiting on the taxiway for another aircraft to take off or land will remain behind the runway holding position markings. 
(E)  Aircraft shall not be taxied by engine power into or out of a hangar or T-hangar. 
Rule 24. Parking Aircraft. 
(A)  Unoccupied aircraft shall not be parked or tied down within any protected area (object fee area, safety area, etc.) as described in FAA AC 150/5300-13 and all aircraft not hangared shall be parked in the areas designated by the airport manager for that purpose. 
(B)  Aircraft shall not be parked within fifty (50) feet of an aircraft fuel pump or fuel service truck parking area. 
(C)  Aircraft shall not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the normal movement of other aircraft and traffic unless specifically authorized by the airport manager as an emergency measure. 
(D)  It is the responsibility of the pilot when leaving a parked aircraft unattended to see that the brakes are set and/or it is properly chocked and/or tied down. 
Rule 25. Loading/Unloading Aircraft. Pilots are prohibited from loading or unloading aircraft with the engine running, except as stated in Rule 19(A) herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1104 - Takeoff and Landing Rules 
Rule 26. Authority to Suspend Operations. The airport manager may suspend or restrict any or all operations whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety, provided operations under instrument meteorological conditions may be continued by properly instrument-rated pilots following appropriate flight rules. 
Rule 27. Clearing Street. No aircraft shall land or take off in such manner as to clear any public street or highway at an altitude of less than fifteen (15) feet, or seventeen (17) feet over an interstate highway, twenty-three (23) feet over a railroad, or twenty-seven (27) feet over a coastal waterway, or the clearance height of the tallest bridge over the waterway, nor land or take off on the taxiway or over hangars or other structures, automobile parking areas, or groups of spectators. 
Rule 28. UNICOM. If no UNICOM frequency is assigned to the airport, pilots of radio equipped aircraft taking off or landing at the Airport should report their traffic intentions on the MULTICOM Frequency 122.8. 
Rule 29. Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT). 
(A)  Immediately after takeoff and after landing prior to engine shut down, pilots should tune their aircraft radios to the emergency frequency (121.5 or 243.0) and listen to determine if their aircraft's emergency locator transmitter (ELT) is broadcasting. If the ELT turned on and transmitted after a takeoff or landing, as soon as possible after turning it off, advise the FAA automated flight service station for the area at telephone number 1-800-WX-BRIEF, that your ELT accidentally turned on at the approximate time and coordinates, if known, and the time and coordinates it was turned off. 
(B)  If a pilot lands his/her aircraft at the airport, parks and locks or hangars his/her aircraft with the ELT transmitting and the airport manager determines such has occurred, the airport manager shall take immediate action to telephone and/or locate the pilot of the aircraft, advise him/her of the situation, and request that he/she return to the airport immediately and turn off the ELT. Should the airport manager be unable to locate the pilot or if the pilot is unable to return to the airport within a reasonable time to turn off the ELT, the airport manager, accompanied by a local peace officer, a civil air patrol officer, or an FAA representative, shall take necessary action to turn off the ELT, provided the action does not result in damage to the aircraft. The aircraft owner shall be responsible for all charges associated with turning off the ELT. 
Rule 30. Takeoffs on Apron or Taxiways. Takeoffs or landings shall not be made on the apron, parking ramp, or taxiway by fixed-wing, or ultralight aircraft except by special permission of the airport manager. 
Rule 31. Takeoffs Allowed. Touch and go landings may be made at the discretion of the pilot. Pilots remaining in the pattern making touch and go landings should broadcast on the UNICOM or the common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) their pattern turns and their touch and go intentions after turning final. All aircraft shall clear for landing and takeoff traffic before taxiing into takeoff position. 
Rule 32. Traffic Pattern Altitude. Traffic pattern elevation at the Airport is eight hundred (800)-one thousand (1,000) feet above ground level (AGL) for all aircraft, which is two thousand one hundred (2,100) feet above mean sea level (MSL) elevation. 
Rule 33. Student Training and Practice Flying. 
(A)  Flight instructors shall inform students and themselves of all rules and regulations in effect at the airport. 
(B)  By notices posted in his/her office, the airport manager may designate limited areas of the Airport and local areas approved by the FAA for practice flying and training of students. 
(C)  Aircraft shall not be permitted to remain on the landing or takeoff areas for the purpose of instruction. 
Rule 34. Special Procedures. 
(A)  The airport manager may, in the interest of safety, designate special traffic procedures for certain operations, such as helicopters, air shows, agricultural operations, gliders, ultralights, etc. Any such change from standard procedures shall be published in the FAA's Airport/Facility Directory if of a permanent nature or the airport manager shall issue a NOTAM if such change is of a temporary nature. 
(B)  Parachute jumping on to the airport property shall not be permitted without the recommendations of the city airport advisory board and the written approval of the city council. 
Rule 35. Flying of Model Airplanes. Engine powered model airplanes, cable or radio controlled, or model gliders shall not be permitted to operated, take off or be launched from, flown over, flown in the terminal area of, or land at the airport, except in areas designated by the airport manager. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1105 - Fire Regulations. 
Rule 36. Applicable Rules. 
(A)  Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities in any manner shall exercise the greatest care and caution to avoid and prevent fire. 
(B)  Smoking or open flame within fifty (50) feet of any fuel tank, fuel pump, or fuel truck is prohibited. 
(C)  Compressed flammable gas shall not be kept or stored upon the airport, except at such place as may be designated by airport manager. 
(D)  No flammable substance shall be used for the cleaning of any aircraft part or other thing inside a hangar, T-hangar, or other building upon the airport. 
(E)  No one shall smoke or ignite a match or lighter in any building or hangar, except in posted "Designated Smoking Areas" identified by the airport manager. 
(F)  Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
(G)  The floors in all buildings shall be kept clean and free of oil. Volatile, flammable substances shall not be used for cleaning the floors. 
(H)  No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper, tall grass, weeds, unusable airplane parts or wreckage, scrap wood or metal, discarded airplane or automobile tires, trash, or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about a hangar, building, or other leased space. If such trash and litter is permitted to accumulate around a private owned, rented or leased hangar/building, the airport manager shall notify the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee by registered letter to remove the offending litter. If within ten (10) work days after receipt of the letter the hanger/building owner, renter, or lessee has not removed the trash and litter as directed, the airport manager may have the area cleaned and the cost for such cleaning shall be charged to the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee. 
(I)  Prior to the fueling of any aircraft, the aircraft shall be bonded to the fuel pump or hydrant service/fuel truck to equalize the static electrical potential between the fueler and the aircraft. Bonding shall be accomplished in the interest of fire safety as described in Section 4.1103, Rule 19(B). 
(J)  A sufficient number, rating, and size of fire extinguishers shall be available whenever aircraft are being refueled. 
(K)  Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have a minimum of two (2) 20B fire extinguishers located at the rear of and ib each side of such truck. 
(L)  Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have an "Emergency Cut-Off" valve which shall be clearly identified and painted red. 
(M)  All aviation fuel nozzles shall have "dead man" controls which will shut off the fuel flow when the nozzle hand control is released. Nozzles with mechanical hold open devices will not be permitted for fueling aircraft. 
(N)  The pilot and passengers will exit the aircraft and the aircraft will be unoccupied during fueling operations, except as provided in Rule 19(A). 
(O)  In all matters related to aircraft fueling, safety, the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Manual 407 "Aircraft Fuel Service, 1990" or as revised, available from the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 022269-9101, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1106. - Knowledge of Rules Implied. 
    By publication and adoption of this ordinance [this article], all persons shall be deemed to have knowledge of its contents. However, the airport manager is directed to have copies of the ordinance printed and posted where appropriate. Copies shall be made available at all times in the Airport manager's office, and copies shall be furnished to all owners and operators of aircraft based at the airport. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1107 - Conflict of Rules and Regulations. 
    If and where there are conflicts in the rules and regulations prescribed herein and the FAA's Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), the latter shall prevail. If and where there exists a conflict between any of the rules and regulations prescribed herein and any other city rules applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
Sec. 4.1108 - Penalty for Violation. 
    The airport manager may deny use of the airport for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for any person violating or refusing to comply with any of the rules or regulations prescribed herein pending a hearing by the city council. Upon such hearing, such person may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for a period of time as may appear necessary for the protection of life and property. Any violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding two-hundred ($200.00) dollars, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and orders. Citation for violation or issuance of a violation ticket of any of the rules and regulations prescribed herein may be made by any authorized peace officer. The airport manager or city council may request authorized peace officers to investigate any suspected violation of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted 8-6-02) 
ARTICLE 4.1200 - UNIFORM POLE ATTACHMENT RATE 

Sec. 4.1200 - Uniform Pole Attachment Rate 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Communications provider includes a cable provider, certificated telecommunications provider, and any other entity providing voice, video, cable, data, internet, or information transmittal services to the general public. The term does not include the city or a governmental entity providing governmental services. 
(2)  Conduit means a structure containing one or more ducts. 
(3)  Duct means a single enclosed raceway for a conductor, cable, or wire. 
(4)  Pole attachment means any attachment by a communications provider to a utility pole, duct, or conduit owned by the city. 
(5)  Telecommunications carrier shall have the meaning assigned to such term by Title 47 U.S.C.  153. 
(b)  A single uniform rate for pole attachments is hereby established. Subject to the provisions of any existing agreement, the city manager/utility director shall determine a single non-discriminatory, competitively neutral pole attachment rate to be charged for each pole attachment, regardless of the nature of the service provided. Such pole attachment rate shall not exceed the maximum rate the municipality would be permitted to charge a telecommunications carrier under the Federal Communications Commission's rules implementing subsection (e) of 47 U.S.C.  244 if the municipality's pole attachment rates were regulated by the FCC. 
(c)  If a communications provider is a party to an existing pole attachment contract with the city, the pole attachment rate determined under subsection (b) shall be applied to such communications carrier's pole attachments in a manner consistent with the terms and conditions of the existing contract. 
(d)  The pole attachment rate shall be in addition to any other fees, charges, or costs required to be paid by or assessed against a communications carrier pursuant to its pole attachment contract or any other Code section or law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, Secs. 1-4, adopted 6-20-06) 
ARTICLE 4.1300 - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NETWORK PROVIDERS 

Sec. 4.1301 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers; 
(2)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
(3)  Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1302 - Governing Law 
    This chapter shall be construed in accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code ("the code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1303 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in the City Design and Construction Standards Manual, Appendix N - Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles (said Appendix N being hereinafter referred to as "Design and Construction Standards") are hereby incorporated into this article and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the Design and Construction Standards are specifically applicable to this article: 
    Applicable codes: (A) the city's adopted building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized National Code Organization; and (B) local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284. 
    City: The City of Bowie, Texas or its lawful successor. 
    City council: The municipal governing body of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
    Chapter 284: Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
    Code: The Texas Local Government Code. 
    Collocate and collocation: The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Decorative pole: A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances. 
    Design district: An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code or ordinance, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Easement: Any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC: The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way: Right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district: An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law: Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local: Within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
    Location: The city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node, node support pole, or transport facility. 
    Mayor: The mayor of the City of Bowie, Texas, or designee. 
    Micro network node: A network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
    Municipal park: An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Network node: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(A)  Includes: 
(i)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
(ii)  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
(iii)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(B)  Does not include: 
(i)  An electric generator; 
(ii)  A pole; or 
(iii)  A macro tower. 
    Network provider: 
(A)  A wireless service provider; or 
(B)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
(i)  Network nodes; or 
(ii)  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Node support pole: A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit: A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
    Pole: A service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement: An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Provider: The same as "network provider." 
    Public right-of-way: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. 
    The term does not include: 
(A)  A private easement; or 
(B)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole: A pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(A)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(B)  A structure for signage; 
(C)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(D)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Street: Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "Street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    Traffic signal: Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility: Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    User: A person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
    Utility pole: A pole that provides: 
(A)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(B)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Section 51.002, Texas Utilities Code. 
    Wireless service: Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider: A person that provides wireless service to the public. 
    Wireless facilities: "Micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1304 - Use and Occupancy of Public Rights-of-Way 
    Pursuant to this article and subject to the Design and Construction Standards and the Code, a network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. 
    The terms of this article shall apply to all network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1305 - Compliance with Design and Construction Standards and Applicable Codes 
    All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this article, applicable city codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1306 - General Construction and Maintenance Requirements 
    A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the Code in a manner that does not: 
(A)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(B)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(C)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(D)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(E)  Violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq. ("ADA"). 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1307 - Permit Applications 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284 of the code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, transport facility or other improvements in a city public right-of-way. 
(B)  The city may not directly or indirectly require, as a condition for issuing a permit required under this article, that a network provider perform services unrelated to the installation or collocation for which the permit is sought, including in-kind contributions such as reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the city. 
(C)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than thirty (30) network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s) and compliance with all permit application requirements, receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(D)  The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's Design and Construction Standards and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the Design and Construction Standards and this article; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance that documents that the network provider and its contractor have at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in general liability coverage. 
(E)  Exception: As provided in section 284.157 of the code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(F)  Notwithstanding subdivision (E) above: 1) the network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of work described in this subdivision (E); 2) the network provider or its contractors may replace or upgrade a pole only with the approval of the pole's owner; and 3) the size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by section 284.003 without the city's approval in accordance with section 284.109, with the city acting on behalf of this state as the fiduciary trustee of public property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1308 - Installation in Historic Districts or Design Districts 
    A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements and all other applicable requirements described in the city's Design and Construction Standards. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts, and the authority to alter or modify existing historic districts and design districts, at a future date. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1309 - Installation in Municipal Parks and Residential Areas 
    A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
i.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide; and 
ii.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with the applicable requirements set out in the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1310 - Municipal Review Process by the City 
(A)  Determination of application completeness: The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
(1)  For network nodes and note support poles: No later than thirty (30) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility: No later than ten (10) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(B)  Approval or denial of application: The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
(1)  For network nodes: No later than sixty (60) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles: No later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities: No later than twenty-one (21) days after the city receives the complete application. 
(C)  Basis for denial of application: If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(D)  Resubmission of denied application: The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
(1)  The applicant has thirty (30) days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(E)  Nondiscriminatory review: Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(F)  Deemed approval: An application for a permit for a node support pole, network node, or transport facility shall be deemed approved if the application is not approved or denied on or before the applicable date for approval or denial prescribed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1311 - Time of Installation 
    A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six (6) months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1312 - Applicable Fees and Rental Rates to the City 
(A)  As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(B)  Network nodes: 
(1)  Application fee: The application fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) covering up to five (5) network nodes, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional network node per application. 
(2)  Annual public right-of-way rate fee: The annual public right-of-way rate shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per network node installed in the city public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Public right-of-way rate adjustment: As provided in section 284.054 of the code, the city may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half (1/2 the annual change, if any, in the consumer price index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice. 
(C)  Node support poles: 
(1)  The application fee for each network support pole shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(D)  Transfer facilities: 
(1)  The application fee for each transfer facility shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) monthly for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under chapter 283 of the Code or cable franchise fees under Chapter 66 of the Texas Utilities Code. 
(E)  Micro network nodes: 
(1)  No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(F)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. 
(1)  Subject to the city's pole service agreement, the collocation of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per year per service pole. 
(G)  City-owned municipal utility poles: 
(1)  A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with Section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(H)  The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1313 - Indemnity 
    As provided in section 284.302 of the code, a network provider accessing a public right-of-way under chapter 284 of the code shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the network provider, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the network provider, or its respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives, while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way. The indemnity provided by this section does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. If a network provider and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. This section is solely for the benefit of the city and network provider and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. A network provider or city shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the network provider or the city related to or arising out of the network provider's activities in a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1314 - Relocation 
    Except as provided in existing state and federal law, a network provider shall relocate or adjust network nodes in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1315 - Interference 
    A network provider shall operate all network nodes in accordance with all applicable laws, including regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. A network provider shall ensure that the operation of a network node does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile telecommunications operation of the city operating at the time the network node was initially installed or constructed. On written notice, a network provider shall take all steps reasonably necessary to remedy any harmful interference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
Sec. 4.1316 - Effect on Other Utilities and Telecommunication Providers 
    Nothing in this article shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, Sec. II, adopted 8-29-17) 
CHAPTER 5 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State constitution reference- Payment of assistance to survivors of firefighters, Art. III, 51-d. 
State Law reference- Automobile liability coverage for firefighters, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 612.001 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 142.006; commission on fire protection personnel standards and education, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 416.001 et seq.; state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 417.001 et seq.; fire department emergency board, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 417.021 et seq.; hazardous substances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 501 et seq.; fire, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 791 et seq.; fire detection and alarm devices, V.T.C.A., Insurance Code, Art. 5.43-2; fire protection sprinkler systems, V.T.C.A., Insurance Code, Art. 5.43-3; fireworks, V.T.C.A., Insurance Code, Art. 5.43-4; municipal fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 342.001 et seq.; liquefied petroleum gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, Sec. 113.001 et seq.; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, Sec. 28.02. 
Cross reference- Fire limits and construction requirements, Sec. 3.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 5.100. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-11,  1, adopted July 2, 2007, amended former Art. 5.100,  5.101-5.117, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 5.100 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3504,   1-3, 5, 3-7-1899; Ord. No. 062684-C,  8, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 95-3,  1, 7-11-95. 

Sec. 5.101 - Fire Department Generally; Appointment, Qualifications of Chief 
    The city shall maintain a fire department consisting of personnel from a full time EMS and fire fighter force as defined in city's annual fiscal year budget, and personnel from an officially franchised volunteer organization of not more than 25 persons. The fire department shall be under the control and direction of the chief of the fire department, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The chief shall meet the requirements of the State of Texas Government code, Section 419.032. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.102 - Designation of Acting Chief 
    In case of the absence or disability of the chief of the fire department, the city manager may appoint an acting chief. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.103 - Return of Chief to Rank 
    Should the chief of the fire department be dismissed from such position on account of unfitness for the discharge of the duties of such position, and not for any cause authorizing his entire dismissal from the service, he shall be restored to the rank and grade held by him prior to his appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.104 - Volunteer Fire Department 
    The Fire Chief shall administer the firefighting activities of the volunteer fire department and its members, and shall provide opportunities for drills and training classes to promote volunteer membership and enhance participation of volunteer members in department activities in fire prevention, firefighting and fire scene maintenance and control. 
(1)  Established. There is hereby established a volunteer fire department of the City of Bowie which shall be a voluntary force of firefighters, hereafter referred to as the "Bowie Volunteer Fire Department." 
(2)  Fire chief to direct. The volunteer members shall function under the general direction and control of the fire chief or the authorized designee thereof, subject to the supervision of the city manager, and also subject to such rules, regulations, and orders as may be promulgated from time to time by the fire chief or his/her authorized designee in accordance with the authority vested in the fire chief by the City Charter and/or ordinances of the City of Bowie. 
(3)  Composition of volunteer department. The volunteer fire department shall be a fire force composed of volunteers. The fire chief shall establish the size, composition, and organization of the volunteer department and may amend such size, composition, and organization from time to time. The initial size of the Bowie Volunteer Fire Department shall not exceed twenty-five (25) members. 
(4)  Training; commission. Prior to performing any duties as a volunteer firefighter, each volunteer firefighter applicant shall receive a minimum of 24 hours of training from the city's fire department. 
(5)  When on duty. Members of the volunteer fire department shall serve at the discretion of the fire chief or his/her authorized designee and may be called into active service at any time the fire chief or his/her authorized designee considers it necessary to have additional firefighters to prevent loss of life or property. 
(6)  Supplies; equipment. The city's fire department shall provide uniforms, gear and equipment for the city's volunteer membership, and may cause to be purchased special items of identification as deemed necessary by the fire chief. 
(7)  Compensation. No volunteer firefighter appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to any compensation for service. A volunteer firefighter who sustains injury in the course of performing official duties may receive hospital and medical assistance in the same manner as provided for fulltime firefighters. 
(8)  To serve as volunteer firefighters. Volunteer firefighters of the city's volunteer department shall serve as firefighters during actual discharge of official duties, subject at all times to the direction, control and supervisory authority of the fire chief, and shall be subject to the same policies, and standard operating procedures as are applicable to all regular career fire department firefighters. Volunteer members shall be entitled to participate in the Texas Local Firefighters Retirement Program. 
(9)  Incorporation. The volunteer membership may incorporate as a 501C3 organization at their sole discretion. However, this will not relieve the volunteer membership from following the directives of this chapter. 
(10)  Priority of response. Bowie Volunteer Fire Department members will give priority of response to the Bowie Fire Department's calls over other fire departments that they might also be a member of. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.105 - Office of Fire Marshal Established 
    An office of fire marshal is hereby established for the City of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.106 - Investigation of Fires 
    The fire marshal shall inspect the cause and origin of every fire, and shall have power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter, which is the subject of such inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of books, papers or documents deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal shall be empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to persons appearing to assist, in all such investigations, either in person or by designation of one (1) of his/her assistants. The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times to enter upon and examine any building and premises where fire has occurred and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised in a reasonable manner, and he shall be further authorized to recommend the abatement or removal of any conditions calculated in his judgment to promote the origin and spread of fire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.107 - Reports to City Manager 
    The chief of the fire department shall maintain and submit timely monthly reporting statistics to the city manager as to the activities of the department. The content of these reports will be subject to the discretion of the city manager as to the data needed to evaluate the performance of the department, its personnel and the readiness of equipment and personnel to respond to any type of routine or emergency situation. He/She shall keep the city manager advised of the readiness of the volunteer fire department and any needs it may have with respect to equipment and personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.108 - Additional Duties of Chief 
    The fire chief, ex officio fire marshal, shall perform additional duties as directed and be responsible for conformance with all administrative and policy directives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.109 - Assignment of Personnel 
    The chief of the fire department shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of all firemen and other officers and employees constituting the fire force, under such rules and regulations as may be established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.110 - Police Authority of Personnel 
    The chief of the fire department and assistants are authorized to exercise the powers of police officers while going to, attending or returning from any fire alarm of fire. The fire chief and each of his assistants, and each and every member of the fire department, shall have issued to him a warrant of appointment signed by the fire chief, in which the date of his appointment shall be stated, and such warrant shall be his commission. However, this shall not be construed as granting the authority to carry a weapon to any member of the fire department at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.111 - Uniforms, Badges 
    The chief of the fire department shall prescribe the uniform and badges for the members of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.112 - Additional Certification of Personnel 
    Depending upon the needs of the city, firemen may be required to have dual certification as a paramedic, EMT or ECA. Whatever additional certifications are necessary to provide the proper level of fire and ambulance service in the city will dictate the minimum level of certification and competency required to continue service in that capacity. All fire personnel will be given ample opportunity to obtain the required certification. Failing to do so will be sufficient cause for the chief of the fire department to transfer the person from the advanced pay scale position to the pay scale position that correlates to the person's ability and level of certification. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.113 - Temporary Appointments 
    In case of riot, conflagration or emergency, the city manager or the chief of the fire department may appoint additional firemen and officers for temporary service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.114 - Suspension of personnel 
    The chief of the fire department shall have the exclusive right to suspend any of the officers or employees who may be under his/her control and management for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, or failure to obey orders given by the proper authority. If any officer or employee be suspended, the chief of the fire department shall certify the fact, in writing, together with the cause of the suspension, to the city manager, who shall, within five (5) days from the receipt of such certificate, if demanded by the suspended employee, proceed to inquire into the cause of the suspension and render judgment thereon. Such judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be suspension, reduction in rank, or dismissal, and such judgment shall be final. In any such investigation, the power to administer oaths and secure the attendance of witnesses, and the production of books and papers shall exist in favor of the fire chief, the city manager, mayor, council committee or the suspended member. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.115 - Crossing Hoses 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride or drive any vehicle across any fire hose belonging to the city fire department while the same is being used or upon the street for the purpose of being used for practice or in case of fire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.116 - Injury to Equipment 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, by driving against, riding into, or in any other way, any of the equipment or apparatus belonging to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.117 - Interference with personnel 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or meddle in any way with any of the firemen while on duty, in case of fire or at practice. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5.118 - Complaints for Violations 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to file complaint against parties violating the provisions of Sections 5.114, 5.115, or 5.116." 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-3-07) 
ARTICLE 5.200. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 5.201 - Definitions 
    The term person as used in this article is hereby defined to mean and include: a person, firm, labor organizations, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-7-93) 
Sec. 5.202 - Throwing or Exploding Fireworks Unlawful 
    No person shall throw or explode any firecrackers, roman candles, skyrockets, torpedoes, grenades, or any other combustible fireworks of any kind within the city limits of Bowie, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, Sec. 2, adopted 9-7-93) 
Sec. 5.203 - Public or Private Demonstrations or Displays 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent any public or private demonstrations or display of fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after permission issued by the City of Bowie, for such demonstration or display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the City after proper inspection shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, Sec. 3, adopted 9-7-93) 
Sec. 5.204 - Penalty for Violations 
    Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, Sec. 4, adopted 9-7-93) 
ARTICLE 5.300. - ARSON REWARD 
(a)  The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the person providing information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city. This reward is an outstanding offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(b)  Notice of such reward shall be posted by the chief of police in at least six (6) different public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3505, Secs. 1, 2, adopted 9-9-63) 
(c)  The city council shall be the sole and exclusive judge in determining eligibility for this reward. 
CHAPTER 6 - HEALTH & SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Health officer, 3.03 
State Law reference- Authority to enforce laws to protect public health, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Sec. 121.003; powers and duties of municipalities relating to public health, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Ch. 122; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, Ch. 342. 

ARTICLE 6.100 - LITTERING 

Sec. 6.101 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Place and its derivatives mean, but shall not be limited to, throw, dump, unload, discharge and deposit. 
    Refuse means, but shall not be limited to, garbage, trash, ashes, rubbish, junk, bottles, cans, automobile parts, paper, and litter. 
    Right-of-way means a street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 6004, Secs. 1, 2, adopted 5-8-67) 
Sec. 6.102 - On Private Property 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse on any privately owned lot, tract or parcel of land located within the city with the intention of abandoning same. 
(Ord. No. 6004, Sec. 2(A), adopted 5-8-67) 
Sec. 6.103 - On Public Property 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse on any public property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 6004, Sec. 2(B), adopted 5-8-67) 
Sec. 6.104 - Duty of Property Owner 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, lessee or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land fronting on a public right-of-way within the city to knowingly permit any refuse to be or remain on such right-of-way opposite such property at any point between the line of such property and the center of the right-of-way. A person shall be presumed to have knowingly permitted refuse to be or remain on the right-of-way if such refuse has remained in the right-of-way for twenty-four (24) hours or more. 
(Ord. No. 6004, Sec. 2, adopted 5-8-67) 
ARTICLE 6.200 - SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 6.201. - Purpose 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: (1) improve and protect the public's health by eliminating smoking in public places; (2) promote the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air and (3) recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the choice to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.202 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct monetary wages and profit, and any persons who volunteer his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or non-profit entity, which employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is a place of employment if it is used as a childcare, adult daycare or health care facility. 
    Private place means any enclosed area to which the public is not invited or in which the public is not permitted, including but not limited to personal residences, private clubs or personal automobiles. A privately-owned business open to the public, is not a private place. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, includes, but shall not be limited to, public transportation and affiliated facilities and reception areas and other enclosed areas owner and/or operated by the City of Bowie. A private residence is not a public place. 
    Service line means any indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving services of any kind, whether or not such services involve the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed or plant in any manner or in any form. 
    Sports arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.203 - Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places as well as those outdoor areas owned and/or operated by the City of Bowie, including, but not limited to the following places: 
(1)  Buses, bus terminals, taxi cabs, train stations, airports and other facilities and means of public transit under the authority of the city, as well as ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities. 
(2)  Service lines situated at or on the premises of public places and sports arenas. 
(3)  Galleries, libraries and museums owned or operated by the city. 
(4)  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except that performers may smoke when the smoking is part of the stage production if such facilities or premises are owned and/or operated by the city. 
(5)  Indoor sports arenas and convention halls if such facilities or premises are owned or operated by the city. 
(6)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including city buildings, under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the city during such time as the public meeting is in progress. 
(7)  Public restrooms if such facilities or premises are owned or operated by the city. 
(b)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the conveyance, public place or sports arena within which the offense occurred did not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials were not located within the conveyance or within fifty (50) feet of the public place or sports arena. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 6.203(a)(5) and (6) that the offense occurred in an open concourse designated as a smoking area by the owner, operator or person in control of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.204 - Reasonable Distance. 
    Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of not less than two (2) feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec 6.205 - Application of Article to City Owned Facilities. 
    This article shall apply only to children's sports arenas, playgrounds, facilities, buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the City of Bowie, with the exception of those locations designated as areas in which smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.206 - Exemptions from Prohibition. 
(a)  Notwithstanding a provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child-care, adult daycare or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided however, that no more than twenty (20) percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this Article. The status of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be changed, except to additional non-smoking rooms. 
(3)  Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. This exemption shall not apply to any organization that is established for the purposes of the avoiding compliance with this article. 
(5)  Outdoor areas at places of employment except those covered in and Section 6.204 herein above and Section 6.207(b) below. 
(6)  Retail tobacco stores and stand alone physical facilities or other retail space provided that smoke from the subject store does not infiltrate areas where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this article. 
(7)  City owned park pavilions when leased for private function not open to the general public. 
(8)  Privately owned businesses. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any public place or sports arena described in this section may declare that entire establishment as non-smoking. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec 6.207 - Posting Signs 
(a)  The owner, manager or other person having control of a public place or sports arena or other area where smoking is prohibited by this Article shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating "NO SMOKING" or displaying the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it.) The sign shall have bold lettering of not less than one inch in height and must be posted at the entrance of the building or other area where smoking is prohibited. 
(b)  All ashtrays and all other smoking paraphernalia shall be limited in facilities to that required for the enforcement of extinguishing of smoking materials in public places and sports arena. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.208 - Fire Department and Code Enforcement Program 
    The Fire Department and Code Enforcement officer or their designee shall promote the purposes and requirements of this article to the public affected by it, and to guide compliance with it. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.209. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be by the fire marshal or designee, code enforcement officer or designee, city fire fighters, peace officers, and the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article should be given to all applicants for occupancy or any other license to operate, rent or lease property or premises owned or operated by the city. 
(c)  Any person may register a complaint under this article to initiate enforcement with any agency or official designated herein. 
(d)  The fire marshal, code enforcement officer and the Bowie Fire Department shall, while an establishment is undergoing mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this ordinance. 
(e)  Any owner, manager, operator, lessor, renter or any employee of any such persons and organizations which exercise control over any premises or properties regulated by this article shall be responsible for informing persons violating this article and its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.210 - Non-Retaliation 
    No person shall in any manner retaliate against any person, if such person exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.211 - Violations and Penalties 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having control of the place or premises where smoking is prohibited by this article to fail to comply with all of its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine set forth in Section 1.105 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.212 - Waivers 
(a)  Any person having control of the facility, room, structures, sports arena or other establishment subject to Section 6.203 may apply to the fire marshal for a waiver of or modification to any provision of this article due to unusual circumstances or conditions. Such waiver shall be granted only if the fire marshal finds from the evidence presented by the applicant for waiver or modification either that: 
(1)  The applicant cannot comply with the provisions of this article for which a waiver is requested without incurring expenses for structural or other physical modifications, other than posting signs, to buildings or structures; or 
(2)  Due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with the provision for which the waiver is requested will not result in a danger to health or annoyance, inconvenience or discomfort. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.213 - Culpability 
    There shall be no requirement of a culpable mental state for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.214 - Other applicable laws 
    This article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.215 - Severability 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such validity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given without that the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
Sec. 6.216 - Effective Date 
    This article shall be effective on and after final passage and publication of the ordinance from which it derives as set out herein. Signage as required by Section 6.207 shall be in place eight (8) weeks after the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, Part No. 1, adopted 11-6-07) 
ARTICLE 6.300 - PROHIBITING SMOKING PRODUCTS AND INGESTION DEVICES 

Sec. 6.301 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, purchase, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Bowie. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16,  1, adopted 1-18-11) 
Sec. 6.302. - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Illegal smoking product means any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081); 
(7)  1-[2-(4-morpholiny)ethyl]-3-(1-napthoyl)indole (JWH-200): 
(8)  5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(l R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (cannabicyclohexanol; CP-47,497 C8 homologue). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
a.  K-2; 
b.  K-2 SUMMIT; 
c.  K-2 SEX; 
d.  GENIE; 
e.  DASCENTS; 
f.  ZOHAI; 
g.  SAGE; 
h.  SPICE; 
i.  KO KNOCK-OUT 2; 
j.  SPICE GOLD; 
k.  SPICE DIAMOND; 
1.  YUCATAN FIRE; 
m.  SOLAR FLARE; 
n.  PEP SPICE; 
o.  FIRE N' ICE; 
p.  K-4; and 
q.  SALVIA DIVINORUM. 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
(b)  Ingestion device means equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body including: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent, screen, hashish head or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(c)  Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16,  1, adopted 1-18-11) 
Sec. 6.303 - Sale, Purchase, Delivery, Offer or Gift 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, purchase, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any illegal smoking material to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 1, adopted 1-18-11) 
Sec. 6.304 - Use or Possession of Illegal Smoking Product 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use illegal smoking products within the corporate limits of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 1, adopted 1-18-11) 
Sec. 6.305 - Use or Possession of Ingestion Device 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 1, adopted 1-18-11) 
Sec. 6.306 - Defenses to Prosecution 
(a)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the use of the illegal smoking product is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if any person charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such products is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to prosecution that the sale, purchase or possession of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 1, adopted 1-18-11) 
ARTICLE 6.400 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6.401 - Authority 
    This article is passed pursuant to and is referable to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code ("TABC"), and the provisions of such code are hereby adopted insofar as the same are applicable, and shall govern the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.402 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, all definitions, words, terms and phrases set forth in the TABC, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.403 - Permits 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, sell, possess for the purpose of sale or distribute any beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage, or otherwise engage in any activity for which a license or permit is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, within the city. 
(b)  Fees established. 
(1)  Permit fee. The permit fee for issuing a license or permit to operate, conduct, and maintain a business establishment selling alcoholic beverages in the city shall not exceed the maximum fee which the city is authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, to charge and collect. 
(2)  [Initial fee.] The initial fee shall be the maximum fee which the city is authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, to charge and collect. 
(3)  Exemption. A mixed beverage permit is exempt from the payment of the fee imposed by this subsection during the three-year period following the issuance of the permit as specified in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
(c)  Payment of fee. 
(1)  Term. The permit fee shall be collected when the application for such permit is submitted. The permit shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of its issuance, and, if issued, during the calendar year, the permit fee shall be collected in full without reduction. The permit fee shall be renewed by the gapplicant every two (2) years during the time that such applicant is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages within the city. Permit applications shall be filed with the city secretary and a twenty-five-dollar fee will be charged for that filing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.404 - Zoning Compliance Required 
    No permit shall be granted under the terms of this article unless the location at which the business is sought to be established and maintained is a permitted use under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city as of or after the effective date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.405 - Prohibited Sales 
    Except as otherwise specifically allowed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or as otherwise provided herein, no alcoholic beverages may be sold within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school or private school, or public hospital. No permit or license shall be issued to any such applicant. Measurement of such distance shall be in accordance with the terms of this article and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.406 - Methods for Determining Distance Measurement 
(a)  Church or public hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(b)  Public or private school. The measurement of distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and public or private school shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.407 - Exception to Distance Requirements 
    Upon receipt of a request, the city council may consider and grant an exception to reduce the distance requirement contained in section 6.406 above if it determines that enforcement of the distance requirements in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the council, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determine is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6.408 - Hours 
(a)  Authority. Pursuant to authority granted by Chapter 105 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, the city adopts the extended hours prescribed for the sale or offering for sale of any mixed beverage, beer or other alcoholic beverage by a holder of certain types of late hours permits. 
(b)  Mixed beverages. No person shall sell, or offer for sale, mixed beverages at any time not permitted by this subsection. 
(1)  A mixed beverage permittee may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between 7:00 a.m. and midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday a mixed beverage permittee may sell mixed beverages between midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 10:00 a.m. and midnight, except that an alcoholic beverage served to a customer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday must be provided during the service of food to the customer. 
(2)  The holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit may also sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day if the premises covered by the permit are in an area where the sale of mixed beverages during those hours is authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverages Code and city ordinance. 
(c)  Beer. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver beer at any time not permitted by this subsection. 
(1)  A person may sell, offer for sale, or deliver beer between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday he may sell beer between midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between noon and midnight, except that permittees or licensees authorized to sell for on-premises consumption may sell beer between 10:00 a.m. and noon if the beer is served to a customer during the service of food to a customer. 
(2)  The holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license may also sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer between 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day if the premises covered by the permit are in an area where the sale of beer during those hours is authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverages Code and city ordinance. 
(d)  Wine and beer retailers. The hours of sale and delivery for alcoholic beverages sold under a wine and beer retailer's permit or a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit are the same as those prescribed for the sale of beer under subsection (c) above, except that no sale shall be allowed between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(e)  Hours of consumption. 
(1)  No person shall consume or possess with intent to consume an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Proof that an alcoholic beverage was possessed with intent to consume in violation of this section requires evidence that the person consumed an alcoholic beverage on that day in violation of this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, Chapter 105, as amended, in addition to any other period during which the sale and consumption of alcohol is authorized under this article: 
a.  A licensed or permitted premises located at a festival, fair or concert may sell alcoholic beverages between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; and 
b.  A person may consume alcoholic beverages at a festival, fair or concert between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(f)  Applicability. This section is intended to apply and does apply to all late hours permit holders as may be authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverages Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11; Ord. No. 2015-13, Sec. 1, adopted 12-15-15) 
CHAPTER 7 - OFFENSES & NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of governing body to adopt ordinance, rule or police regulation for the good government, peace or order of the municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.001; authority of city to define and declare nuisance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 217.002. 

ARTICLE 7.100 - UNUSED WELLS, CISTERNS, CELLARS, ETC. 

Sec. 7.101 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capped means having its opening securely covered with a permanent cover which is not readily removable without destruction. 
    Filled in means completely filled with soil. 
    Unused means: 
(1)  For a water well or a cistern, one not presently being used as a water source for human consumption. 
(2)  For a storm cellar, cellar or basement, one not being connected to, or part of, a person's dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 030188-B, Sec. 2, adopted 3-15-88) 
Sec. 7.102 - Purpose; Scope of Article 
(a)  The city council finds that there are within the city limits, unused water wells, cisterns, storm cellars, cellars and basements, which should be regulated because of the possibility of injuries to persons and threats to the health, safety and welfare of the public in general, for which the police power of the state, which is delegated to this city, is to be and is hereby invoked in aid of the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  This article shall govern the requirements of filling in of all abandoned or unused water wells, cisterns, storm cellars, cellars, and basements which exist partly or wholly within the city. 
(Ord. No. 030188-B, Sec. 1, adopted 3-15-88) 
Sec. 7.103 - Capping 
    Every unused water well located within the city shall be capped. 
(Ord. No. 030188-B, Sec. 3.1, adopted 3-15-88) 
Sec. 7.104 - Filling In 
    Every unused cistern, storm cellar, cellar or basement located partly or wholly within the city shall be filled in. 
(Ord. No. 030188-B, Sec. 3.2, adopted 3-15-88) 
ARTICLE 7.200 - NUISANCES 

Sec. 7.201 - Conditions Enumerated 
    Upon the discovery of any of the following public nuisances upon any property in the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, notice shall be given the owner, tenant, lessee and/or occupant of the premises that they are in violation of this article through the existence of one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  The growth of grass, weeds or other uncultivated plants to a height greater than ten (10) inches on any property. 
(2)  The accumulation of garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse or other matter of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(3)  The accumulation of stagnant water. 
(4)  The visual line-of-sight obstruction of an intersection within fifteen (15) feet of same caused by natural growths or manmade barriers. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, conduct or maintain any outside storage outside of an enclosed structure or fully concealed behind an opaque screening fence, on any portion of a lot or tract. 
(a)  Prohibited outside storage as set forth in this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following items stored in a manner other than in an enclosed building or behind an opaque screening fence: 
i.  Building materials to be used on-site; 
ii.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a home occupation; 
iii.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a nonresidential activity; 
iv.  Chemicals; 
v.  Furniture not designed for outdoor use; 
vi.  Appliances not designed for outdoor use; 
vii.  Appliances designed for outdoor use but not currently installed; 
viii.  Tools, mobile and/or mechanical equipment not connected with a residential use; 
ix.  Lawn maintenance equipment; 
x.  Motor vehicle parts and/or accessories, including, but not limited to engines, transmissions, electrical parts, suspensions parts, vehicle body parts, batteries, tires, wheels, hubcaps, and other motor vehicle parts; 
xi.  Other items of personal property which are not customarily used or stored outside or what are not made of a material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outside environment; 
xii.  Barrels, boxes and buckets; or 
xiii.  Trash, garbage, or other refuse. 
(b)  Smokers, barbecue grills, or any other type of outdoor cooking equipment may not be maintained in the front yard between the front building line and the curb or street. 
(c)  No screening or storage requirements apply to (b) hereinabove, provided the items are maintained behind the front building line. A culpable mental state is not required for violation of this subchapter and need not be proved. 
Any person found guilty of violating this section will be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day such nuisance is allowed to remain after notification to remove same by city officer. 
(Ord. No. 060485-2, Sec. 1, adopted 6-18-85; Ord. No. 2009-14, Sec. 1, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 7.202 - Notice of Violation 
    Notice shall be given the owner, tenant, lessee and/or occupant of the premises upon which a condition enumerated in Section 7.201 exists. Such notice shall give the party in question ten (10) days from receipt of the notice to cause correction of the violation. Notice shall be through personal delivery of notice or certified/registered return receipt via mail delivery. If a person cannot be personally served, and the owner's address is unknown, the city has the option of public notice of the violation at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days or by posting the notice on or near each building on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(Ord. No. 060485-2, Sec. 2, adopted 6-18-85; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.203 - Notice to Unknown Party 
    If the address of the party responsible for a violation of this article is unknown and cannot be ascertained after reasonable diligence, notice may be given by publishing not less than twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such notice will provide an address or legal description of the property, the nature of the violation, provision of fourteen (14) days to abate the nuisance and the susceptibility of the party to citation and/or having the city to abate or contract for the abatement of the violation and having all associated costs assessed against the property in the form of a lien in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Art. 4436. 
(Ord. No. 060485-2. Sec. 3. adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 7.204 - Penalty for Violation 
    Any person having supervision or control over any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, failing to comply and correct the violation within ten (10) days after receipt of notice as hereinabove provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code]. 
(Ord. No. 060485-2, Sec. 4, adopted 6-18-85; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.205 - Abatement by City; Lien 
    In addition to the other penalties established for the violation of this article, the city shall have the option, after expiration of the ten (10) day notice to undertake such work as may be required to remedy the unsanitary and unhealthful or detrimental public welfare conditions that have been found to exist, and charge the expenses incurred in doing or having such work done to the owner of such property, as shown on the city tax rolls. Such expenses shall be assessed on the real estate upon which such expense is incurred, following which a statement (or affidavit) may be filed with the county clerk which shall constitute a privileged lien in accordance with the provisions of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Art. 4436. The ten (10) day notice may also inform the owner by certified mail that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. 
(Ord. No. 060485-2, Sec. 5, adopted 6-18-85; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.206 - Definitions 
    The words "property, lot or parcel of real estate" as herein used shall be held to include, in addition to those grounds within their respective boundaries, all lots or parcels of ground lying and being adjacent thereto and extending beyond the property line of any such property, lot, or parcel of real estate to the curb line of adjacent streets where a curb line has been established, and any abutting rights-of-way beyond the property line where no curb line has been established and also to the center of adjacent alleys. 
(Ord. No. 98-7 adopted 7-21-98) 
ARTICLE 7.300 - DRAINAGE OF WASTES ONTO STREETS 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge waste water of any nature from any sink, urinal or privy, except as may be herein provided, upon or into any street or alley within the city, nor shall any person allow such sinks, urinals or privies to drain upon private property and then run into or upon any street or alley within the city. This article shall not apply to any natural drain of rainfall into or upon any street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 6000, Sec. 1, adopted 6-6-1893) 
ARTICLE 7.400 - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 7.401 - General Prohibitions 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any street, alley, avenue, or public grounds within the city, or erect any fence or building so as to encroach on any street, alley, or avenue in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 1, adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.402 - Penalty for Violation 
    Anyone violating or permitting those under his control or employment to violate any of the provisions of Section 7.401 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code] for each day such obstruction is allowed to remain in the street, alley, avenue, or public grounds after being notified to remove the same by any city officer. This section shall not apply to any person using such streets, avenues or alleys temporarily for depositing building material when engaged in the construction or repairing of any building adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 2, adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.403 - Reserved 
Sec. 7.404 - Barrels, Boxes, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to place any barrel, box, wood or other substance on any sidewalk or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3706. Sec. 5, adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.405 - Signs, Awnings 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have any sign or obstruction across any sidewalk at a lower or less height than eight (8) feet. It shall be unlawful for any person to nail sticks, planks or pins to any awning post along a sidewalk so as to obstruct free passage thereon. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 6, adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.406 - Crowds 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone by loud talking, or any unusual act or exhibition to attract a crowd on any sidewalk and refuse to desist when requested to do so by any city officer. This section shall apply also to anyone composing such crowd engaged in the obstruction of such sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 3706. Sec. 7. adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.407 - Ingress, Egress at Public Places 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk in front of any church or other public place or other place of business or in any other way to obstruct the passage in or out of any church or theater, or other public place along such sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 8, adopted 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.408 - Horses 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or lead any horse upon any sidewalk, or into any store, grocery, or public house, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 9, 5-31-1892) 
Sec. 7.409 - Merchants Receiving, Forwarding Goods 
    Nothing in this article or in Article 4.100 of Chapter 4 shall be so construed as to prevent any merchant from occupying not to exceed one-half of any sidewalk in receiving and forwarding goods, wares, and merchandise, provided they shall not occupy such space for a longer period than six (6) hours in any one (1) day. 
(Ord. No. 3706, Sec. 11, adopted 5-31-1892; Ord. No. 6006, Sec. 1, adopted 10-9-67) 
ARTICLE 7.500 - JUNKED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The date of adoption of Ord. No. 3006 is unknown. 
State Law reference- Regulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles, V.T.C.S., Art. 4477-9a, Sec. 5.01 et. seq. 

Sec. 7.501 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Antique motor vehicle means any passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or which becomes thirty-five (35) years or more old. 
    Collector means the owner of one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Section 1 of V.T.C.S., Art. 4477-9a, Sec. 5.01, and motorboats, outboard motors or vessels subject to registration under Chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code, that is: 
(1)  Is inoperative; and 
(2)  Does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(3)  Remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty-five (45) days. 
    Exceptions. The provisions of this article applicable to junked motor vehicles shall not apply to: 
(a)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment. 
    Special interest motor vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. No. 3006; Sec. 1; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.502 - Deemed Public Nuisance; Declared Unlawful 
(a)  The presence of any junked motor vehicle on any private lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, or on any public right-of-way or other public property within the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning, or discarding a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or other public property or on the real property of another or to permit a junked motor vehicle to be parked, left, or maintained on his own real property; provided, that this section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed, operable, or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 2) 
Sec. 7.503 - Notice to Owner to Abate Nuisance-When on Public Property 
(a)  Whenever a public nuisance exists on public property or on a public right-of-way within the city in violation of this article, the city manager shall give not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle or if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. 
(b)  If the nuisance is not removed and abated within ten (10) days, the city manager shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it. The city manager shall thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in such manner as city council may provide, consistent with state law, and such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. However, the owner or occupant of the premises, or of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, may within the ten-day period after service of notice to abate the nuisance, request of the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, that a date and time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a trial to determine whether he is in violation of this article. Such trial shall be set as provided in Section 7.506. If the owner or occupant of the premises requests a hearing within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, the city manager shall not order the removal of the motor vehicle until ordered to do so by the judge of the municipal court. If the owner or occupant of the premises fails to either remove and abate the nuisance, the city manager may cause the removal of the junked motor vehicle or cause to be filed in municipal court a complaint for the violation of maintaining a public nuisance. If a person is found guilty of maintaining a public nuisance under this article, the person shall be punished as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code], and the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 3; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.504 - Notice to Owner to Abate Nuisance-When on Private Property 
(a)  Whenever a public nuisance exists on private property within the city in violation of Section 7.502, and the owner thereof can be found, the city manager shall give not less than ten (10) days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle or if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. 
(b)  If the nuisance is not removed and abated within ten (10) days, the city manager shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it. The city manager shall thereafter dispose of the motor vehicle in such a manner as the city council may provide, consistent with state law, and such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. However, the owner of the premises may within the ten-day period after service of notice to abate the nuisance, request of the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, that a date and time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a trial to determine whether he is in violation of this article. Such trial shall be set as provided in Section 7.506. If the owner of the premises requests a hearing within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, then the city manager shall not order the removal of the motor vehicle until ordered to do so by the judge of the municipal court. If the owner of the premises fails to either remove and abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, the city manager may cause the removal of the junked motor vehicle or cause to be filed in municipal court a complaint for the violation of maintaining a public nuisance. If the owner of the premises is found guilty of maintaining a public nuisance as defined in this article, the owner shall be punished as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code], and the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 4; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.505 - Description of Vehicle in Order 
    Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 5) 
Sec. 7.506 - Trial in Municipal Court-Preliminaries 
    Upon receiving a request for trial, made pursuant to Section 7.504 or Section 7.503, the clerk of the municipal court shall set a date and a time for such trial on the court docket. The clerk of the municipal court shall notify the city attorney of the date and time of such hearing. The city attorney shall cause to be prepared, filed, and served on the defendant, a written complaint charging that the owner or occupant of the premises, as the case may be, has violated this article. After service, such complaint shall be on file with the clerk of the municipal court not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of trial. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 6) 
Sec. 7.507 - Trial in Municipal Court-Findings of Judge; Penalty 
    The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before the court as set out herein, and shall determine whether the defendant is, in fact, in violation of this article. Upon a finding that the defendant is in violation of this article, such defendant shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code]. The judge of the court shall further order the defendant to remove and abate such nuisance within ten (10) days. To abate or remove the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue and order to the city manager to have the same removed, and the city manager shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. The city manager shall thereafter dispose of such motor vehicle in such manner as the city council may provide, consistent with state law, and such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 7) 
Sec. 7.508 - Removal with Permission of Owner 
    After receipt of notice from the city manager to abate the nuisance as herein provided, the owner or occupant of the premises may, within ten (10) days, give his written permission to the city manager for removal of the junked motor vehicle. The giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article. A vehicle that has been removed may not be removed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 8; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 7.509 - Removal by City 
    If there is a junked motor vehicle on public property, on private premises, or on the public right-of-way adjacent to the premises, and the owner or occupant of the premises cannot be found and notified to remove the vehicle, upon a showing of the facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order to the city manager to have the vehicle removed, and the city manager shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it. If the notice required in Sections 7.503 and 7.504 is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, then after ten (10) days from the date of the return, the court may issue an order to the city manager to have the junked motor vehicle removed, and the city manager shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it. The city manager shall thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in the manner provided by the city council, consistent with state law, and the vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 9) 
Sec. 7.510 - Notice to State 
    Notice shall be given to the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation within five (5) days after the date of removal of a junked motor vehicle as provided in this article, identifying the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3006, Sec. 10) 
ARTICLE 7.600 - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 

Sec. 7.601 - Finding and Intent. 
The city council finds that sex offenders that use physical violence and who are convicted of preying on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the health safety, and welfare of children. Sex offenders are likely to use physical violence, to repeat an offense, have many more victims than are ever reported, are prosecuted for only a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the ability to protect themselves, but additional measures should be taken to keep known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, Sec. 2, adopted 8-1-06) 
Sec. 7.602 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, Sec. 2, adopted 8-1-06) 
Sec. 7.603 - Sex Offender Residency Prohibition, Penalty, and Exception. 
(a)  If a person is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's sex offender database because of a violation involving a victim who was less than sixteen (16) years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Section 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. It shall be prima face evidence that this section applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than sixteen (16) years of age. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(c)  Any person violating a provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty, Section 1.105 of this Code. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the state's child safety ban. A person, as described in subsection (a), residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this section; 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult; 
(3)  The person is a minor; 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or, temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas; or 
(5)  The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, Sec. 2, adopted 8-1-06) 
Sec. 7.604 - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sex offenders; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, is located within one thousand (1,000) feet, as defined in section secction 7.602, of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Section 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty, Section 1.105 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, Sec. 2, adopted 8-1-06) 
ARTICLE 7.700 - TREES OBSTRUCTING RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 7.701 - Height Restrictions; Interference with Motorists, pedestrians. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit or allow trees or tree limbs to grow upon any such real property, or along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or if there is no curb between the property line and the edge of the street, if any portion of the tree or tree limbs are growing at a height less than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches above the pavement of the roadway or eight (8) feet above the pavement of the sidewalk, or if any portion of the tree or tree limbs are growing in a manner that interferes with or causes an obstruction to motorists using the roadway or pedestrians using the sidewalk. 
(b)  A tree or tree limb shall be deemed to interfere with or cause an obstruction to motorists or pedestrians if it obscures the motorists' or pedestrians' view of any street intersection, sign or traffic control device or if it otherwise causes or creates a hazard that could reasonably cause property damage or personal injury. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.702 - Duty to Cut or Remove. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city to cut, or cause to be cut, and remove, or cause to be removed, all such trees or tree limbs from such property or along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or if there is no curb, between the property line and the edge of the street, as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.703 - Nuisance Declared. 
All trees or tree limbs which are growing at a height less than required by this article or in a manner that interferes with or causes an obstruction to motorists or pedestrians using the roadway or sidewalk shall be presumed to be objectionable, unsightly, and unsafe, and are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.704 - Notice; Abatement by City. 
(a)  In the event that any person owning any real property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the city to give ten days notice of the violation to the owner prior to abating the violation. The notice shall be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown: 
a.  By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days in the newspaper of general circulation in Bowie, Montague County, Texas, if there is a newspaper published in the city of Bowie. If not, then publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in Montague County, Texas, if there is a newspaper published in the county. If not, then publication shall be had in a newspaper of general circulation in an adjoining county to Montague County, Texas. 
b.  By posting notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)  If such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within ten days after the date of notification as provided above, the city may go upon such property, or authorize another to go upon such property, and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article, and may charge the expenses incurred in having same done to the owner of such property as provided hereinafter. The remedy provided in this section is in addition to the remedies provided for in sections 7.706 and 7.708. 
(c)  In the notice of a violation the city may inform the owner that: 
(1)  If the owner commits or allows another violation of the same kind or nature that constitutes a public nuisance on or before the first anniversary date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, abate the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expenses against the property; and 
(2)  If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by this section and assess the expenses as provided in section 7.705. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.705 - Collection of charges; notice; lien. 
(a)  The charges provided for in this article shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. 
(b)  The city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was done and charges were incurred a notice which shall include: 
(1)  Identification of the property; 
(2)  Description of the violation; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the condition; 
(4)  A statement of the city's charges and expenses in abating the condition; 
(5)  A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to pay the expense within thirty (30) days of the date of the letter, a lien against the property may be filed with the county clerk of Montague County. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, adopted 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.706 - Notice Required Prior to Seeking Legal Relief 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.704, the city shall, prior to filing a compliant in the city municipal court or seeking injunctive or other legal relief, be required to give notice to any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city, of a violation of this article. Notice shall be given as set forth in section 7.704. The notice may state in part that a violation of the article has occurred and that if the violation is not abated within ten days of the date of the notice, a complaint may be filed in the city municipal court, or injunctive or other relief may be sought. For any property, one notice per year as provided in section 7.704 shall be sufficient for the city to seek relief pursuant to this section. The notice sent pursuant to this section may be combined with the notice provided for in section 7.704. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, adopted 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.707 - Definition 
For purposes of this article, the word "person" shall include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, adopted 10-7-08) 
Sec. 7.708 - Penalty 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, Sec. 1, adopted 10-7-08) 
ARTICLE 7.800 - CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Constitution reference- Plea of guilty or nolo contendere in misdemeanor, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 27.14; corporations and associations, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 17A; municipal corporations, Art. 11, Sec. 5, Texas Constitution; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 51.072. 

Sec. 7.801 - Popular Name 
    This article shall be cited as the code enforcement citation issuance ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.802 - Purpose 
    This article provides procedural and substantive rules relating to the issuance of citations by nonpeace officers to defendants accused of violating criminal ordinances of the city. The mandates and process established by this article are specifically designed to achieve the effective and efficient administration of the city's code enforcement program through the improved operation of the city's municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.803 - Application 
    This article applies to the issuance of citations alleging criminal violations within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. The procedures as set forth in this article apply only to offenses alleged to occur on or after the date of enactment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.804 - Definitions 
(a)  General . Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meaning set forth in this section. Terms that are not defined below, but are defined elsewhere in this code, shall be given the meanings set forth in the code. Words and phrases not defined in this code shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). The word "shall" is always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely directory. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only. 
(b)  Specific . 
Citation . An allegation of a city ordinance violation in the form of a written notice and promise to appear before the city municipal court, as provided for in this article. 
City . The City of Bowie, an incorporated municipality located in Montague County, Texas. 
Person . A living human being expressly excluding a corporation or association. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.805 - Relation to Related Laws 
(a)  A citation issued pursuant to this article does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant to Article 14.06(d) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure or V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Section 543.003. 
(b)  In lieu of issuing a citation pursuant to this article, notice of an alleged city ordinance violation may be made by service of a summons pursuant to Article 23.04 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(c)  An allegation of a city ordinance violation by a corporation or association shall be made pursuant to Chapter 17A of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.806 - Authority to Issue Citations 
    Pursuant to this article, and the scope of their assigned duties, a citation may be issued to a person by any of the following individuals so designated by the city council: 
(1)  Environmental health inspector; 
(2)  City inspector; 
(3)  OSSF inspector; 
(4)  Building official; 
(5)  Code officer; 
(6)  Code inspector; 
(7)  Licensed fire inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.807 - Form and Content of Citation 
    A citation issued under this section must be in a form approved by the municipal court clerk that includes the following information: 
(1)  The name, telephone number, address, date of birth, or driver's license number and physical description of the person cited; 
(2)  The offense for which the person is charged; 
(3)  The date and location of the offense; 
(4)  An appearance date, which must be not less than 10 business days from the date the citation is issued; 
(5)  A statement requiring the person receiving the citation to appear at municipal court on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation; 
(6)  A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to Article 27.14 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for the person cited to provide the person's signature. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.808 - Pleading Subsequent to Issuance of Citation 
    All pleas arising from the issuance of a citation under this article shall be made pursuant to Article 27.14 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.809 - Violation of Promise to Appear 
    A person issued a citation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 8[7.808] herein, on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.810 - Interference or Obstruction of Issuance 
    A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a citation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.811 - Providing False or Fictitious Name 
    A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an individual authorized to issue a citation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7.812 - Penalty 
    Each violation under this section is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, Sec. 2, adopted 5-1-12) 
CHAPTER 8 - PERSONNEL & ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 8.100 - SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS 
    City departments and other activities are intended to receive their direction and supervision from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 062684-D, Sec. 3; adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 8.200 - CITY ORGANIZATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of city, Art. I; city council, Art. II; administrative organization, Art. III; municipal court, Art. IV; finance, Art. VII; bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants and other evidence of indebtedness, Art. VIII; taxation, Art. IX. 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to appoint, remove and prescribe duties for any officer it deems necessary, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 26.041. 

Sec. 8.201 - Departments Enumerated 
    In accordance with Section 3.03 of the city charter, the mayor and city council hereby establish the following departments in the city and place them under the control and direction of the city manager: 
(1)  Administrative department. 
(2)  Finance department. 
(3)  Street department. 
(4)  Parks department. 
(5)  Recreation. 
(6)  Police department. 
(7)  Fire department. 
(8)  Library department. 
(9)  Water and wastewater utilities department. 
(10)  Electric utilities department. 
(11)  Meter department. 
(12)  Airport. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 1, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 8.202 - Certain Positions Created 
    In accordance with charter Sections 3.02, 4.02 and 4.03, the following positions are created in respective order: 
(1)  City secretary. 
(2)  Municipal court judge. 
(3)  Municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 2, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.203 - Administrative Department 
(a)  The administrative department is comprised of the city management function of the city government. 
(b)  The administrative department is comprised of the city manager, the city manager's secretary and all subordinate employees of the city management function. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 3, 3a, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 8.204 - Finance Department 
(a)  The finance department is comprised of the finance function of the city government. 
(b)  The finance department is comprised of the financial director, and all subordinate employees of the utility service office. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 3, 3a, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 8.205 - Reserved 
Sec. 8.206 - Finance Director 
(a)  The finance director shall report directly to the city manager and shall receive authority and direction from the city manager. 
(b)  The finance director shall be charged with the administration of the financial affairs of the city, including the keeping and supervision of all accounts, the custody and disbursement of city funds and money according to ordinances and regulations of the city council and the issuance of all permits and the collection of all permit fees. 
(c)  The finance director shall, as ex-officio treasurer, receive and securely keep all moneys belonging to the city, and make all payments for the same upon the order of the mayor, attested by the secretary under the seal of the corporation. No order shall be paid unless such order shall show upon its face that the city has directed its issuance, and for what purpose. A full and correct statement of the receipts and payments shall be rendered to the city council at least once a quarter. The finance director shall serve as the general accountant of the corporation, and shall keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements for the city, and separately, under proper heads, each cause of receipt and disbursement, and also accounts with each person including officers who have money transactions with the city, crediting accounts allowed by proper authority and specifying the particular transaction to which such entries apply. The finance director shall keep a register of bonds and bills issued by the city, and all evidence of debt due and payable to it, noting the particulars thereof, and all facts connected therewith, as they occur. The finance director shall maintain whatever support systems as required to cause all billings and payables to be effected and reported in a timely manner. 
(d)  The finance director shall be responsible for the training, placement and proper utilization of office personnel under the direction of that office. The finance director shall provide direction and staff support to the utility service supervisor and the utility service unit. 
(e)  The finance director shall maintain whatever level of supervision for those employees controlled in the above capacities to ensure proper safeguard of funds and records. The city secretary shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city council; and shall perform all such other duties as may be required by law, ordinance, resolution, order of the city council or direction by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 3c, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 8.207 - City Manager's Secretary 
    The city manager's secretary shall report directly to the city manager and receive authority and direction from the city manager. The city manager's secretary shall, as required, serve the mayor and city council, assist the city secretary and/or serve as the deputy if required by the city manager upon request by the mayor and/or city council. The city manager's secretary will perform additional duties as directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 3d, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.208 - Parks Department 
    The parks department shall be comprised of the supportive positions authorized by the mayor and council in the budget document or as amended by the mayor and council upon request by the city manager. The department will be supervised by the department director and be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of all public grounds and facilities, including Elmwood Cemetery. The parks director shall be responsible for effective scheduling and utilization of personnel in causing all public grounds and facilities to receive timely maintenance. He shall prepare a preventative maintenance program to avoid unnecessary repair and/or damage to facilities and provide for the proper condition of properties. He shall maintain records of his activities, maintain the required supplies and equipment for his activities and perform additional duties as directed. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 6, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Sec. 8.209 - City Secretary 
(a)  The city secretary shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the city council and serve at their pleasure. The city secretary shall keep the minutes of the city council meetings, shall be the official custodian of the records of the city and provide for the security and safeguard thereof. The city secretary shall be a signator on behalf of the city and attest to official documents on behalf of the city. The city secretary shall keep all contracts made by the city council. The city secretary shall assist the mayor and council as their recorder and perform such other duties as directed by the city council. 
(b)  The city secretary shall serve as the coordinator of all city elections and shall be responsible for all election matters as required by state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 12, adopted 6-26-84; Ordinance adopting Code) 
Charter reference- City secretary, 3.02. 
Sec. 8.210 - Municipal Court Judge 
(a)  The municipal court judge shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the city council, who shall serve at their pleasure for a two-year term. He shall have full power and authority to enforce all process of the court and to punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas and to compel their attendance by fine or imprisonment, or both. 
(b)  The municipal court judge may require of all persons arrested for offenses committed in the city bonds for their appearances before the court, and no such bond shall be taken except it be executed by the person in whose behalf it is made and with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the municipal court judge, and all bonds taken in proceedings in the court shall be payable to the city. 
(c)  The municipal court judge shall have the power and authority to impose all fines and fees applicable under state law, including a special expense, not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Section 38.11, or under Section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d); and the special expenses described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 17.04 dealing with the requisites of a personal bond and a special expense for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, after due notice, not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(d)  The municipal court judge shall have power and authority to administer official oaths and affirmations, and to give certificates thereof, and either the municipal court judge or the city secretary acting as ex officio clerk of the court, shall have full power and authority to issue subpoenas, writs of capias, search warrants, executions and all other process known to the law, which justice courts are by law authorized to issue in similar cases. 
(e)  If, for any cause, the municipal court judge shall temporarily fail to act, then and in such case, the mayor, or in his absence, inability or disqualification the acting mayor of the city, is hereby authorized to appoint some qualified person or himself, who shall have all the powers and discharge all the duties of the office, and shall receive no additional compensation therefor accruing while he is so acting. The mayor is hereby empowered to be the ex officio magistrate and perform as the municipal court judge in the absence of the person so appointed. The mayor shall have the duty to serve in such role and is thereby considered a magistrate of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. 1(e), adopted 6-26-84; Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 13, adopted 6-26-84) 
Charter reference- Judge for the municipal court, 4.02. 
State Law reference- Fines and special expenses, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 45.06; judge of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 29.004. 
Sec. 8.211 - Municipal Court Clerk 
    The municipal court clerk shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the city council and serve at the pleasure of same. The clerk is to assist the municipal court judge with any and all such duties as directed. The clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in the issuing process of such court. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 14, adopted 6-26-84) 
Charter reference- Clerk of the municipal court, 4.03. 
State Law reference- Municipal court clerk, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 29.010. 
Sec. 8.212 - Code of Criminal Procedure 
    The rules of procedure in criminal cases, as set out in the Code of Criminal Procedure in Criminal Cases of the Justice Court, is adopted by the city council, including rules of appeal, costs of trial in contested cases, costs of trial and appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3601, Sec. 1, adopted 1-18-60) 
State Law reference- Criminal procedure in justice and municipal courts, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 45.01 et seq. 
Sec. 8.213 - City Attorney 
(a)  The office of city attorney shall be an appointive position, without a specified term of office, but rather serving at the pleasure of the city council. Any appointment made under this section shall be by resolution of the city council. The appointee shall serve until his appointment be revoked by resolution, or a successor is appointed by resolution. 
(b)  Any person appointed to the office of city attorney shall be a practicing attorney, duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 5105, Sec. 2) 
Editor's note- The date of adoption of Ord. No. 5105 is unknown. 
Sec. 8.214 - Associate Municipal Court Judge 
(a)  The associate municipal court judge shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the city council and serve at the pleasure of same. The associate municipal court judge is to assist the municipal court judge with any and all such duties as directed. The associate municipal court judge shall have the power and authority to perform all of the duties delegated to the municipal court judge under Section 8.210 of the Bowie Code of Ordinances, as necessary. 
(b)  In the event of the temporary absence of the municipal court judge, said judge may designate the associate municipal court judge as the magistrate to perform all required duties in the municipal court judge's absence. The associate municipal court judge shall be empowered to perform and discharge all of the duties of the municipal court judge during the designated period. If so designated, the associate municipal court judge shall have the duty to serve in such role and is thereby considered a magistrate of the city. 
(c)  In the event that the municipal court clerk has received the required training necessary to perform the duties of associate municipal court judge, nothing in this article shall preclude the dual appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, Sec. 2, adopted 3-16-04) 
ARTICLE 8.300 - MAYOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor, 2.04. 

Sec. 8.301 - Generally 
    In addition to those duties provided the mayor by the city charter, the duties in this article are hereby imposed. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. 1, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.302 - Supervision of City Employees 
    The mayor shall inspect the conduct of all subordinate officers in the city government, and, cause all negligence, carelessness and other violations of duty to be accounted for and prosecuted, where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. l(a), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.303 - Administer Oaths of Office 
    The mayor shall administer all oaths of office. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. l(b), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.304 - Special Police Force 
    Whenever the mayor deems it necessary, in order to enforce the laws of the city, or to avert danger, or to protect life or property, in case of riot or any outbreak or calamity or public disturbance, or when he has reason to fear any serious violation of law or order, or any outbreak or any other danger to the city, or the inhabitants thereof, he shall summon into service as a special police force, all or as many of the citizens as in his judgment may be necessary. Such summons may be by proclamation or other order addressed to the citizens generally, or those of any ward of the city, or subdivision thereof, or may be by personal notification. Such special police force, while in service, shall be subject to the orders of the mayor, shall perform such duties as he may require, and shall have the same power while on duty as the regular police force of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. 1(c), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.305 - Recommendation of Services 
    The mayor shall have the duty to recommend such measures as may tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, the fire, health, security, cleanliness, comfort, ornament and good government of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. l(d), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.306 - Closure of Places of Public Assembly 
    The mayor shall have the duty, in case of a riot or unlawful assemblage or with a view to preserve peace and good order in the city, to order and enforce the closing of any theater, ballroom, or other place of resort or public room or building, and may order the arrest of any person violating the laws of the state or any ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. l(f), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.307 - Official Signatory for City 
    The mayor shall be the official signatory for the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. l(g), adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.308 - Superiority Over Other Officers, Departments 
    The powers and duties of the mayor shall take precedence over those assigned to other officers/employees of the city regardless of manner assigned/empowered. All such ordinances, directives or other manners of assignments shall be subordinate to this article until such time this article is amended or repealed of such duties and powers; until such time, those ordinances and directives, and/or sections/words thereof, that are inconsistent with this article shall be deemed subordinate, and/or void, and/or separable from the remainder of that ordinance or directive, only to the extent, as it pertains to that, which is at the time, in conflict with the active enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062684-A, Sec. 2, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 8.400 - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, 3.01. 

Sec. 8.401 - Appointment; Compensation 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager, at its discretion, for an indefinite term, who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 2, 4, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.402 - Qualifications 
    The city manager shall be chosen by the council on the basis of his character, executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and without regard to political consideration. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 3, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.403 - Powers and Duties 
    The city manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for proper administration of all affairs of the city under his jurisdiction and to that end, he shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Supervise and administer all departments and future departments that may be created by the city. 
(2)  Appoint and when necessary for the welfare of the city, remove any officer or employee of the city except as otherwise provided by the city charter and except as he may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council an annual budget and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(5)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable to him. 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the council, except when he is under discussion, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of the council. 
(7)  Acquire needed goods and services for municipal operations and if necessary invite competitive bidding for such goods and services to the extent provided by applicable state statute. 
(8)  Authorize payments for obligations, debts and warrants of the city experienced during the normal course of operations to the extent provided by local, state and federal law. 
(9)  Administer and enforce all laws and ordinances of the city to the extent provided by city charter, state statute and federal statute. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 4, adopted 4-5-88) 
State Law reference- Purchasing and contracting, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, 252.001 et seq. 
Sec. 8.404 - Interference by Council Prohibited 
    Neither the city council or any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates. However, the council may consult and advise the city manager, make any inquiry regarding the appointments or removals and may express their opinion in regard thereto. In regard to administrative and executive duties under the city manager, the council shall deal solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 5, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.405 - Creation of New Departments or Offices 
    The council, with or without the recommendation of the city manager, may create, change and abolish offices, departments or agencies other than the offices, departments and agencies as established by the city charter or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 6, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.406 - Removal 
    The council may remove the city manager upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city council. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 7, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.407 - Surety Bond 
    The council shall require the city manager, before entering upon the duties of his office, to execute a good and sufficient bond with a surety company doing business in the state and approved by the council, as surety thereon, such bond to be in such amount as the council may demand, payable to the city, and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 8, adopted 4-5-88) 
Sec. 8.408 - Absence 
    To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the city manager may designate, by letter filed with the city secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the city. In the event of failure of the city manager to make such designation, the council may by resolution appoint an officer of the city to perform the duties of the city manager until he shall return or his disability shall cease. In case of disability or illness exceeding thirty (30) days, where his duties could not be performed properly, his salary should be continued at the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 040588, Sec. 9, adopted 4-5-88) 
ARTICLE 8.500 - PERSONNEL COMPLAINTS 

Sec. 8.501 - Procedure for Complaints Against City Employees 
(a)  Complaints must be written and signed - Any complaint made against the conduct of an employee of the city for the purpose of seeking disciplinary action of any type must be made in writing and signed by the person making the complaint. 
(b)  Sufficient information required - The written complaint shall contain sufficient information necessary for the investigation of the complaint, including, but not limited to, a description of the employee's conduct, an explanation of why the employee's conduct is objectionable, names and addresses of witnesses, name and address of the complaining party. 
(c)  Persons with whom filed - The complaint shall be filed by one (1) of the following means: 
(1)  Actual delivery to the city manager, city secretary, deputy city secretary; 
(2)  Actual delivery to any member of the city council, including the mayor; or 
(3)  Mailing the complaint to the city manager by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid. If mailed, the envelope shall be addressed: 
City Manager 
304 Lindsey Street 
Bowie, Texas 76230 
(d)  Delivery to city manager - The person receiving the complaint shall deliver the complaint to the city manager as soon as possible during normal working hours. The city manager shall notify the city council of the receipt of the complaint. 
(e)  Manner of disciplinary action - Any disciplinary action considered or taken against any employee of the city shall be made in a manner consistent with city, state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 011690-A, Sec. 1-4, 6, adopted 1-16-90; Ord. No. 040390-A, Sec. 1, adopted 4-3-90) 
ARTICLE 8.600 - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. Nos. 120689-B and 112090-A, adopted Dec. 5, 1989 and Nov. 20, 1990, respectively, were not enacted as a specific amendment or addition to the Code but the editor determined their incorporation to be advisable. 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Chapter 851. 

Sec. 8.601 - Participation; Benefits 
    Pursuant to V.A.C.S., Title 110B, Subtitle G, Sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the "system"): 
(a)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least twenty-five (25) years of credited service in that system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under Section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  If a vested member, as that term is defined in Section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of Section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(c)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (b) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(d)  The rights, credits and benefits herein above authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(e)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability annuity under Section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under Section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees: 
(1)  That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
(2)  That the disability is likely to be permanent; and 
(3)  That the member should be retired. 
    Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Section 64.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(f)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (e) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 121388-A, Sec. 1, adopted 12-13-88) 
Sec. 8.602 - Increase in Retirement Annuities 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.A.C.S., Title 110B, Section 64.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to December, 1987. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 121388-B, Sec. 2, adopted 12-13-88) 
Sec. 8.603 - Updated Service Credits and Increases in Retirement Annuities Effective January 1, 1990 
(a)  Authorization of updated service credits - On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in such system in force and effect on the first day of January, 1989, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with such system shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
    In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(b)  Increase in retirement annuities : 
(1)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 or Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of annuity increased under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(c)  Effective date - Subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 120589-B, Sec. 1-3, adopted 12-5-89) 
Sec. 8.604 - Updated Service Credits and Increases in Retirement Annuities Effective January 1, 1991 
(a)  Authorization of updated service credits - On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 863.403 of Subtitle of Title 8, V.T.C.A, Government Code, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January, 1990, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of such title) in an amount that is one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of such title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
    In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of Title 8, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(b)  Increase in retirement annuities : 
(1)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below-stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from the service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(c)  Effective date - Subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 1991. 
(Ord. No. 112090-A, Sec. 1-3, adopted 11-20-90) 
Sec. 8.605 - Updated Service Credits and Increases in Retirement Annuities Effective January 1, 1992. 
(a)  Authorization of updated service credits 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(2)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). If the city has previously adopted, or if it hereafter adopts an ordinance authorizing updated service credit for unforfeited credit for prior service or current service with any other participating municipality, the calculations and adjustments set forth in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act shall apply to any such transferred service. 
(3)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(4)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this ordinance on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(b)  Increase in retirement annuities 
(1)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(c)  Dates of allowances and increases - The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(d)  Effective date - Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the first day of January 1992. 
(Ord. No. 91-13, Sec. 1-4, adopted 12-10-91) 
Sec. 8.606 - Extension of Health Benefits Coverage to Retirees 
(a)  The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement. 
(b)  The city hereby adopts the following definition of "retiree" for purposes of this article: 
(1)  You are at least 60 years of age and have at least 15 years of credited service with this system; or 
(2)  You have at least 25 years of credited service with this system, regardless of your age; 
(c)  When retiree turns 65, retiree will move to Texas Municipal League's Group Benefits Risk Pool Medicare Supplement Policy. 
(d)  The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool: 
(1)  The same medical plans offered to active employees 
(2)  Dental Plan III 
(3)  Retiree Life 
(4)  Retiree Optional Life 
(e)  The interlocal agreement in effect between the City of Bowie and the TML/GBRP provides that the board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The City of Bowie elects to have the retiree medical contribution be 150% of the active employee contribution for as long as TML-GBRP offers this rate structure for retiree medical coverage. Other coverages will be as established annually by the TML-GBRP Board of Trustees. 
(f)  This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date or to employees which retired under a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify, they must enroll for this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement. 
(g)  This section may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-8 adopted 9-1-98) 
Sec. 8.607 - Additional Rights 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which Subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act", the City of Bowie, Texas, Adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "System"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the System is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the System performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this article, the governing body of the city has: (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in additions to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this article pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Texas Government Code as amended, the City of Bowie hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 853-505. 
    In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees Saving Fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The City of Bowie agrees that its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 99-6 adopted 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2000-14 adopted 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8.608 - Authorization of Restricted Prior Service Credit 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the System for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this aection must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, adopted 4-16-00) 
ARTICLE 8.700 - STREET DEPARTMENT 
    The street department is comprised of the street superintendent and those supportive positions authorized in the budget document or as amended from time to time by the mayor and city council as requested by the city manager and deemed necessary for the proper maintenance of the street program in the city. The street superintendent shall be responsible for the timely repair of all road surfaces in the city, the supervision and training of assigned personnel, the maintenance of all equipment and records maintenance for the street department. The street superintendent shall perform additional duties as required. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 4, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 8.800 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish police force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Section 341.003; Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Sec. 415.001 et seq. 

Sec. 8.801 - Composition of Police Department 
    The department of police shall be composed of the chief of police and such other officers, patrolmen and employees as the city manager may determine. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.802 - Chief of Police Generally 
    The director of the department of police shall be the chief of police. The chief of police shall have immediate direction and control of the police department, subject to the supervision of the city manager, and also subject to such rules, regulations and orders as the city manager may prescribe, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city, and shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the police force. He shall devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties, and shall not be absent from the city except in the performance of his official duties, unless granted a written leave of absence by the city manager. His office shall be kept open at all hours, day or night, and either he or his subordinate shall be in constant attendance at such office. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.803 - Return of Chief to Rank 
    Should the chief of police, in case he is selected from the ranks of the police department, or the assistant chief be dismissed from his position on account of unfitness for the discharge of his duties, and not for any cause justifying his entire dismissal from the department, he shall be restored to the rank and grade held by him prior to his appointment. 
Sec. 8.804 - Designation of Acting Chief 
    In case of the disability of the chief of police, by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the chief shall recommend in writing to the city manager one (1) of his subordinates to temporarily act in his stead. Failing that, the city manager shall designate an acting chief of police during such disability, and the officer so designated shall serve without additional compensation. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.805 - Commission of Appointment; Oath; Bond 
    Each member of the department of police, both rank and file, shall have issued to him a warrant of appointment, signed by the city manager, in which the date of his appointment shall be stated, and such shall be his commission. Each member of the department of police shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to an oath that he will faithfully, without fear or favor, perform the duties of his office, and such oath shall be filed and preserved with the records of the department, and shall in addition execute the necessary bond required by the city council, which shall also be filed and preserved with the records of the department. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.806 - Special Police Restricted 
    No person, except as otherwise provided by general law or the city charter, or the ordinances passed in pursuance thereof, shall act as special police or special detective, except upon written authority from the city manager. Such authority, when conferred, shall be exercised only under the direction and control of the chief of police and for the time specified in the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.807 - Authority of Officers 
    The officers constituting the department of police of the city are hereby invested with all the power and authority given to them as peace officers under state law in taking cognizance of, and in enforcing the criminal laws of the state, and against the ordinances and regulations of the city; to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to preserve the good order of the city, and to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence, and the property therein from injury. Such policemen shall have no power or authority in civil matters, but shall execute any criminal warrant or warrant of arrest that may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted authorities of the city. Such policeman shall not receive any fee or other compensation for any services rendered in the performance of his duty, other than the salary paid him by the city, nor shall he receive a fee as a witness in any case arising under the criminal laws of the state, or under the ordinances or regulations of the city and prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.808 - Management of City Prison 
    Subject to the direction of the city manager, the chief of police shall have control and management of the city prison. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.809 - Uniforms; Badges 
    The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police department, and direct the manner in which the members of the department shall be armed. Any person other than a member of the department who shall wear such uniform or badge shall be subject to such fine as may be prescribed by the council by proper ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, 6-26-84) 
State Law reference- Impersonating public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, 37.11. 
Sec. 8.810 - Suspension of Personnel; Appeal 
    The chief of police shall have the exclusive right to suspend any of the officers or employees who may be under his jurisdiction and control for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by the proper authority or for any other just and reasonable cause. If any officer or employee be suspended, the chief of police shall forthwith in writing certify the fact, together with the cause for the suspension, to the city manager who shall, within five (5) days from the receipt of such certificate, if demanded by the suspended officer or employee so to do, proceed to inquire into the cause of the suspension and render judgment thereon. If the charge be sustained, judgment thereof may be suspension, reduction in rank, or dismissal; and such judgment shall be final, unless appealed to the city council in writing within five (5) days from the decision of the city manager. In which case the mayor shall appoint a council committee to further review the matter and cause a decision by the city council, which shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7, adopted 6-26-84) 
Sec. 8.811 - Reports 
    The chief of police shall maintain and submit timely monthly reporting statistics to the city manager as to the activities of his department. The content of these reports will be subject to the discretion of the city manager as to the data needed to evaluate the performance of the department, its personnel and the readiness of equipment and personnel to respond to any type of routine or emergency situation. He shall keep the city until proper certification from the state is received. The reserve force is intended to augment and supplement the regular officers and not replace them as the primary police force of the city. All reserves will be subject to the rules and operating procedures of the police department and those of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3402, Sec. 1, adopted 4-15-80; Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 7a, adopted 6-26-84; Ord. No. 060485-1, Sec. 1, adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 8.903 - Qualifications 
    Police reserve personnel shall have qualification and training standards in effect as documented by the chief of police under the title "Police Department Applicant Flow Chart." No person shall be appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer unless that person has first been issued a reserve qualification certificate by the State Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. This section will also incorporate as standards all future internal operating procedures and standards as placed into effect by the chief of police after proper staff coordination. 
(Ord. No. 3402, Sec. II, adopted 4-15-80; Ord. No. 060485-1, Sec. 3, adopted 6-18-85) 
Sec. 8.904 - Authority, Responsibility of Officers 
    The reserve law enforcement officers shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of a police officer of the city while on duty as assigned by the chief of police. Such reserve law enforcement officers shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the police department as well as to all operational policy established by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 3402. Sec. III, adopted 4-15-80) 
Sec. 8.905 - Discrimination Prohibited 
    No person shall be denied appointment as a reserve law enforcement officer for the city on the basis of sex, race, color, national origin or religion. 
(Ord. No. 3402, Sec. IV, adopted 4-15-80) 
ARTICLE 8.1000 - EXCESSIVE FORCE POLICY 
(a)  "Excessive force" is hereby defined as an aggressive act committed by a peace officer in the performance of his or her duty which is capable of or intended to cause serious bodily harm or death. Typically, the use of service weapons or other firearms or the use of a baton or a flashlight in a manner which is capable of inflicting permanent injury (e.g. striking blow to head or face) are examples of the use of excessive force. 
(b)  The City of Bowie hereby adopts the policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by its local police department against any person or persons engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations provided such demonstration and no perceived imminent threat of death or injury apparent to the police officer. Furthermore, under the circumstances will the force used be greater than necessary and if used it shall be in accordance with the approved departmental policies regulating the use of force. 
(c)  The City of Bowie hereby prohibits any person involved in a demonstration from physically barring any entrance or exit of any facility or location which is the subject of a nonviolent civil rights demonstration. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in Section 1.105 of this code for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-2 adopted 2-3-98) 
ARTICLE 8.1100 - MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND 
(a)  A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor shall pay a $3.00 security fee as a cost of court to the City of Bowie Municipal Court. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the finance director, as appropriate, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. 
(c)  The fund designated by this subsection may be used only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the municipal court: 
(1)  the purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)  identification cards and systems; 
(5)  electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  signage; 
(8)  confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  locks, chains, or other security hardware; or 
(10)  continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 98-4 adopted 3-3-98) 
ARTICLE 8.1200 - MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND 

Sec. 8.1201 - Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the Fund, pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
Sec. 8.1202 - Establishment of Amount of Fee and Assessment and Collection 
(a)  The fee shall be in the amount of $2.00. 
(b)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  a sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  the person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)  the court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after December 1, 1999. 
(d)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the City of Bowie, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
Sec. 8.1203 - Designated Use of the Fund and Administration 
(a)  The Fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technology enhancements for the municipal court of the City of Bowie, Texas, including: 
(1)  computer systems; 
(2)  computer networks; 
(3)  computer hardware; 
(4)  computer software; 
(5)  imaging systems; 
(6)  electronic kiosks; 
(7)  electronic ticket writers; or 
(8)  docket management systems. 
(b)  The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 99-14 adopted 12-14-99) 
CHAPTER 9 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
    On and after the passage of this ordinance, any person, firm or corporation seeking approval of any plat, plan or replat of any subdivision of land within the City of Bowie, Texas, and its legally established extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be required to comply with the requirements of this ordinance before such approval may be granted, to-wit: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 212; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities in counties that regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 242.001; extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 212.003; recording of plats, V.T.C.A., Property Code, Sec. 12.002 
Cross reference- Also see Sec. 3.919 regarding flood damage prevention for subdivision proposals. 

SECTION 1. - GENERAL 
    These regulations shall govern every person, firm, association or corporation owning any tract of land within the city limits of the City of Bowie who may hereafter divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to said City, or for laying out suburban lots or buildings lots, or any lots, streets, alleys, parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
    2.01 Administrative Officers are every officer referred to by title, i.e., City Manager, City Attorney, City Secretary, City Engineer, Director of Public Works, etc., and shall be the person so retained in this position by the City, or his duly authorized representative. 
    2.02 Alley shall mean a minor way used primarily for vehicular service to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    2.03 Arterial Street or Thoroughfare shall be a principal traffic way more or less continuous across the city or areas adjacent thereto and shall act as a principal connecting street with state and interstate highways. 
    2.04 Building Line shall be a line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street or road right-of-way line or property line. 
    2.05 City or the City shall mean City of Bowie, Texas. 
    2.06 City Council shall be the duly elected governing body of the City of Bowie, Texas. 
    2.07 Collector Street shall be a street which is continuous through several residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts and thoroughfares, highways or business district. 
    2.08 Commission shall mean the City Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    2.09 Cul-De-Sac shall mean a short residential street having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turn around. 
    2.10 Dead End Streets shall mean a street other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    2.11 Easement shall mean an area for restricted use on private property upon which any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements. Any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity, at any time, of procuring the permission of anyone. 
    2.12 Engineer shall be the City Engineer of the City of Bowie, the City's Consulting Engineers, or their duly authorized representatives. 
    2.13 Final Plat shall be any plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land requested to be recorded of record in the Deed Records of Montague County, Texas. 
    2.14 Lot of Record shall mean a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded with the County Clerk, Montague County, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded with the County Clerk, Montague County. 
    2.15 Master Plan shall be the comprehensive plan of the City and adjoining areas as adopted by the City Council and the City Planning and Zoning Commission, including all its revision. This plan indicates the general location recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
    2.16 Mobile Home Parks or Trailer Courts are areas for renting or leasing sites for mobile homes or trailer coaches. 
    2.17 Plat shall mean a map or chart of the subdivision. It shall include plan, plat or replat, in both singular or plural. 
    2.18 Preliminary Plat shall be any lot, tract, or parcel of land that is not to be recorded of record but is only a proposed division of land for review and study by the City. 
    2.19 Resubdivision shall mean the division of an existing subdivision, together with any changes of lot size therein, or with the relocation of any street lines. 
    2.20 Replatting shall be the resubdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot, or tract. A replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to additional notice and public hearing requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Section 212.015, if the area to be replatted was assigned interim or permanent single family or duplex zoning or was restricted in the same manner by deed restrictions. 
(Ordinance No. 061885; Ordinance adopting Code) 
    2.21 Residential Street shall be a street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district and which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
    2.22 The word "Shall" shall be deemed as mandatory. The word "May" shall be deemed as permissive. 
    2.23 Short-Form Subdivision shall refer to any subdivision plat which meets the requirements therefor contained in this ordinance. 
    2.24 Standard Specifications and Codes of the City shall be applied to all improvements constructed within the City and shall be in accordance with all revisions, as may be adopted by the City. 
    2.25 Street means a way for vehicular traffic whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
    2.26 Street Width shall be the shortest distance between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of a street. 
    2.27 Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include resubdivision. 
SECTION 3. - PURPOSES, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

3.01 - [Adoption] 
    Under the authority of Article 974a of the Revised Civil Statutes [Chapter 212 of the Local Government Code] of the State of Texas, which article [chapter] is hereby made a part of these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Bowie, Texas, does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Bowie and in the unincorporated areas lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City Limits of Bowie, in order to provide for the orderly development of the areas and to secure adequate provisions for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage, and other facilities. 
3.02 - [Subdivision Defined] 
    As used herein, the term "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building or development, and shall include resubdivision. "Resubdivision" shall mean any change in the division of any existing subdivision or any change in lot size therein, or the relocation of any street lines. 
3.03 - [Submission of Plan] 
    Any owner of land inside or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Bowie wishing to subdivide such land shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission a plan of subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in these regulations. An owner subdividing his land into parcels of not less than five (5) acres each and not involving new streets and/or utilities shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(Ordinance No. 061885; Ordinance adopting Code) 
3.04 - [Approval Required] 
    No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded and no lot in a subdivision inside of or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Bowie shall be improved or sold until the plat shall have been considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. The City shall have the authority to prohibit the installation of public utilities in unapproved subdivisions and to prohibit the issuance of building permits for structures on lots in an unapproved subdivision. 
SECTION 4. - PROCEDURE 

4.01 - Preapplication Conference 
    Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with the City Manager or his duly authorized representatives concerning the ultimate land-use of the proposed development, the suitability of the location of the proposed subdivision, the most advantageous subdivision plan, the arrangement of streets, alleys and lots, and the layout of utility lines and availability of service from trunk mains. Conditional approval as to the general land-use of the proposed subdivision must be obtained from the City Manager prior to preparation of the preliminary plat. 
4.02 - Application Procedure 
A.  All property not subdivided into lots, blocks, and streets or property to be resubdivided, within the City or within its jurisdiction, shall hereafter be laid out under the direction of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or in the absence of such a Commission, by the City Council, or subject to its approval, and no other subdivision will be recognized by the City. Prior to the consideration of the plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Manager and his duly authorized representatives shall check the plat and make recommendations. 
B.  When a preliminary plat is filed with the City for review and approval, it shall be immediately forwarded to the City Engineer, or the City's Consulting Engineers, who will make a preliminary study of the plat. If it appears substantially complete, the engineers will make an on-site review of the preliminary plat to determine any apparent problems with development of the subject land. Any preliminary plat which is found to be incomplete or requires significant changes shall be returned to the subdivider for additions or changes before resubmission. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, or agent of any owner, to lay out, subdivide, or plat any land into lots, blocks, and streets within the City, or to sell property therein, which has not been laid out, subdivided, and platted according to these regulations and the rules of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
D.  No officer or employee of the City shall perform or cause to be performed, any work upon any streets or in any addition or subdivision of the City, unless all requirements of these regulations have been complied with by the owner of the addition or subdivision. 
E.  The City hereby defines its policy to be that the City will withhold improvements of any nature whatsoever, including the maintenance of streets, issuance of building permits, or furnishing of sewage facilities and water service, until the subdivision plat has been approved by the City Council. No improvements shall be initiated nor any contracts executed until this approval has been obtained. 
F.  Any owner or developer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its jurisdiction who may wish to effect a subdivision of such land shall conform to the general procedure described as follows: 
1.  The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the City Planning and Zoning Commission a preliminary plat for its study and recommendations. The preliminary plat shall then be submitted to the City Council for final action. 
2.  After approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the subdivider may then prepare a final plat of all or a portion of the land included in the preliminary plat for submission to and consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission for final recommendations. 
3.  Upon final action on any such final plat by the City Planning and Zoning Commission, the same shall be referred to the City Council, and the City Council shall, at its next succeeding meeting, consider such final plat for acceptance of the dedication of all public property therein set forth, provided that the plat shall in all things fully comply with the terms and provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  Upon acceptance of such plat and public properties by the City Council, the City shall immediately cause such plat to be recorded in the Deed Records of Montague County, Texas. The subdivider shall, however, pay to the City, in advance, the required fees for filing of such plat by the County Clerk. Recording of the final plat shall be the responsibility of the City Secretary. 
5.  The preliminary plat shall show the entire proposed subdivision, the various phases by which the subdivision will be developed, and lots that will be sold within each phase to be developed upon approval of the final plat by the City Council. As utilities, paving, and drainage improvements are installed on each consecutive block, building permits may be issued on a block by block basis. However, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by any building official until the phase is completed and accepted by the City. 
6.  The subdivider shall include in the conditions of sale for each lot within the subdivision a notice to the purchaser that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any residence constructed therein unless and until the City has approved and accepted that phase of the subdivision. 
7.  The subdivider shall understand that all proposed improvements are to be installed or constructed at his own cost and expense, unless otherwise noted herein. 
4.03 - Preliminary Plat 
[A.]  An application in writing, for the approval of the preliminary plat, together with six (6) prints, shall be filed with the City Manager at least thirty (30) consecutive calendar days before the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission, if the plat is to be considered at such meeting. No plat will be considered by the City until the prescribed filing fees have been paid. 
[B.]  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1? = 100'). The information to be included and the procedure for submittals are as follows: 
A.  Existing Features. 
1.  The boundary line (accurate in scale) of the tract to be subdivided. 
2.  The location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, existing permanent buildings, railroads, rights of-way and other important features, such as abstract lines, political subdivision or corporation lines, and school district boundaries. 
3.  Existing sewer mains, water mains, drainage culverts, or other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes, grades, and locations indicated. 
4.  Contours with intervals of two feet (2') or less, referred to mean sea level datum. 
5.  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
B.  New Features. 
1.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
2.  North point, scale, date, and approximate acreage of the proposed subdivision. 
3.  The names and addresses of the subdivider and of the engineer, surveyor, or planner. 
4.  The tract designation and other description according to the real estate records of the City or County Auditor and Recorder; also, designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision. 
5.  All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved in the deeds for the use of all property owners in the proposed subdivision, together with the purpose of conditions or limitations of such reservations. 
6.  The layout, names, and widths of proposed streets, alleys, and easements. 
7.  The layout, numbers, set-back lines, and approximate dimensions of proposed lots, blocks, parks, etc. 
C.  Utilities. A plan of the proposed water and sanitary sewer mains and proposed drainage facilities, including drainage areas, location of lines, inlets, culverts, bridges, and calculated run-off and points of concentration. 
D.  Location Map. A location map of the proposed subdivision on a scale of one inch to two thousand feet (1?= 2,000') showing existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares covering an area at least one (1) mile outside the proposed subdivision. 
E.  Cross-Sections. Typical cross-sections of proposed streets showing the width of pavement, type of pavement, and location and widths of sidewalks. 
F.  Approval Block. The following notice shall be placed on the face of each preliminary plat by the subdivider. 
"Preliminary Plat For Review Purposes Only" 
    The following certificates shall be placed on the preliminary plat by the subdivider. 
Recommended for Approval: __________Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission, 
City of Bowie, Texas Date Approved for Preparation of Final Plat: __________Mayor, City of Bowie, Texas Date  
G.  Submission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be furnished with six (6) prints of the preliminary plat along with a letter of transmittal stating briefly the type of streets, drainage facilities, sanitary facilities and water system thirty (30)days or more before the regular meeting date of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take action on any preliminary plat submitted to them, in accordance with these regulations, within thirty (30) days after said plat is filed with the City Manager and the prescribed filing fees are paid. The final action taken on the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council will not constitute in any manner the acceptance of the subdivision nor the improvements to be placed therein but will be merely an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
H.  Approval. The approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council shall be effective for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the approval date, unless reviewed by the City Council in the light of new or significant information, which would necessitate the revision of the preliminary plat, such revision being subject to the same procedures as the original preliminary plat. 
If a final plat for the subdivision, or a portion thereof, has not been submitted, or if a change in requirements has not occurred which would affect the preliminary plat, at the end of the one hundred eighty (180) days after approval, then the City Council will declare the preliminary plat null and void, unless the subdivider has requested and received an extension of time. 
4.04 - Final Plat 
    [A.] After approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, a final plat, prepared by a registered public surveyor bearing his seal, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    [B.] Six (6) direct prints and two (2) film positives of the final plat shall be executed and filed with the City Manager at least thirty (30) consecutive calendar days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which action is requested. No plat will be considered by the City until the prescribed filing fees have been paid. The final plat may constitute all or only a portion of the approved preliminary plat, but any portion thereof shall conform to all of the requirements of these regulations. If final plats are submitted for approval for portions or sections of the proposed subdivision, each portion or section shall carry the name of the entire subdivision but shall bear a distinguishing letter, number, or subtitle. Block letters shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision might be finally approved in sections. 
    [C.] Upon receipt of the required copies of the final plat, the detailed engineering plans and other required data, which shall include the prescribed filing fees, development offset costs, individual cost estimates for site improvements for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and paving improvements shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the following table. 
Item No. Description Unit Quantity Unit Price Cost  
[D.]  Also to be included as other required data, the developer shall submit additional detailed cost estimates for any improvements to be constructed in which the City may be asked to participate in a pro rata share of the project. These improvements shall be determined by the City and in accordance with the City's General Development Plan. 
[E.]  The Planning and Zoning Commission will either recommend approval or disapproval of the final plat and forward it to the City Council. Any action taken by the City Council shall be final, regardless of the previous action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[F.]  The final plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring twenty-two inches or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (22? or 24? x 36?) and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch (1? = 100'). 
[G.]  Other plats for filing with the County may be required and shall be furnished by the subdivider. 
[H.]  The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings, a metes and bounds description of the boundary (error of closure shall not exceed one (1) in ten (10) thousand for unadjusted boundary and one (1) in fifty (50) thousand for the plat boundary), exact acreage to hundredths, and the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract. One copy of the traverse closure sheet shall be enclosed. 
B.  True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, official monuments, or subdivision corner, which shall be accurately described on the plat. Municipal, township, county, or abstract lines shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings, where applicable. 
C.  An accurate location of the subdivision in reference to the deed records of the County which shall include the volume and page of the deed of the property to be subdivided. 
D.  The exact layout including: 
1.  Street and/or alley names; 
2.  The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, and points of curvature, length and bearing of the tangents; 
3.  All easements for right-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of the easements; and, 
4.  All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths and with bearings and angles to street and alley lines to the nearest second. 
E.  The accurate location, material, and approximate size of all monuments. 
F.  The accurate outline description of all property which is offered for dedication for public use, such as parks, etc., with the purpose indicated thereon, and all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
G.  Building set-back lines. 
H.  Private restrictions. 
I.  Name of the proposed subdivision. 
J.  Name and address of the subdivider. 
K.  North point, scale, and date. 
L.  Construction plans and profiles shall be drawn on sheets, measuring twenty-two inches or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (22? or 24? by 36?), shall be the same size as the final plat and shall include the following. 
1.  A plan and profile of each street with top of curb grades shown. Each sheet shall include north point, scale, date and bench mark description to mean sea level datum. Unless otherwise approved by the City, scales shall be one inch equals forty (40) feet (1? = 40') horizontally and one inch equals four feet, five feet, or six feet (1? = 4', 5', or 6') vertically. Each plan shall show the seal and signature of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared the plans. 
2.  The cross-sections of proposed streets showing the width of roadways and type of pavement and location and width of sidewalk. 
3.  A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated and showing locations of manholes, cleanouts, etc., and a plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves, fire hydrants, fittings, etc., in conformance with the applicable criteria presented in "SECTION 6-IMPROVEMENTS." Unless otherwise approved by the City, scales shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1? = 100') horizontally and one inch equals four feet, five feet, or six feet (1? = 4', 5', or 6') vertically. Each plan shall show the seal and signature of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared the plans. Each sheet shall include north point, scale, date, and benchmark description to mean sea level datum. 
4.  A plan and profile of the proposed storm sewers, showing hydraulic data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, outlet structures, etc., in conformance with the criteria as shown in "SECTION 6-IMPROVEMENTS." Unless otherwise approved by the City, scales shall be one inch equals forty feet (1? = 40') horizontally and one inch equals four feet, five feet, or six feet (1? = 4', 5', or 6') vertically. Each plan shall show the seal and signature of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared the plans. Each sheet shall include north point, scale, date, and bench mark description to mean sea level datum. 
M.  Certification shall be made by a registered public surveyor or licensed state land surveyor, registered in the State of Texas, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, and material are correctly shown. 
N.  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public, by the owner and lien holder of the land, and a complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated. 
O.  The following certificate shall be placed on the plat in a manner that will allow the filling in of the certificate by the proper parties. 
"Recommended for Approval: __________Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission, 
City of Bowie, Texas Date Approved and Accepted: __________Mayor, City of Bowie, Texas Date  
The undersigned, the City Secretary of the City of Bowie, Texas, hereby certifies that the foregoing final plat of the _______ Subdivision or Addition to the City of Bowie was submitted to the City Council on the ___ day of _______ 19___, and the Council, by formal action, then and there accepted the dedication of streets, alleys, parks, easements, public places, and water and sewer lines, as shown and set forth in and upon said plat, and said Council further authorized the Mayor to note the acceptance thereof by signing his name as hereinabove subscribed. 
Witness my hand this ___ day of _______, A.D., 19___ 
_____
City Secretary 
City of Bowie, Texas" 
P.  Certificate showing that all taxes and fees have been paid on the tract to be subdivided. 
[I.]  The final plat shall be recorded by the City Secretary in the office of the County Clerk of the County within thirty (30) days from and after the date of final acceptance by the City Council; the subdivider shall, however, pay to the City, in advance, the required fees for filing of such plat by the County Clerk. 
[J.]  Six (6) sets of plans and specifications for water, sanitary sewer, paving, and drainage improvements, prepared by a registered professional civil engineer, shall be approved and retained by the City prior to any construction in the subdivision. 
[K.]  The approval of the construction drawings by the City Council shall be effective for a period of two (2) years after the approval date, unless the subdivider has requested and received an extension of time. Construction drawings which have expired shall be resubmitted to the City for approval before any construction is begun. The design of the proposed improvements shall be based on the construction requirements which are in effect at the time of resubmittal. 
4.05 - Procedure for Short-Form Subdivision 
A.  Any subdivision or replat thereof which may be determined to fall within the following criteria may be termed a "short-form subdivision" and may receive an administrative approval following the compliance with the abbreviated procedures set forth herein. "Plats for record" or "lots of record" of undivided property shall be deemed to meet these criteria. 
1.  The land in question is bounded by legally subdivided land and does not exceed five (5) acres. 
2.  The subdivision or use of the land subdivided does not necessitate any appreciable alteration of utility installations, streets, alleys, or building setback lines. 
3.  The tracts so subdivided conforms in size and shape to the lots in the vicinity. 
B.  All design, engineering, improvements, and drawing information standards provided in these regulations applicable to all subdivisions shall be applicable to the short-form subdivisions. 
C.  If the City Engineer finds that the final plat meets all the provisions of these regulations, the final plat may receive an administrative approval. The final plat shall then be presented to the Commission and Council for review. 
D.  The final short-form plat shall be filed with the City accompanied with a fee as hereinafter prescribed. After all requirements have been met and signatures obtained, the plat and all other necessary instruments shall be filed for record with the County Clerk by the City Secretary. 
E.  After all requirements have been met and the final short-form plat properly filed, the subdivider shall be issued a building permit. 
SECTION 5 - GENERAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS 
    All requirements pertaining to lot size, yard size, dwelling size, lot coverage, height, parking, loading and screening contained in the current Zoning Ordinance of the City shall be adhered to for development under this ordinance. 

5.01 - Streets 
A.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the general plan of the community, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
B.  Where such is not shown in the general plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall: 
1.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of or conformance to an existing street impracticable; and, 
3.  Be laid out so that they shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles. 
C.  Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
D.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') shall be avoided. 
E.  Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the City's Thoroughfare Plan, and shall conform to the following: 
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width Residential (Minor) 60 feet Collector 60 feet Secondary Thoroughfare 70 feet Arterial or Major Thoroughfare 100 feet  
F.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where necessary to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations and where the City finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the street has already been provided adjacent to an area to be subdivided; the other remaining portion of the street shall be platted within such subdivision. Where part of a residential or collector street is being dedicated along a common property line, the first dedication shall be one-half (1/2) of the proposed street right-of-way plus five feet (5'). 
G.  Cul-de-sacs in residential additions shall not be longer than six hundred feet (600') from the nearest intersection, and in industrial areas they shall not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest intersecting street, and there shall be provided at the closed-end a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty-one feet (81') and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet (100'). 
H.  All streets shall be paved, and paving shall conform to the "SECTION 6 IMPROVEMENTS" of these regulations. 
I.  Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land-use, and the facilities in the area surrounding the land to be subdivided. Minimum grades shall be three tenths percent (0.3%) on concrete streets and five tenths percent (0.5%) on all other types of street paving. 
J.  Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the City or an approved equal, as approved by the City Manager. Street markers and erections will be at the expense of the subdivider. 
K.  Residential lots shall not face arterial streets or thoroughfares, and driveway or alley pavement cuts shall not be permitted on arterial streets. Alleys shall be provided along side and rear lot lines of arterial streets for rear entrance. 

5.02 - Alleys 
A.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the City may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
B.  Alleys shall be provided in all residential areas. 
C.  The minimum right-of-way width of any alley shall be twenty feet (20'). 
D.  Alley intersections and sudden changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, lot corners shall be cut off at least fifteen feet (15') on each tangent to permit safe vehicular movement. 
E.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities, as determined by the City. 
F.  Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial, industrial, or residential areas, fences shall only be constructed along the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five feet (5') of a point where the driveway would intersect the alley pavement at ninety degrees (90). Fences to be constructed along any driveway or perpendicular to alleys shall not be constructed within five feet (5') of the edge of the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 061885; Ord. No. 2000-07) 
5.03 - Lots 
A.  All lots shall conform to the regulations as set forth in the City's Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Corner lots in residential areas shall be wider than inside lots so as to allow an appropriate set-back from both streets. 
C.  Each lot shall face onto a public street or a private drive, except in a planned unit development. Lots with street frontage at both front and rear shall be avoided, except when backing onto a highway or thoroughfare. 
D.  Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
E.  The minimum width of any lot shall be fifty (50) feet and the minimum depth of any lot shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
F.  The minimum area of any subdivided lot shall be 6,500 square feet. 
5.04 - Easements 
A.  Easements across lots on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities when necessary and shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide. 
B.  Where a subdivision is bounded by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such water course, or of such width to provide for any future anticipated construction, plus a minimum of ten feet (10') on each side. 
5.05 - Blocks 
A.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to the following items. 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use proposed; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic; and 
4.  Limitations of topography. 
B.  Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length nor be less than five hundred feet (500') in length, except in certain instances where topographical features warrant special consideration. These limits shall be exceeded only upon specific approval by the City. Blocks longer than six hundred feet (600') shall be avoided in business districts. 
5.06 - Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Homes 
    Development of mobile home parks for locating mobile homes shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance regulating "Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Homes" and shall meet the approval of the City. 
5.07 - Survey Monuments and Lot Markers 
A.  Permanent Survey Reference Monuments. A concrete monument, six inches (6?) in diameter and twenty-four inches (24?) long, shall be placed on all boundary corners, block corners, curve points, and angle points. A copper pin 1/4-inch in diameter embedded at least three inches (3?) in the monument shall be placed at the exact intersection point on the monument. The monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction, and the top of the monument shall be not less than twelve inches (12?) below the finished grade of the development. 
[B.]  Lot markers shall be 1/2-inch reinforcing bar, eighteen inches (18?) long, or approved equal, and shall be placed at all lot corners flush with the ground, or below ground, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed. 
SECTION 6. - IMPROVEMENTS 

6.01 - Standard Specifications and Construction Details 
[A.]  All improvements within the City shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications and construction details of the City of Bowie, Texas, or, in the absence of such specifications and details, to meet the approval of the City. 
[B.]  All improvements, even in previously approved but still unimproved subdivisions, shall conform to the City's current regulations and specifications for street, drainage, and utility construction. 
[C.]  Upon recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council subsequent to Council approval, exceptions may be granted to subdivisions platted prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
6.02 - Street Paving 
A.  Concrete Curb and Gutter. 
1.  Concrete Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of a concrete batch design, providing a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch (p.s.i.). Forms for constructing said curb and gutter shall be approved by the City. Subgrade preparation and a minimum of two (2) inches of compacted crushed or broken aggregate base material shall extend behind the back of curb a minimum distance of two (2) feet as described here. 
(Ord. No. 061885; Ord. No. 2000-07) 
B.  Pavement Requirements-Flexible Base and Surface. 
1.  Residential, Collector, and Commercial Streets and Commercial and Industrial Alley Construction. The subdivider shall, at his own expense, pay for constructing all residential, commercial, and collector streets and commercial and industrial alleys within his subdivision and one-half (1/2) of all perimeter streets and alleys. 
A six inch (6?) minimum thickness of crushed or broken aggregate base material (excluding gravel aggregate) on a prepared subgrade shall be required. Said crushed or broken aggregate base material shall meet the following physical requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods listed below: 
Gradation (Tex-110-E) Retained on 
Square Sieve Percent 
% 2 Inch 0 No. 4 40-75 No. 40 75-90 Max Liquid Limit (Tex-104-E) 40 Max Plasticity Index (Tex-106-E) 10 Wet Ball Mill Max (Tex-116-E) 40 Min Percent Density (Tex-114-E) 100  
The subgrade shall be prepared to receive the base material in the following manner. The roadbed shall be excavated and shaped in conformity with the typical sections shown on the plans. All unstable and objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. The subgrade shall then be scarified to a minimum depth of six inches (6?) and recompacted to a minimum 95% density when tested in accordance with test method Tex-114-E and Tex-115-E. Where the plasticity index of the subgrade soil is twenty (20) or greater, stabilization of the subgrade, six-inches (6?) thick with two percent (2%) hydrated lime by weight shall be required. The subgrade shall be finished to the lines and grades established and in conformity with the typical sections shown on the plans. 
The six inch (6?) minimum thick crushed or broken aggregate base material shall be dumped on the prepared subgrade and then spread, sprinkled, mixed, rolled, and further manipulated to achieve a minimum compaction of 100 percent density as described above. The compacted base shall then be finished to the lines and grades established and in conformity with the typical sections shown on the plans. All irregularities, depressions, or weak spots which develop shall be corrected immediately by scarifying the affected area, adding suitable material, and reshaping and recompacting. After the finished base material has sufficiently cured, the surface of the base material shall be swept and then primed with 0.25 Gal/SY of MC-30 cutback asphaltic material further cutback by the addition of fifteen percent (15%) kerosene. The asphaltic material shall be applied with a self-propelled pressure distributor. 
After the prime coat has penetrated the surface of the base course, the surface shall be cleaned of all dirt, dust, or other deleterious matter. Then 0.30 Gal/SY of AC-5 asphalt cement containing two percent (2%) by weight latex additive (solids basis) shall be applied to the clean surface at a temperature between 375 degrees F and 390 degrees F by a self-propelled pressure distributor. Aggregate meeting the specifications for the first course shown below shall be immediately and uniformly applied at a rate of 1 CY/90 SY by a self-propelled continuous feed aggregate spreader and rolled at a rate of 1 HR/2000 SY by a pneumatic tire roller having a minimum weight of 25,000 LBS and providing a minimum ground contact pressure of 90 p.s.i. Upon completing the rolling of the first course, a second course of AC-5 with latex shall be applied at a rate of 0.40 Gal/SY as described above. Aggregate meeting the specifications for the second course shown below shall be immediately and uniformly applied at a rate of 1 CY/120 SY and rolled as described above at a rate of 1 HR/1200 SY. 
The aggregate used to construct the two course surface treatment described above shall be composed of clean, tough and durable particles of crushed gravel or stone containing less than five percent (5%) by weight soft particles and other deleterious materials when tested in accordance with test method Tex-217-F, Part I, and less than one percent (1%) fines when tested in accordance with test method Tex-217-F, Part II. The first course aggregate shall comply with the following gradation when tested in accordance with test method Tex-200-F, Part I: 
Percent by Weight Retained on 3/4? Sieve 0 Retained on 5/8 inch; Sieve 0-2 Retained on 1/2? Sieve 20-40 Retained on 3/8 ? Sieve 80-100 Retained on 1/4? Sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 Sieve 99-100  
The second course aggregate shall comply with the following gradation when tested in accordance with test method Tex-200-F, Part I: 
Percent by Weight Retained on 5/8 inch; Sieve 0 Retained on 1/2?c Sieve 0-2 Retained on 3/8 ? Sieve 20-35 Retained on No. 4 Sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 40 Sieve 99-100  
The second course aggregate shall have a minimum polish value of thirty (30) when tested in accordance with test method Tex-438-A. 
Any proposed pavement section differing from this section shall be fully documented by the design engineer to substantiate the fact that such alternate will provide an equivalent capacity for the pavement noted above and must be approved by the City. 
2.  Industrial Street and Major Thoroughfare Construction. The subdivider shall, at his own expense, pay for constructing all industrial streets within his subdivision and one-half (1/2) of all perimeter streets. On roadways, adjacent to the proposed subdivision, that are designated to be major thoroughfares, the subdivider shall be required to construct, at his own expense, one-half (1/2) of the street section with integral curbs on each side. Where major thoroughfares traverse a subdivision, the subdivider shall be required, at his own expense, to construct a twenty-two-foot (22') wide section on each side of the roadway. 
The construction of these roadways shall be in accordance with the procedures described above for residential, collector, and commercial streets, except that the six-inches (6?) of crushed or broken aggregate base material shall be replaced with eight inches (8?) of the same material. 
Any proposed pavement section differing from this section shall be fully documented by the design engineer to substantiate the fact that such alternate will provide an equivalent capacity for the pavement noted above and must be approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07 adopted 3-21-00) 
C.  Paving Width Requirements. 
1.  Residential Streets, Collector Streets, and Alleys. Residential street paving shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet (26') in width, measured between the faces of curbs. 
Collector street paving shall be a minimum of thirty-six feet (36') in width, measured between the faces of curbs, except that the width for collector streets in industrial and commercial areas must be a minimum of forty-four feet (44') in width, measured between the faces of the curbs. 
Alley paving shall be ten feet (10') wide in residential areas and sixteen feet (16') wide in commercial and industrial areas. Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley paving at that point. Paving radius where alleys intersect residential and collector streets shall be ten feet (10') and where alleys intersect thoroughfare streets the radius shall be fifteen feet (15'). 
2.  Major Thoroughfares. The following minimum pavement widths are set by this ordinance for the construction of thoroughfares as follows: 
Thoroughfare Classification Minimum 
Right-of-Way 
Width Minimum Pavement Width Between Faces of Curbs Class I - Major Thoroughfare 100' Two 33' Traffic Lanes divided by a 15' median Class II - Secondary Thoroughfare 70' Four 11' Traffic Lanes or Two 12' Traffic Lanes and Two 10' Parking Lanes Class III - Collector 60' Four 10' Traffic Lanes or Two 12' Traffic Lanes and Two 8' Parking Lanes Class IV - Collector 60' Two 18' Traffic Lanes or Two 10' Traffic Lanes and Two 8' Parking Lanes Class V - Minor 50' Two 13' Traffic Lanes or One 10' Traffic Lane and Two 8' Parking Lanes  
Note: The minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet (5'). 
3.  Street returns 
a.  The minimum radius for all street returns shall be twenty feet (20'). 
b.  Returns for driveways on residential streets shall be ten feet (10'), commercial and industrial driveway returns shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') and a maximum of twenty (20') except in special cases. 
D.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  Longitudinal Pavement Slopes. The minimum longitudinal standard alley pavement slopes shall be as set forth in Section 5.01, I. 
The maximum longitudinal slopes are as follows: 
Type of Street Maximum Slope Class I - Major Thoroughfare 6% Class II - Secondary Thoroughfare 6% Class III - Collector 8% Class IV - Collector 8% Class V - Minor (Residential) 10%  
Maximum grades for alleys shall be eight percent (8%) within thirty feet (30') of its intersection with a street and fourteen percent (14%) elsewhere. 
2.  Transverse Pavement Slopes. The transverse pavement slope for all streets shall consist of a 0.02 FT/FT cross-slope from roadway centerline to gutter. 
3.  Lime Stabilization. Hydrated lime shall be spread uniformly over the soil to be treated and sprinkled to the proper moisture content. The soil, lime, and water shall be mixed until a homogeneous product is obtained that is free of clods and lumps. The mixture will then be immediately rolled to the required compaction. 
(Ord. No. 061885; Ord. No. 2000-07) 
6.03 - Sidewalks 
[A.]  Concrete sidewalks shall have a width of not less than four feet (4') and thickness of not less than four inches (4?) and shall be constructed of two thousand (2,000) p.s.i. concrete on both sides of all streets and thoroughfares within the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot (1') from the property line within the street or thoroughfare right-of-way and shall extend along the street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends. Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curb in residential areas will be considered where driveway entrances are constructed from the rear of lots on each side of the street for the full length of the block or where mountable curbs are installed. In these instances, the sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide. 
[B.]  Sidewalks in Commercial areas shall be a minimum width of five feet (5') or extend from the back of the curb to the building line as required by the City. 
[C.]  Sidewalks in Industrial areas and Planned Developments will be as required by the City. 
[D.]  All concrete for sidewalks shall be placed on two-inch (2?) sand cushion and shall be reinforced with 6 x 6 No. 10 gauge welded wire fabric. 
[E.]  Longitudinal slope of sidewalks shall be that of the curb adjacent to the sidewalk. The transverse slope of the sidewalk shall be 1/4-inch per foot starting at the back of the curb. The maximum ground slope from the edge of the sidewalk on the property line side shall not exceed eleven percent (11%). If it does exceed eleven percent (11%), a retaining wall, that is acceptable to the City, shall be provided on the property line. 




6.04 - Storm Sewer 
A.  General. 
1.  Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for storm sewer improvements to be constructed and shall show the locations, sizes, grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed pipe, inlets, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances. Each sheet of the plans and profiles shall bear the seal and signature of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared them. 
2.  The subdivider shall pay for the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development of his subdivision, including any necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required easements. 
a.  An enclosed storm sewer shall be provided in all areas where the quantity of the accumulated storm run-off does not exceed two hundred (200) cubic feet per second (c.f.s.). 
b.  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than two hundred (200) c.f.s. and less than five hundred (500) c.f.s., either an enclosed storm sewer system or a concrete-lined channel shall be constructed. 
c.  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than five hundred (500) c.f.s., the drainage improvements may be either an enclosed storm sewer system, a concrete-lined channel, or an earthen channel. Earthen channels shall be designed according to the criteria as set forth herein for open channel sections. 
B.  Rational Method. The design of storm drainage improvements in the City shall be based on flood discharges determined from the Rational Method. The formula for calculating storm flows in this manner is: 
Q = CIA. where, 
Q is the storm flow at a given point, measured in cubic feet per second; 
C is the percentage of rainfall on a given area that flows off as free surface water; 
I is the average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period equal to the time of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the first inlet or given point on the storm sewer; 
A is the area in acres tributary to the design point. 
C.  Run-off Coefficient "C". The run-off coefficient, which considers the slope of the terrain, the character of the land-use, the length of overland flow, and the imperviousness of the drainage area, shall be determined from the ultimate land development plan of the City. The run-off coefficient for the appropriate land uses shall be as follows: 
Commercial Areas 0.90 Industrial Areas 0.70 Residential Areas 0.45 Apartment Areas 0.70 Park Areas 0.35  
D.  Rainfall Intensity "I". The rainfall intensity frequency curves, which are shown on Plat 1, are plotted from data published by the U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bureau, Technical Paper No. 40. 
    The intensity, I, in the formula Q = CIA, is determined from these curves by arriving at a time of concentration and adapting a storm frequency upon which to base the drainage improvements . 
1.  Time of Concentration. The time of concentration, which is the time of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the first inlet in the system, or given point on the storm sewer, consists of the time required to flow overland plus the time required to flow in the gutter to the inlet, plus the time of flow in the storm sewer. A minimum time of concentration of fifteen (15) minutes shall be used for all areas except commercial areas, and a minimum time of concentration of ten (10) minutes shall be used in commercial areas. A nomograph, shown on Plate 2, is attached for estimating the time of concentration. 
2.  Storm Frequency. Recommended design storm frequencies for the storm drainage improvements in the City are shown in a table as follows: 
Type of Facility Description of Area to be Drained Maximum 
Time of 
Concentration 
(Minutes) Design 
Frequency 
(Years) Type of Facility Description of Area to be Drained Maximum 
Time of 
Concentration 
(Minutes) Design 
Frequency 
(Years) Sag Inlets Any type of area 30 25 At Grade Inlets Any type of area 30 5 Storm Sewer Lines Any type of area 30 10 Culverts, Bridges, Channels, and Creeks Any type of area less than 100 Ac. 30 25 Culverts, Bridges, Channels, and Creeks Any type of area greater than 100 Ac., but less than 1,000 Ac. 45 50 Culverts, Bridges, Channels, and Creeks Any type of area greater than 1,000 Ac. 60 100  
    * 
When the maximum of time concentration or area to be drained is exceeded, the design shall be based on a fifty-year frequency. 
    ** 
When the maximum time of concentration or area to be drained is exceeded, the design shall be based on a one hundred-year frequency. 
    *** 
Whenever, in a storm sewer system, an inlet is located at a low point so that flow in excess of the storm sewer capacity would be directed onto private property, the design frequency shall be increased beyond twenty-five (25) years. If the inlet location is such that overflow could cause damage or serious inconvenience, it may be desirable to increase the design frequency to as much as one hundred (100) years. 
    **** 
When the maximum time of concentration of sixty (60) minutes is exceeded on any area to be drained, the design shall be based on a one hundred-year frequency having a maximum time duration of sixty (60) minutes. 
E.  Area. The area used in determining flows by the "Rational Method" shall be calculated by subdividing a map into drainage areas within the basin contributing storm water run-off to the system. 
F.  Spread of Water. During the design storm, the quantity of storm water that is allowed to collect in the streets before being intercepted by a storm drainage system is referred to as the "spread of water." In determining the limitations for carrying the storm water in the street, the ultimate development of the street shall be considered. The use of the street for carrying storm water shall be limited to the following. 
SPREAD OF WATER 
Major Thoroughfares (divided) One (1) traffic lane on each side to remain clear. Thoroughfares (not divided) Two (2) traffic lanes to remain clear. Collector streets One (1) traffic lane to remain clear. Residential streets Six-inch (6?) depth of flow at curb, or no lanes completely clear.  
    Curves are provided on Plate 3A for determining the spread of water for certain gutter slopes, gutter discharge, and pavement crown. Also provided are nomographs, Plates 3B and 3C, for determining the capacity of parabolic gutters for various width streets. 
    The length of inlet opening for each cubic feet per second of gutter flow is as follows: 
Street Guide Length of Inlet Opening 
in Feet Per C.F.S. Less than 2% 1.0 2% to 3.5% 1.5 Greater than 3.5% 2.0  
G.  Storm Sewer Design. Storm water run-off in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets shall be intercepted in inlets and carried away in a storm sewer system. Storm sewer capacity shall be calculated by Manning's Formula: 
Q = 1.486 / n AR 2/3 S1/2 where: 
    Q ;hg;is the discharge in cubic feet per second; 
    A ;hg;is the cross-sectional area of flow in square feet; 
    R ;hg;is the hydraulic radius in feet; 
    S ;hg;is the slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot; and, 
    n ;hg;is the coefficient of roughness (n = 0.013 for concrete pipe and 0.015 for poured culverts). 
    In the design of the storm sewer system the elevation of the hydraulic gradient of the storm sewer shall be a minimum of one and one-half feet (1.5') below the elevation of the adjacent street gutter. 
    Storm sewer pipe sizes shall be so selected that the average velocity in the pipe will not exceed fifteen feet (15') per second nor be less than three feet (3') per second. 
    Storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete culvert pipe conforming to ASTM Description C76 Class III and shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18?) in diameter. 
H.  Open Channel Design. Storm water run-off in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets in developed areas and run-off in undeveloped areas may be carried in open channels (not in the street right-of-way). Open channel capacity shall be calculated by Manning's Formula, and roughness coefficients shall be as follows: 
Type of Lining Roughness 
Coefficient 
"n" Maximum Permissible 
Mean Velocity Earth (Bermuda Grass) 0.035 8 ft. per sec. Earth (Nonvegetated) 0.030 5 ft. per sec. Concrete-lined 0.015 15 ft. per sec. Weathered Rock 0.030 15 ft. per sec.  
    Open Channels shall be constructed with a trapezoidal cross-section and shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1 in earth and 1.5:1 when lined with concrete. 
    Concrete lining in channels shall have a minimum thickness of six inches (6?) and shall be reinforced with 12 x 12-W4 x W4 welded wire fabric with a nominal diameter of 0.225 inches and a nominal weight of 0.136 lbs./L.F. 
    Concrete-lined channels shall have a reinforced concrete toe wall constructed along the base and side slopes of the lined channel and shall have a minimum vertical depth of two feet (2'). A horizontal concrete section, one foot (1;ft) in width, shall be constructed between the top of the channel lining and the toe wall. 
    The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way on all earth and concrete-lined channels of sufficient width to provide for excavation of the open channel of proper width, plus ten feet (10') on each side to permit ingress and egress for maintenance. 
I.  Culvert Design. At locations of creek crossings with proposed roadway improvements, it is sometimes necessary to receive and transport storm water under the roadway in culverts. The quantity of flow shall be determined by the Rational Method, and the capacity of the culvert shall be calculated by Manning's Formula. 
    Design of culverts shall include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as well as downstream velocities and flooding conditions. Consideration shall be given to the discharge velocity from culverts, and the following limitations are allowed. 
CULVERT DISCHARGE - VELOCITY LIMITATIONS 
Culvert Discharging Onto Maximum Allowable 
Velocity (f.p.s.) Earth 6 Sod Earth 8 Paved or riprap apron 15 Shale 10 Rock 15  
    Generally, all culverts shall be designed with a free outfall, and the following head losses shall govern the design of the culvert. 
1.  Frictional Head Loss 
h f = S f L, where 
S f = Slope of frictional gradient in feet per foot; and, 
L = Length of culvert in feet 
2.  Head Loss Due to Change in Velocity 
h v = V 2 2 - V 1 2 , where 2g 2g  
V 2 = Velocity in culvert; 
V 1 = Velocity in channel upstream from culvert; and 
g = Acceleration due to gravity 
3.  Head Loss at Upstream Entrance to Culvert Due to Entrance and Change in Section 
h e = V 2 2 where V 1 is equal to or less than six fee per second 2g h e = V 2 2 - 0.5 V 1 2 , where V 1 is greater than six feet per second where V 1 is equal to or less than six fee per second 2g 2g  
6.05 - Water Mains 
    Water systems shall have sufficient number of outlets and shall be of sufficient size to furnish adequate domestic water, to furnish fire protection to all lots, and to conform with the City's Water Plan. The developer shall pay for all costs associated with the water system within the boundaries of the subdivision and the expense of extending the existing system to his boundaries. Oversizing required by the City will be pro-rated and cost-shared by the City on that basis. The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of water mains proposed. 
A.  In zoning districts commonly referred to as "Residential Sections," the minimum size of water main shall be six-inch (6?) diameter. The distribution system shall be gridiron with minimum size six-inch (6?) diameter mains at intervals not to exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200). Where intervals between "cross-connecting" mains must exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200), or where dead-ends must exist, eight-inch (8?) diameter or larger mains shall be installed. 
B.  Eight-inch (8?) diameter and larger mains shall be installed in all streets in zoning districts commonly referred to as "Commercial" or "Industrial," with minimum size eight-inch (8?) intersecting mains every six hundred feet (600'). Where dead-ends must exist, eight-inch (8?) diameter or larger mains shall be installed. The minimum limits set forth in the above shall not be exceeded except upon the specific approval by the City Engineer, City Building Official, and the Fire Chief, but in no event shall these requirements be less that [than] the minimum required by the State Board of Insurance or the Fire Prevention and Engineering Bureau of Texas. 
C.  All water mains shall be constructed in dedicated street rights-of-way or easements. 
D.  All water mains twelve-inch (12?) in diameter and smaller may be either ductile iron pipe, thickness class 50 minimum, or polyvinyl chloride pipe as specified below, unless otherwise specified. 
E.  The ductile iron pipe shall have a single rubber gasket joint, shall have a cement mortar lining of the "Enameline" type, or approved equal, and shall have a minimum cover of forty-two inches (42?). Water mains fourteen-inches (14?) and larger may be either ductile iron pipe, thickness Class 60 minimum with cement mortar lining, or reinforced concrete steel cylinder pipe, Class 150 minimum. Ductile iron pipe shall be required in all bores, in unstable soil conditions (expansive clays, unstable subsoil), in or near creeks, or where lines must be installed at shallow depths (less than 36?). 
    The ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal molds in accordance with the applicable specifications of ANSI A21.5 (AWWA C151) and Federal Specification WWP-421c. The joint details shall be in accordance with the applicable specifications of ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111). 
    Prior to approval of plans and specifications, the subdivider shall perform a soil survey to establish the corrosive characteristics of the soil at, and along, the alignment of the proposed water mains. If the corrosive characteristics are found to be excessive, then an approved polyethylene encasement or wrapping shall be installed to protect the ductile iron pipe. 
F.  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe may be installed for water mains in the public water utility system. 
1.  PVC Pipe and Fittings. PVC pipe shall be new, manufactured in the United States of America, and shall conform to the current specifications of AWWA C900, PVC pipe with cast iron outside dimensions and with rubber ring joints. PVC water pipe shall be listed by Underwriters Laboratories and approved for use in cities and towns of Texas by the State Board of Insurance. The rigid PVC pipe shall bear the seal of approval (or "NSF" mark) of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory for potable water pipe. 
Provision must be made for contraction and expansion at each joint with a rubber ring and an integral thickened bell as part of each joint. Pipe and fittings must be assembled with a nontoxic lubricant. Pipe shall be made from NSF approved class 12454-A or B PVC compound conforming to a minimum ASTM resin specification D1784. PVC pipe shall be Class 150 (DR 18) and meet the physical dimensions as shown on the following list. 
Nominal Size 
(Inches) Outside Diameter 
(Inches) Class 150 (DR 18) 
Nominal Wall Thickness 
(Inches) 6 6.90 0.406 8 9.05 0.533 10 11.10 0.654 12 13.20 0.777  
PVC pipe shall be designed for a minimum 150 p.s.i. water pressure, plus 35 p.s.i. surge allowance. Service connections shall not be made by direct tapping for service lines; a brass tapping saddle shall be used to tap service lines. 
2.  PVC Pipe Special Embedment. PVC pipe shall be placed on a four-inch (4?) layer of crushed rock or rounded gravel bedding material. 
The trench shall be backfilled with a minimum of six inches (6?) of sand on the sides and twelve inches (12?) (loose) over the top of the pipe and consolidated to a minimum of 90 percent standard proctor density. This is basic-Class "B" as defined by ASCE Manual No. 37 and AWWA C900-75. Final backfill is to conform to Section W.4.16.1, or Section W.4.16.2. The Class "B" embedment material is further defined as follows: 
a.  95% of Material Passing 3/4? Screen. 
b.  95% of Material Retained on No. 4 Screen. 
Tracer tape, blue in color, similar to Terra Tape "D" DETECTABLE, as supplied by Griffolyn Co., Inc., Houston, Texas, shall be installed in the backfill material over the top of the PVC non-metallic pipe in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
G.  Fittings shall be either gray or ductile cast iron with mechanical joints or single rubber gasket slip joint and shall be cement-lined and coated inside and out with a seal-coat of bituminous material, unless the pipe material is reinforced concrete steel cylinder, in which case special fittings shall be furnished. All gray or ductile cast iron fittings shall conform to the applicable standards and specifications of ANSI, latest edition. 
H.  Gate valves shall conform to American Water Works Association Specification C500, latest edition. Valves shall be designed for a minimum water working pressure of 150 pounds per square inch. Gate valves shall have a clear waterway equal to the full nominal diameter of the valve and shall be opened by turning to the left. Each valve shall have the maker's initials, pressure rating, and year in which manufactured cast in the body. 
    All valves buried in the ground shall be provided with cast-iron valve boxes of proper dimensions to fit over the valve bonnets and to extend to such elevation at or slightly above the finished street grade or ground line, as approved by the City. Tops shall be complete with covers and shall be adjustable. Valve boxes shall be set vertical and concentric with the valve stem. Any valve box which has so moved from its original position as to prevent the application of the valve key shall be satisfactorily reset by the developer at his own expense. A concrete pad of the dimensions, 3'-0? x 3'-0? x 6?, shall be poured around all valve boxes, unless otherwise directed by the City. 
I.  Fire hydrants shall conform strictly to AWWA Standard Specifications for Fire Hydrants for Ordinary Water Works Service, C502 latest edition, except for changes or additions specifically outlined as follows: 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place all of every lot within a radius of five hundred feet (500') in residential areas, but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than six hundred feet (600') be made from the fire hydrant to cover all of every lot within the subdivision or tract under development. 
2.  Fire hydrants shall be located in commercial and industrial areas so that all of every lot shall be within a radius of three hundred feet (300'), but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than four hundred feet (400') be made in order to adequately afford fire protection to the building or buildings. 
3.  All fire hydrants shall have one (1) pumper nozzle and two (2) hose nozzles with the City's standard threads, shall have a main barrel valve opening of not less than five inches (5?), and shall be placed on connecting mains of not less than six inches (6?) in diameter. Six-inch (6?) gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrants leads. 
4.  The bonnets of all fire hydrants shall be painted by the developer in accordance with the size of the water main to which the fire hydrant lead is attached. 
a.  6-inch Main-Aluminum 
b.  8-inch Main-Royal Blue 
c.  10-inch Main and larger-Standard Yellow 
The body and outlet caps of all hydrants shall be painted a silver color with an approved aluminum paint. 
5.  The operating nut shall be designed to prevent seepage of rain or sleet and the accumulation of dust around the revolving nut. The operating nut shall conform to the standards now in use by the City. The hydrant valve shall open by turning to the left. 
6.  The hydrant top or bonnet shall be free draining and of a type that will maintain the operating mechanism in readiness to use under freezing conditions. It shall be so designated as to make tampering difficult and shall be provided with convenient means to afford lubrication to insure ease of operation and the prevention of wear and corrosion. 
7.  The body of the hydrant shall be equipped with a breakable flange, or breakable cast-iron flange bolts, just above the grade-line. 
8.  All hydrants shall be of such design as will permit their extension without excavating in case of future grade changes. 
9.  The complete hydrant shall be of such design that when the hydrant barrel is broken through traffic collision, it may be replaced without excavating or breaking the pavement. The barrel and operating mechanism shall be so designed that in case of accident, damage or breaking of the hydrant above or near the grade level, the main valve will remain reasonably tight against leakage or flooding. 
10.  Changes in shape or size of the waterway shall be accomplished by means of easy curves. The junctions of hose or pumper nozzles with the barrel shall be rounded to ample radii. Exclusive of the main valve opening, the net area of the waterway of the barrel and foot piece of the smallest part shall be not less than 150 percent of that of the net opening of the main valve. 
11.  Hydrants shall be provided with an automatic and positively operating, noncorrodible drain or drip valve so as to drain the hydrant completely when the main valve is shut. A drain valve operating by springs or gravity is not acceptable. 
12.  Operating stems whose threads are not located in the barrel or waterway shall be made of genuine wrought iron or steel and shall be bronze bushed where passing through the stuffing box. Operating threads must be sealed against contact with the water at all times regardless of open or closed position of main valve. All operating stems shall be coupled opposite the break flange with a breakable coupling or coupled in such a way as to part without breaking. 
13.  Unless otherwise specified by the City, hydrants shall be furnished with ?O" ring seals. 
14.  The hydrant head shall be constructed so that it may be rotated to face the nozzles in any desired direction. The developer shall rotate the fire hydrant in such a direction to best serve the City. 
15.  Hydrants closing with the pressure must have a bronze cap nut to seal the bottom end of stem threads against contact with water. 
16.  If required by the City, the developer shall furnish drawings with complete detailed dimensions of the hydrant proposed for the subdivision. 
17.  Fire hydrants shall be placed at all locations shown in the plans. Each hydrant shall be set upon a slab of stone or concrete not less than four inches (4?) thick and not less than one (1) square foot of surface area. Where solid rock exists in the bottom of the trench and same is excavated to the proper depth to form a foundation for the hydrant, the slab of stone or concrete above specified may permitted. 
The hydrant shall be set perpendicular, and to the proper depth, and shall be carefully and substantially blocked against firm trench walls using Class 2,000 concrete as herein specified. 
There shall be placed around the base of the hydrant not less than seven (7) cubic feet of sound broken stone or clean gravel, or other suitable material, to provide reservoir capacity so that the hydrant will completely drain when closed. 
18.  The above mentioned fire hydrants in residential, commercial, and industrial tracts of real estate located in the City shall be installed and operable prior to the erection of any building in which any combustible material is used as determined by the Fire Chief of the City. 
19.  The owner of any commercial or industrial tract property contemplated for development under this ordinance on which fire hydrants and water mains are to be installed shall provide easements to the City whereby the Fire, Police and Water Utilities Departments of the City shall have ready ingress and egress to, from, and across such property to any location on such property when necessary to extinguish a fire or to prevent the occurrence of a fire or to maintain, service and inspect such fire hydrants and water mains that may be installed or when such access to and from said property is essential to the preservation of life or property. 
6.06 - Sanitary Sewers 
    Sanitary sewer facilities shall be furnished and installed to adequately service the subdivision and shall conform to the City's Sanitary Sewer Plan. The developer shall pay for all costs associated with the sewer system within the boundaries of the subdivision and the expense of extending the existing system to his boundaries. Oversizing required by the City will be prorated and cost-shared by the City on that basis. The adequacy of the sewerage facilities provided by the subdivider shall be determined by the City. 
A.  Materials. Sanitary sewer mains may be vitrified clay sewer pipe (extra strength), conforming to ASTM C700, latest revision, or cement-lined bituminous coated ductile iron pipe or polyethylene-lined ductile iron pipe. 
    As approved by the City, sanitary sewer mains may also be constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe conforming to the specifications of ASTM D 3034, SDR 35, or equal. Joints for the PVC pipe and fittings shall be compression rubber gasket joints. The bell shall consist of an integral wall section with factory installed ring securely locked in bell groove to provide positive seal under all installation conditions. Fittings and accessories shall be manufactured and furnished by the pipe supplier, or approved equal, and shall have bell and/or spigot configuration identical to that of the pipe. 
    Connections shall be made with a fabricated fitting. Filed glued connections are not allowed. When PVC pipe passes through a manhole wall, asbestos cement sleeves with a rubber ring joint shall be used to provide a positive water tight connection. 
    The PVC pipe shall be placed on a four-inch (4?) layer of crushed rock or rounded gravel bedding material. The trench shall be backfilled with a minimum of six inches (6?) of sand on the sides and twelve inches (12?) loose sand over the top of the pipe and consolidated to a minimum of ninety (90) percent standard proctor density. This is basic-Class "B" embedment as defined by ASCE Manual No. 37 and AWWA C900-75 and ASTM D2321, with five percent (5%) maximum Mandrell Test to be performed. Final backfill is to conform to Section S.4.17. The Class "B" embedment material is further defined as follows: 
1.  95% of Material Passing 3/4? Screen. 
2.  95% of Material Retained on No. 4 Screen. 
    The encasement, embedment, and backfill requirements for PVC pipe, vitrified clay pipe, and ductile iron pipe shall conform to the standard details and specifications of the City. 
B.  Minimum Size Main. The minimum diameter of sewer mains shall be eight inches (8?). 
C.  Pipe Joints. All vitrified clay sanitary sewer pipe joints shall be of the premolded type conforming to ASTM Designation C425. 
D.  Location. Wherever possible, sewers shall be located in the alleys or easements and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') to six and one-half feet (6-1/2') deep to the invert. 
E.  Alignment and Grades. All sewers shall be laid in straight alignment where possible with a uniform grade between the manholes. In those cases where horizontal curvature must be utilized to serve a particular area, the minimum radius of curvature shall be one hundred feet (100'). Grades and appurtenances of sanitary sewers shall conform to the requirements of the Texas Department of Health, and the following are the minimum slopes which should be provided for a velocity of at least two feet (2') per second; however, slopes greater than these are desirable. 
Sanitary 
Sewer - Diameter Minimum Slope in 
Feet Per 100 Feet 4-inch (service mains) 1.00 6-inch 0.50 8-inch 0.33 10-inch 0.25 12-inch 0.20 15-inch 0.15 18-inch 0.11 21-inch 0.09 24-inch 0.08 27-inch 0.06 30-inch 0.055 36-inch 0.045  
F.  Infiltration. Prior to the acceptance, the sanitary sewers shall be subject to leakage tests. The leakage outward or inward (exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per inch of the pipe diameter per mile per twenty-four (24) hours for any section of the system. 
G.  Lift Stations. All lift stations shall be designed and constructed with two or more sewage pumps, and the stations shall be capable of pumping the design maximum flow with the largest pump out of service. Detailed design data, plans, and specifications of the pumps shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to the purchase and installation of the pumps. 
H.  Force Mains. All force mains shall be ductile cast iron pipe, minimum Class 150, with rubber gasket joint, and shall have a cement mortar lining, with a seal-coat of bituminous material. 
    At design for average flows, a cleansing velocity of at least two feet (2') per second shall be maintained. Where necessary, automatic air relief valves shall be placed at high points in the force main to prevent air locking. 
I.  Manholes. Manholes shall be placed at points of change in alignment, grade, or size of sewer, the intersection of sewers, and the end of all sanitary sewer mains that will that will be extended at a later date. 
    Maximum manhole spacing for sewers with straight alignment and uniform grades should be determined so as to assure continuous operation based on available cleaning equipment. The required design standards shall be as follows: 
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sewer Pipe 
Size Manhole Diameters Maximum Distance 
Between Manholes 6? 4'-0? 400 feet 8? 4'-0? 650 feet 10? 4'-0? 800 feet 12? 4'-6? 900 feet 15? 4'-6? 1,000 feet 18? 5'-0? 1,100 feet 21? 5'-0? 1,200 feet 24? 5'-0? 1,300 feet 30? 6'-0? 1,500 feet  
J.  Cleanouts. Standard cleanouts shall be constructed at the ends of all sanitary sewers. 
6.07 - Utility Services 
A.  All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner so as to eliminate the necessity for disturbing the street and the alley pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and drainage structures when connections are made. 
B.  The subdivider shall provide separate service lines for water and sanitary sewerage to each lot or point of metering. 
C.  Water service lines shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4?) Type "K" copper and shall be provided with a corporation at the main and a curb stop located at least two feet (2') outside of curb with cover not to exceed one and one-half feet (1-1/2'). 
D.  Sanitary sewer service lines shall have a minimum diameter of four-inches (4?), shall meet the same requirements for sanitary sewers described above, shall be constructed from the main to the lot property line using wyes and necessary bends, and shall have a minimum cover at the property line of four feet (4'), where possible. 
E.  The subdivider shall place a suitable marker at the point where said service lines are stubbed out so that these lines can be easily located for connection by the City. Suitable markers shall be "W" for water and "S" for sewer stamped in top of curb or edge of pavement if no curb is constructed. Letters shall have a minimum height of two inches (2?) and a minimum width of two inches (2?). 
F.  The subdivider shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of their respective utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of such cost. 
G.  The use of underground electrical services and transmission lines is encouraged for all subdivisions, where feasible. 
6.08 - Street Lighting 
    Street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook. Round tapered standards with bracket arms shall be used and lighting levels, as recommended, shall be provided for very light traffic in residential areas, medium traffic on collector streets, and heavy traffic on thoroughfares. In no instance shall the spacing between street lights exceed four hundred feet (400'). 
    Initial cost of installation of street lighting shall be borne by the subdivider. 
6.09 - Record Drawings (As-Built Plans) 
    Within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the subdivision, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the City a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer improvements showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an "As-Built" stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, one reproducible drawing of the utility plan sheets, containing the As-Built information, shall be submitted to the City. 
    No final acceptance of the subdivision will be made by the City until this requirement has been made to the satisfaction of the City. It shall be the responsibility of the City to furnish copies of the as-built plans to the appropriate state agencies. 
SECTION 7. - FILING FEES AND CHARGES 

7.01 - [Payment Required] 
    The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid to the City when any plat is tendered to the Planning and Zoning Commission or any other authorized board or agency of the City. Each of the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the Planning and Zoning Commission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee or fees shall have been paid to the officer designated therein. 
7.02 - [Schedule] 
    The City Manager, his deputies or assistants shall calculate the basic fees and charges for plat review in accordance with the following schedule. 
A.  Residential Preliminary Plats - $100.00 per plat, plus $3.00 per lot. 
B.  Residential Final Plats - $200.00 per plat, plus $4.00 per lot. 
C.  Short-Form Plats - notices to be sent to adjacent property owners required-$190.00; notices to be sent to adjacent property owners not required-$140.00. 
(Ord. No. 2003-09, Sec.1, 9-16-03) 
D.  For approval of multiple dwelling areas, commercial or industrial tracts, both preliminary and final plats shall have the following fees. 
[1]  Less than 5-Acre Tract, each plat ..... $100.00 
[2]  5 But Less than 25-Acre Tract, each plat ..... $350.00 
[3]  25 But Less than 100-Acre Tract, each plat ..... $750.00 
[4]  Over 100-Acre Tract, each plat ..... $750.00 
plus per acre in excess of 100 acres for each plat ..... $5.00 
E.  Mobile Home Parks for Locating Mobile Homes: 
Preliminary Plats-$100.00 per plat, plus $3.00 per unit 
Final Plats-$200.00 per plat, plus $4.00 per unit. 
F.  These fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission and whether the plat is approved or denied by the City Council. 
G.  Before commencing with construction there shall be a fee paid to the City equal to two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the total cost for paving. Said fee shall cover the cost of quality control required by the standard specifications and performed by outside laboratories. After determination of the actual cost of said quality control paid to the outside laboratories by the City, the difference, if any, between the two and one-half percent (2.5%) fee and the actual cost shall be refunded to the subdivider. If the actual cost exceeds the two and one-half percent (2.5%) fee, no additional fee shall be paid by the subdivider. 
H.  The subdivider shall be charged a development offset cost per lot for payment of a proportionate share of capacity in all major facilities that the City will need to add to serve the additional lots. This development offset cost will cover such improvements as elevated and ground storage reservoirs, pumping stations, water treatment plants, raw water supply lines, major transmission mains, outfall sewer mains, and wastewater treatment plants. 
    The amount of the development offset cost per lot calculated by the City is $1,500.00, and is based upon current construction costs for the development of the improvements. 
    The City shall review the amount of the development offset cost annually and, at such time deemed appropriate, the amount of the development offset cost shall be adjusted to reflect the current construction costs. 
SECTION 8. - MAINTENANCE BOND 
    The subdivider shall furnish a good and sufficient maintenance bond in the amount of five percent (5%) of the contract price or in such amount as approved by the City with a reputable and solvent corporate surety, in favor of the City, to indemnify the City against any repairs which may become necessary to any part of the construction work performed in connection with the subdivision, arising from defective workmanship or materials used therein, for a full period of one (1) year from the date of final acceptance of the entire project. Final acceptance will be withheld until said maintenance bond is furnished to the City. 
SECTION 9. - EXTENSION TO EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION 

9.01 - [Extension of Provisions] 
    The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Bowie, Texas, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, is hereby extended to all of the area lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Bowie, Texas, and the rules and regulations within said Subdivision Regulations Ordinance governing plats and subdivision of land shall be applicable to such area within said extraterritorial jurisdiction from and after the date of final passage of this ordinance. 
9.02 - [Conformity Required] 
    No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Bowie, Texas, except in conformity with the provisions of this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance. 
SECTION 10. - OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

10.01 - Changes and Variations 
    These rules and regulations are the standard requirements of the City of Bowie, Texas. A suspension of any of these rules and regulations may be granted by the City Council, upon a showing that there are special circumstances of [or] conditions affecting the property in question, that enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will deprive the applicant of a substantial property right, and that such suspension, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property rights in the vicinity. 
10.02 - Penalty 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable, accordingly. 
10.03 - All Conflicting Ordinances Repealed 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
10.04 - Severability 
    If any section or part of any section, paragraph or clause of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such declaration shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or sections, part of section, paragraph or clause of the ordinance. 
10.05 - Effective Date 
    This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its publication. 
    (This page is intentionally left blank.) 
CHAPTER 10 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic regulation by home rule cities, V.A.C.S., Art. 1175(5), (6); abandoned vehicles, V.A.C.S., Art. 4477-9a, Sec. 5.01 et seq.; Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d; long-arm jurisdiction over nonresident motor vehicle operator in suit following collision, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Sec. 17.061 et seq.; municipal authority relating to parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 431.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE 10.100. - ONE-WAY ALLEYS 
    All vehicle traffic on the alley-way running through Block 40, Cowan Addition, to the city shall be in a one-way direction, with traffic entering such alley from Lindsey Street, and flowing in a westerly direction only, exiting on Mason Street. 
(Ord. No. 3007, Sec. 1, adopted 2-1-83) 
ARTICLE 10.300. - VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY ACT ADOPTED 
(a)  The city adopts the Vehicle Storage Facility Act (V.A.C.S., Art. 6687-9a) and exempts itself from the provision of such act. 
(b)  The city orders the compliance of all others within the city, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and all others engaged in doing business with the city to conform with the provisions of the vehicle storage facility act. 
(Ord. No. 050686, Sec. 1, 2, adopted 5-20-86) 
State Law reference- Violation of Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.A.C.S., Art. 6687-9a, 17. 
ARTICLE 10.400 - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 10.401 - Determinations 
    The city council has determined: 
(a)  Speed limits set forth in this article shall be effective at all hours, except where otherwise provided herein, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such parts of such highways; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed as attempting to modify or alter the basic rule set forth in V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d, Section 166(a)(1), nor to authorize for any class of vehicle in excess of the maximum values set forth for the class of vehicle in subsection (a), paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of such section, and; 
(b)  No special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d, Section 166, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits herein established shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits herein specified and established shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 21886-A, Sec. 2, adopted 3-4-86) 
Sec. 10.402 - Speed Limits on Specific Streets Established 
    The city council determines and declares the reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits upon the following streets or portions of streets to be as follows: 
(1)  FM 1125, northbound: 45 m.p.h. From south city limits (MP 1.989) to Wilbarger St. (MP 1.759) 0.230 mile 30 m.p.h. From Wilbarger St. (MP 1.759) to 1056 feet north of Wilbarger St. (MP 1.556) 0.203 mile 40 m.p.h. From 1056 feet north of Wilbarger St. (MP 1.566) to Lamb St. (MP 1.236). 0.320 mile 30 m.p.h. From Lamb St. (MP 1.236) to US 81 (MP 1.000). 0.236 mile (2)  FM 1125, southbound: 30 m.p.h. From US 81 (MP 1.000) to Lamb St. (MP 1.236). 0.236 mile 40 m.p.h. From Lamb St. (MP 1.236) to Wilbarger St. (MP 1.759). 0.523 mile 45 m.p.h. From Wilbarger St. (MP 1.759) to south city limits (MP 1.989) 0.230 mile (3)  FM 1816, northbound: 30 m.p.h. From SH 59 (MP 23.760) to Orchard St. (MP 23.306) 0.454 mile 35 m.p.h. From Orchard St. (MP 23.306) to 1,225 feet south of north city limits (MP 23.002). 0.304 mile 45 m.p.h. From 1,225 feet south of north city limits (MP 23.002) to north city limits (MP 22.70). 0.232 mile (4)  FM 1816, southbound: 45 m.p.h. From north city limits (MP 22.770) to 1,225 feet south (MP 23.002) 0.232 mile 35 m.p.h. From 1,225 feet south of north city limits (MP 23.002) to Orchard St. (MP 23.306) 0.304 mile 30 m.p.h. From Orchard St. (MP 23.306) to SH 59 (MP 23.760) 0.454 mile (5)  F.M. 2094, southbound and northbound: 30 m.p.h. From junction U.S. 287 to Lamb St. 0.230 mile 45 m.p.h. From Lamb St. to 0.240 mile south of Lamb St. 0.240 mile 30 m.p.h. From 0.240 mile south of Lamb St. to the south city limit. 0.160 mile (6)  F.M. 3043, northbound: 35 m.p.h. From U.S. 81 (MP 0.000) to 116 feet southeast of Nelson St. (MP 0.363). 0.363 mile 40 m.p.h. From 116 feet southeast of Nelson St. (MP 0.363) to 459 feet northwest of southeast city limits (MP 0.563). 0.200 mile (7)  FM 3043, southbound: 40 m.p.h. From 459 feet northwest of southeast city limits 0.200 mile (MP 0.563) to 116 feet southeast of Nelson St. (MP 0.363) 35 m.p.h. From 116 feet southeast of Nelson St. (MP 0.363) to U.S. 81 (MP 0.000) 0.363 mile (8)  SH 59, eastbound: 45 m.p.h. From west city limit to 0.200 mile east of west city limit. 0.200 mile 35 m.p.h. From 0.200 mile east of west city limit to 0.400 mile east of west city limit. 0.200 mile 30 m.p.h. From 0.400 mile east of west city limit to Orchard St. 0.870 mile 40 m.p.h. From Orchard St. to Nelson St. 0.200 mile 45 m.p.h. From Nelson St. to the east city limit. 0.320 mile (9)  SH 9, northbound: 50 m.p.h. From south city limits (MP 6.215) to 1,901 feet south of Wilbarger St. (MP 5.840) 0.375 mile 40 m.p.h. From 1,901 feet south of Wilbarger St. (MP 5.840) to Wilbarger St. (MP 5.480). 0.360 mile 30 m.p.h. From Wilbarger St. (MP 5.480) to U.S. 81 (MP 5.000). 0.480 mile (10)  SH 9, southbound: 30 m.p.h. From U.S. 81 (MP 5.000) to Wilbarger St. (MP 5.447). 0.447 mile 45 m.p.h. From Wilbarger St. (MP 5.447) to Missouri St. (MP 5.803). 0.356 mile 50 m.p.h. From Missouri St. (MP 5.803) to south Hwy. 287 Frontage road (MP 6.264). 0.461 mile 60 m.p.h. From (MP 6.264) to south city limits (MP 6.366) 0.102 mile (11)  SH 59, westbound: 45 m.p.h. From the west city limit to La Salle St. 0.200 mile 40 m.p.h. From La Salle St. to Orchard St. 0.520 mile 30 m.p.h. From Orchard St. to 0.400 mile east of west city limit. 0.870 mile 35 m.p.h. From 0.400 mile east of west city limit to 0.200 mile east of west city limit. 0.200 mile 45 m.p.h. From 0.200 mile east of west city limit to west city limit to west city limit 0.200 mile (12)  U.S. Hwy. 81, northbound: 40 m.p.h. From junction U.S. 287 to Baccus St. 0.245 mile 50 m.p.h. From Baccus St. to Sessions St. 0.300 mile 55 m.p.h. From Sessions St. to the north city limit. 0.220 mile (13)  U.S. Hwy. 81, southbound: 45 m.p.h. From the north city limit to Baccus St. 0.530 mile 40 m.p.h. From Baccus St. to junction U.S. 287. 0.245 mile (14)  U.S. Hwy. 287: 45 m.p.h. From the city limits to a point 0.20 miles east of the west city limits,approximately where Highway 81 intersects Highway 287. 40 m.p.h. From a point 0.20 miles east of the west city limits to a point 0.40 miles east of the west city limits. 35 m.p.h. From a point 0.40 miles east of the west city limits to the east city limits. (15)  U.S. Hwy. 287 Frontage Road: 45 m.p.h. From mile point 12.968 to 1.862 miles west at mile point 14.830 for the west bound U.S. 287 frontage road. 1.862 45 m.p.h. From mile point 12.968 to 1.822 miles east at mile point 14.790 for the east bound U.S. 287 frontage road. 1.822  
(Ord. No. 3001, Sec. 1-3; Ord. No. 3003, adopted 5-14-62; Ord. No. 21886, Sec. 1, adopted 3-4-86; Ord. No. 21886-A, Sec. 1, adopted 3-4-86; Ord. No. 2009-13, Sec. 1, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 2009-17, Sec. 1, 9-1-09) 
Editor's note- The date of adoption of Ord. No. 3001 is unknown. 
Sec. 10.403 - Penalty for Violations 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates such provision shall upon conviction receive the punishment provided in the Penal Laws of the State of Texas for any person who drives a vehicle upon a public highway at an unlawful speed. 
(Ord. No. 21886, Sec. 3, adopted 3-4-86) 
Sec. 10.404 - Establishment of Speed Zones 
    Whenever the city manager shall determine, on the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation, that the thirty (30) miles per hour speed hereinafter set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any sort of a highway or street, the chief of police may determine and declare a reasonable and safe speed limit and the change shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersections or other places or parts of the highway or street. 
Sec. 10.405 - Maximum Speed Limits in Certain Zones 
    It is hereby deemed upon the basis of an engineering survey and/or traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law and/or city ordinance upon certain streets is greater than is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon during certain times of the day due to the particular hazards existing during those times. It is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits are altered on those streets set out in the schedule in this section during those hours of the day when signs are erected by public authority giving notice thereof. 
Sec. 10.406 - Regulation of Speed by Variable Signs 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to use variable message traffic signs, as hereinafter described, to indicated speed limits in the zones as set out in Section 10.402(a) where there is a need to indicate different speed limits at particular times of the day due to hazards existing during those hours. Such different speed limit is herein after referred to as a temporary speed limit. the variable message traffic signs shall be designed in a manner approved in the manual on uniform traffic control devices for street and highways and shall consist of a standard with yellow sign faces. When the temporary speed limit is in effect, said speed limit and hours shall be posted accordingly. At all other time, the regularly established prima facie speed limit will continue in effect. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to cause the proper posting of variable message signs and the proper additions and entries made to the Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 10.407 - Variable Speed Limits Established 
(a) 
East Pecan St. From Mill St. to Raymond St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (b) 
Elba St. From Mill St. to Lamb St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (c) 
Hodge St. From Lamb St. to Mill St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (d) 
Houston St. From Mill St. to Slate Hwy. 59 North 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (e) 
Hulme St. From Bowie St. to Lovers Lane 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (f) 
Lamb St. From Elba St. to Nelson St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (g) 
Lamb St. From East Wise St. to Tarrant St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (h) 
Lovers Lane From Matthews St. to Jefferson St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (i) 
Lowrie St. From Orchard St. 
to Sessions St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (j) 
Mill St. From East Wise St. 
to Greenwood St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (k) 
Nelson St. From Rock St. 
to Raymond St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (l) 
Orchard St. From Matthews St. 
to Roberts St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (m) 
Roberts St. From Live Oak St. 
to Sessions St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (n) 
Rock St. From Tarrant St. 
to Nelson St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (o) 
Sanders St. From Bowie St. to 
Lovers Lane 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (p) 
Sessions St. From Lowrie to 
Roberts St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (q) 
Summit St. From East Wise St. 
to Tarrant St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (r) 
Tarrant St. From Rock St. 
to Mill St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (s) 
Taylor St. From East Wise St. 
to Tarrant St. 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m. (t) 
Williams St. From Mill St. 
to State Hwy. 59 North 7:30 a.m.-4:00 p.m.  
(Ord. No. 99-7 adopted 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2018-05, Sec. 1, adopted 5-30-18) 
ARTICLE 10.500. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 10.501 - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "truck terminal" shall apply to commercial activity only and not be construed as applicable to a place of residence or property ownership/occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4A, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.502 - Load Limits 
    All vehicle/truck traffic having a gross weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds (loaded or unloaded) whether it be designated a truck, a trailer, a combination or vehicle of other description is hereby prohibited from streets, roads, byways or routes of any other name or description that lie within the city limits, other than those federal or state roadways, including Farm to Market roads, which lie within the city limits or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 1, adopted 6-4-85) 
State Law reference- Extent of extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 42.021. 
Sec. 10.503 - Deviation 
    The operator of a vehicle coming under this article may depart from the routes designated in Section 10.502 only when it is necessary to reach a truck terminal or to load or unload merchandise at locations off such designated routes and shall not leave such designated route until a turning off point has been reached that leads to the ultimate destination of the vehicle by the shortest route which is consistent with the reasonable operation of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 3, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.504 - Evidence of Destination 
    A person operating a vehicle coming under this article upon a street or in an area in violation of Section 10.503 shall have in his possession for inspection a log book, delivery slips or other evidence of the destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the vehicle upon such street or in such area. 
(Ord. No. 062185, Sec. 2, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.505 - Parking Restricted 
    Any vehicle/truck having a gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds (loaded or unloaded), whether it be designated a truck, a trailer, combination thereof or vehicle of other description, is prohibited from parking in other than commercial business locations or other approved off-road sites, except while loading or unloading at point of business. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.506 - Parking Prohibited in Residential Areas 
    The parking of any vehicle coming under the provisions of this article is strictly prohibited in residential areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4B, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.507 - Parking on Residential Streets 
    No truck or other vehicle covered by this article shall be allowed to park on-street or off-street (except as provided in Section 10.508) in any area with primary residential usage. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4D, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.508 - Nonconforming Facilities 
    Truck terminals, garages and/or yards in existence on December 4, 1984 shall be allowed to continue to operate, but will not be allowed to expand its size or use while in a residential setting. This section shall be subject to the conditions set forth in Section 10.509. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4B, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.509 - Application to Tank Vehicles 
    Tank vehicles containing flammable, toxic or otherwise hazardous chemicals shall not be allowed to park and/or garage on any city street or throughway; or be allowed off-street within one hundred (100) feet from any building used for assembly, institutional or residential occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 052185, Sec. 4C, adopted 6-4-85) 
Sec. 10.510 - Restricting Oversized Loads 
    Any truck/vehicle over seventy (70) feet long will be prohibited from making any turns (left or right) at the junction of State Hwy. 59 and US Hwy. 81 (Mason and Wise Street). 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, Sec. 1, adopted 8-27-18) 
ARTICLE 10.600 - BICYCLES, TOY VEHICLES, SKATES 

Sec. 10-601 - Riding or operation prohibited on certain sidewalks 
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar conveyance on the following public sidewalks: 
Beginning on the west side of Cummins Street and ending on the east side of Lindsey Street, designating the Western and Eastern boundaries and the north side of Pecan Street to the south side of Montague Street, designating the Northern and Southern boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, Sec. 1, adopted 10-21-03) 
Sec. 10-602 - Speed limit 
No person shall ride or operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar conveyance on any public roadway with a speed limit greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, Sec. 2, adopted 10-21-03) 
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES & SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Revenue bonds, 8.04; franchise and public utility, Art X. 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities, V.A.C.S., Art. 1106 et seq. and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 401.001 et seq.; public utilities, V.A.C.S., Art. 1416 et seq.; Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.A.C.S., Art. 1446c; plumbing and sewers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 214.011 et seq.; authority for municipal public services and utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 402.002; water, V.T.C.A., Water Code, Sec. 1.001 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code, Sec. 26.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE 11.100. - DUTIES OF UTILITY SERVICE SUPERVISOR 
    The utility service supervisor shall report to the city clerk for the purpose of ensuring all utility billing support is handled in a timely manner. The utility service supervisor shall be responsible for timely utility meter reading, defective meter reporting, rereads, detection of meter tampering and reporting of same, and service connects, disconnects and repairs as directed. The utility service supervisor will be responsible for the training and proper utilizations of personnel to support this activity as authorized by the city manager in accordance with the budget document. The utility service supervisor will perform additional duties as required and directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 3e, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 11.200. - DIRECTOR OF WATER AND WASTEWATER UTILITIES 
    The water and wastewater utilities shall be under the control and supervision of the director of water and wastewater utilities, who shall be appointed by the city manager and receive his authority and direction from the city manager. The water and wastewater director shall be responsible for the proper treatment and testing of water and wastewater in a timely manner as required by all federal, state and/or local laws, ordinances, policies, procedures and directives. The director shall be responsible for the proper certification, training and placement of assigned personnel under his control. He shall provide for the proper maintenance of all systems under his control and establish an ongoing preventive maintenance and capital improvements program for water and wastewater facilities. The water and wastewater director shall maintain the certification required by the state and keep the city manager advised as to any changes affecting the city's approved water supply rating or wastewater facilities' effectiveness for compliance with rated effluent allowances in accordance with the current operating permits. The director shall continually recommend for additions, deletions, repairs, replacement and renovation of the water and wastewater facilities. He shall perform such other related duties as required by the city manager and make such reports to the city manager as required in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 10, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 11.300 - TAMPERING AND THEFT OF SERVICES 

Sec. 11.301 - Prohibited Acts 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city to: 
(1)  Tamper with any utility meter used in connection with providing water and/or electricity by the city. 
(2)  Intentionally, by any means or device, prevent electricity and/or water from passing through any meter belonging to the city, or used in connection with the service of electricity and/or water by the city. 
(3)  Intentionally prevent a meter from duly registering the quantity of electricity and/or water supplied by the city. 
(4)  Intentionally manipulate a meter from duly registering the quantity of electricity and/or water passing through it. 
(5)  Intentionally divert any electricity and/or water so as to prevent registration by a duly installed meter. 
(6)  Damage, destroy, or remove any meter installed by the city to measure the service of electricity and/or water. 
(Ord. No. 3711-A, Sec. 1, adopted 9-6-83) 
Sec. 11.302 - Prima Facie Evidence of Knowledge of Violation 
    The presence at any time on or about any electric and/or water meter of wiring, pipes or other by such meter, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person owning or having custody and control of the room, building, place, or premises where such device or diversion is found, and shall such devices resulting in the diversion of electricity and/or water, or prevention of the free passage and registration further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such person to defraud, and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalties of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3711-A, Sec. 3, adopted 9-6-83) 
ARTICLE 11.400 - SEPARATE UTILITY SERVICE REQUIRED 
    Each and every living unit not owned by the same person and occupied by the same immediate family is required to have a separate utility service and metering capability. Those circumventing the intent of this directive shall be subject to citation of local ordinance violations. This shall apply to both the parties supplying the unauthorized service and also to those receiving the unauthorized service. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine as provided in Section 1.105 [of this Code] per individual, per service, per connection, per day the violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 8, adopted 8-7-84) 
ARTICLE 11.500 - UTILITY BILLING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 11.501 - Timely Collection of Debts; All Customers Treated Equally and Fairly 
(a)  The city will provide for timely collection of all debts owed the city. 
(b)  All utility customers will be treated in an equal and fair manner as provided for by ordinance and local policy governing same. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 1, adopted 8-7-84) 
Sec. 11.502 - Billings Generally 
    The utility service section shall provide for all utility readings to be accurate and read as near as possible to an even number of days between each successive reading. The customer service section shall provide all utility customers with accurate statements identifying the usages and the amounts owed, and do so in a timely manner to enable all classes of customers to receive their utility bills at regular intervals of time. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 2, adopted 8-7-84) 
Sec. 11.503 - When Payments Due; Administrative Charges 
(a)  Payment must be received on or before the fifteenth day following due date of billing, following the month in which water and/or sewer services were performed. A ten (10) percent penalty will be added after the fifteenth day following [the] due date. If payment is not received by the city, notice shall be given that the city may terminate the service immediately if payment is still delinquent. After the twenty-second day after [the] due date, the customer shall be considered delinquent and then water service will be terminated. The city will require full payment of the account plus an administrative charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) before the service will be restored. An additional charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be added if anyone other than an authorized water department employee reinstates the service. 
(Ord. No. 040390-C, Sec. II, adopted 4-3-90; Ordinance adopting Code) 
(b)  In addition to sanctions provided for by this section, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 040390-C, Sec. IV adopted 4-3-90) 
Sec. 11.504 - Delinquent Charges; Notices 
    All customers shall be allowed fifteen (15) days to pay their account before the account is considered as delinquent. If payment is not received by the sixteenth day, the account is considered delinquent and the customer service section will: 
(1)  Add a ten-percent penalty charge: 
(2)  Mail a delinquent notice setting a due date for payment of the delinquent bill and the delinquent handling service charge. The notice will also stipulate a service termination date on which the utility service will be discontinued for failure to pay the total amount owed. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 3, adopted 8-7-84) 
Sec. 11.505 - Service Disconnect Fee 
(a)  If a customer fails to pay the full amount owed prior to the termination date, the utility service section is directed to discontinue the utility services on that account without any additional notice. The customer service section is directed to apply a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service disconnect fee to the account and to apply the utility deposit previously credited to that account toward the balance owed. The customer service section shall then mail the customer a notice advising them of the balance owed and request payment prior to turning the matter over for collection. 
(b)  Should the deposit be sufficient to cover the amount owed, the customer service section will mail the customer a notice advising of same and the amount to be refunded, if any. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 4, adopted 8-7-84) 
Sec. 11.506 - Service Reconnects After Nonpayment of Account 
    Any account disconnected for non-payment and reconnected within five (5) days will pay all past due amounts and a reasonable trip charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and a trip charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) between 4:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekends. Holidays will be charged at a weekend rate. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, Secs. 2, 3, adopted 8-7-84; Ord. No. 2005-12, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
Sec. 11.507 - Unauthorized Connections After Disconnection for Nonpayment 
    If utility service should be disconnected for nonpayment and the service is reconnected or turned on without proper authorization by the utility service section, the staff shall follow through by all remedies available under the law to cause citations to be issued to the owner/occupant of the unit in question and any other person that is known to be involved. The service is to be interrupted immediately, and the account is to be charged another disconnect fee. Should this sequence of events be repeated, a more permanent service severance shall be required to avoid additional unauthorized reconnects and the account charged fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such additional severance of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 06268-4-F-1, Sec. 7, adopted 8-7-84) 
Sec. 11.508 - Liens Authorized for Unpaid Accounts. 
    The city manager, or designee, is authorized to place a lien on property for unpaid utility accounts as stated in Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, Sec. 1, adopted 9-4-01) 
ARTICLE 11.550 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 11.551 - Program Adoption 
The City of Bowie ("city") developed this ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flags Rule ("rule"), which implements Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003. 16 C.F.R.  681.2. This Program was developed for the finance department of the city ("utility") with oversight and approval of the city council. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the city council determined that this program was appropriate for the city's utility, and therefore approved this program on April 21, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. I, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11-552 - Purpose and Definitions 
(a)  Establish an identity theft prevention program. To establish an Identity Theft Prevention Program designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing covered account and to provide for continued administration of the Program in compliance with Part 681 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing Sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003. 
(b)  Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the Red Flags Eule. The Red Flags Rule ("rule") defines "identity theft" as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person" and a "red flag" ("red flag") as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Under the rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The Program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to: 
(1)  Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
(2)  Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program; 
(3)  Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and 
(4)  Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(c)  Red Flags Rule definitions used in this program. 
City: The City of Bowie, Texas. 
Covered account: Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft. 
Creditors: The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors." 
Identifying information is defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person," including: name, address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routing code. 
Program: The identity theft prevention program for the city. 
Program administrator: The finance director is the program administrator for the program. 
; Utility: The utility is the finance department for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. II, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11.553 - Identification of Red Flags. 
In order to identify relevant Red Flags, the Utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with Identity Theft. The Utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories: 
(a)  Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies-Red flags. 
(1)  Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report; 
(2)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant; 
(3)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and 
(4)  Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity, including but not limited to: 
a.  Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries. 
b.  Unusual number of recent credit applications. 
c.  A material change in use of credit. 
d.  Accounts closed for cause or abuse. 
(b)  Suspicious documents-Red flags. 
(1)  Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic; 
(2)  Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
(3)  Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
(4)  Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged. 
(c)  Suspicious personal identifying information-Red flags. 
(1)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth); 
(2)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, Social Security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
(3)  Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
(4)  Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
(5)  Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer; 
(6)  An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person; 
(7)  A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law social security numbers must not be required) or an applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet; and 
(8)  A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(d)  Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account-Red flags. 
(1)  Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
(2)  Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account; 
(3)  Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity); 
(4)  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
(5)  Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the Utility; 
(6)  Notice to the Utility that an account has unauthorized activity; 
(7)  Breach in the utility's computer system security; and 
(8)  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(e)  Alerts from others-Red flag. 
(1)  Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. III, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11.554 - Detecting Red Flags 
(a)  New Accounts-Detection. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, Utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
(1)  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)  Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
(3)  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; 
(4)  Request additional documentation to establish identity; and 
(5)  Independently contact the customer or business. 
(b)  Existing Accounts-Detection. In order to detect any of the Red Flags identified above for an existing account, Utility personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account: 
(1)  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)  Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and 
(3)  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. IV, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11-555 - Preventing and Mitigating Identity Theft 
In the event Utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag: 
(a)  Prevent and mitigate. 
(1)  Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft; 
(2)  Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods; 
(3)  Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts; 
(4)  Not open a new account; 
(5)  Close an existing account; 
(6)  Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities; 
(7)  Reopen an account with a new number; 
(8)  Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take; 
(9)  Notify law enforcement; or 
(10)  Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
(b)  Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to Utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
(1)  Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
(2)  Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
(3)  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
(4)  Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis; 
(5)  Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured; 
(6)  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
(7)  Request only the last four (4) digits of social security numbers (if any); 
(8)  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
(9)  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. V, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11-556 - Program Updates 
    This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the utility from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will consider the utility's experiences with identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other entities, consult with law enforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel. After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program or present the city council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. VI, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 11.557. - Program Administration 
(a)  Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity theft committee for the utility. The committee is headed by a program administrator who may be the head of the utility or his or her appointee. Two or more other individuals appointed by the head of the utility or the program administrator comprise the remainder of the committee membership. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. 
(b)  Staff Training and reports. 
(1)  Initially, all Utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. Thereafter, all utility staff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally, all new utility employees shall undergo training. 
(2)  All utility staff shall submit reports monthly concerning the utility's compliance with the program, the training that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the program administrator, the monthly reports shall contain a recap of the incident and include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the incident. 
(c)  Service provider arrangements. In the event the Utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the Utility will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft. 
(1)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
(2)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program and report any red flags to the program administrator. 
(d)  Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to the identity theft committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, Sec. VII, 4-21-09) 
ARTICLE 11.600 - WATER AND SEWER DEPOSITS 

Sec. 11.601 - Water and Sewer Deposit Established 
    All new utility accounts will be required to pay a non-refundable service connect fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a reasonable trip charge, currently twenty five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 94-3, Sec. 1; adopted 5-17-94) 
Sec. 11.602 - Deposit Refunds 
(a)  Any customer who currently has a held deposit may request in writing a refund of the deposit plus interest, minus the fifty dollar ($50.00) service connect fee. 
(b)  Any customer not requesting a deposit refund will have the deposit refunded with interest when the account is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, Secs. 4, 5; adopted 5-17-94) 
ARTICLE 11.700 - BAD CHECKS 

Sec. 11.701 - Water and Sewer Service 
    Checks received for payment and returned by the bank because the account has insufficient funds or does not exist, etc., will create additional staff work to notify the customer and arrange for payment. The customer service section is hereby directed to assess a thirty dollar ($30.00) handling charge for all checks returned because they cannot be processed for payment. 
    The city retains the right to terminate water service immediately if the customer does not pay the account in full. In addition, the staff shall pursue all remedies available by law to recover the monies due when it becomes apparent that in-house efforts to collect for returned checks are not successful. 
(Ord. No. 062684-F-1, Sec. 6, adopted 8-7-84; Ord. 040390-C, Sec. II, adopted 4-3-90; Ord. No. 2010-02, Sec. 1, adopted 2-16-10) 
Sec. 11.702 - Electrical Service 
    Customers who submit payment with a check that is returned because the bank will not or cannot process the payment will be charged thirty dollars ($30.00) for clerical processing and be required to pay the amount due plus such additional processing charge by money order, cashiers check or cash within three (3) working days or be subject to disconnection for nonpayment. 
(Ord. No. 1018, Sec. 5, adopted 3-19-85; Ord. No. 2010-02, Sec. 1, adopted 2-16-10) 
ARTICLE 11.800 - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 11.801 - Water Rates 
(a)  Water Rates. The monthly rates and charges for the sales made or services rendered by the water system of the city are hereby established, levied, set and prescribed as follows: 
As set out in Appendix C "Schedule of Fees" City of Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  These rates are applicable to all sales or service of water. All leakage between a meter and a building is the responsibility of the owner, tenant or occupant of the building. 
(Ord. No. 99-12 adopted 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2006-01, Secs. 1, 2, adopted 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2006-04, Secs. 1, 2, adopted 4-4-06; Ord. No. 2014-08, Sec. 1, adopted 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2018-11, Sec. 1, adopted 9-18-18) 
Sec. 11.802 - Sewer Rates 
(a)  Sewer Rates. The monthly rates and charges for the sales made or services rendered by the water system of the city are hereby established, levied, set and prescribed as follows: 
As set out in Appendix C "Schedule of Fees" City of Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Anyone receiving city water service and connected to the city sewer must pay the above sewer charges regardless of whether the building is occupied or not. 
(c)  The city will develop administrative procedures for determining the estimated amounts of water usage that goes into the sanitary sewer system for treatment that comes from business, commercial, or industrial customers. This procedure will only be applied when there is a reasonable belief that a large portion of the monthly water usage is not going into the system for treatment. 
(Ord. No. 99-13 adopted 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2000-16(A), Sec. 1, adopted 11-14-00; Ord. No. 2011-13, Sec. 1, adopted 11-1-11; Ord. No. 2013-13, Sec. 1, adopted 9-17-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, Sec. 1, adopted 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2018-12, Sec. 1, adopted 9-18-18) 
ARTICLE 11.900 - WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES 
    Fees for water and sewer taps are payable with the application for such taps: 
(a)  Water Taps: 
3/4 inch $1,000.00 1 inch  1,200.00 2 inch  2,000.00 plus materials 3 inch  2,000.00 plus materials 4 inch  2,000.00 plus materials 6 inch  2,000.00 plus materials  
(b)  Sewer Taps: 
4 inch $1,000.00 6 inch  1,400.00 plus materials  
(Ord. 040390-C, Sec. I-C, adopted 4-3-90; Ord. No. 2005-13, Sec. 1, adopted 8-16-05) 
ARTICLE 11.1000 - METER TESTING FEE 
    Should a customer suspect the meter to be defective, a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) will be charged to replace the meter and test the old. If the meter tested proves to be defective, the meter testing fee will be refunded in full. If the utility service crew finds an obvious defect in the meter when responding to the customer complaint, no fee will be charged and the meter will be replaced at the earliest possible opportunity. 
(Ord. No. 100185, Sec. 3, adopted 10-15-85) 
ARTICLE 11.1100 - DEFECTIVE METERS 
    Should the utility service crew discover a "dead", nonregistering or otherwise defective meter, the city will estimate the consumption based upon previously established usage patterns and current usage situations. 
(Ord. No. 100185, Sec. 4, adopted 10-16-85) 
ARTICLE 11.1200 - BROKEN LINES; DEFECTIVE PLUMBING 
    In the case of discovery of broken line or defective plumbing resulting in water loss, the owner/occupant shall notify the city in a timely manner and request a utility service crew member to verify the occurrence and read the meter. Upon verification, the city will adjust the water consumption for sewer credit only. The adjustment for sewer will reflect as accurately as possible an estimate that coincides with the previous usage patterns and existing use situations. Water charges cannot be waived or adjusted in that those costs must be recovered by the city to offset the expenses of providing the water, even though it was lost or wasted. It shall be the property owner/occupant's responsibility to monitor their plumbing components, especially during winter months or extremely dry summers during periods of ground separation. 
(Ord. No. 100185, Sec. 5, adopted 10-15-85) 
ARTICLE 11.1300 - DIRECTOR OF ELECTRICAL UTILITIES 
    The electric utility shall be under the control and supervision of the director of electric utilities, who shall be appointed by the city manager and receive authority and direction from the city manager. The electric utility director shall be responsible for the generation and/or transmission of electric energy in the utility system. The director shall cause timely repair of the electric utility system and maintain a preventive maintenance program for the system. The director shall provide for the proper training and safeguards for his subordinate personnel. He shall continually upgrade the system and effect an ongoing capital improvement program to improve upon the system and prevent line loss and system malfunctions. The director shall continually recommend additions, deletions, repairs, replacements and renovations of the electric utility system. He shall perform such other related duties as required by the city manager and make such reports to the city manager as required in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 11, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 11.1400 - ELECTRICAL RATES 

Sec. 11.1401 - Electrical Rate Schedules (amended November 17, 2015) 
    The electric utility rates to be charged to the customers of the city electric utility beginning with the first billing cycle in December, 2015, shall be as follows: 
(a)  Schedule R (Residential) 
(1)  Applicability : To single family residential customers where all energy is taken through a single meter. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
(2)  Character of service: A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240; volts; three-phase, 120/208, 120/240, 240/480, 277/480, 2,400/4,160, 7,200/12,470 volts, as available at point of service. 
(3)  Base rate: 
(A)  Customer charge: $10.00 per month, plus 
(B)  Distribution and wires charge: $0.0595per kWh for all kWh. 
(4)  Minimum monthly charge: The customer charge plus applicable power cost on the Kilowatt hours used. 
(5)  Billing adjustment: In addition to the base rate charges, each customer's monthly bill shall include an appropriate wholesale power and transmission charge as described in section 11.1402. 
(6)  Tax adjustment: The above rate schedule shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes which the city may hereafter have to pay which are levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of this schedule. 
(b)  Schedule SC (Small Commercial) 
(1)  Applicable: To all non-residential customers billed through one (1) meter whose monthly peak demand is less than 50 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
(2)  Character of service: A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase, 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480, 2,400/4,160, 7,200/12,470 volts as available at point of service. 
(3)  Base rate: 
(A)  Customer charge: $20.00 per month, plus 
(B)  Distribution and wires charge: $0.0470 per kWh for all kWh. 
(4)  Minimum monthly charge: The customer charge plus applicable power cost on the kilowatt hours used. 
(5)  Billing adjustment: In addition to the base rate charges, each customer's monthly bill shall include an appropriate wholesale power and transmission charge as described in section 11.1402. 
(6)  Tax adjustment: The above rate schedule shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or (increased taxes which the city may hereafter have to pay which are levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of this schedule. 
(c)  Schedule LP-1 (Medium Commercial) 
(1)  Applicable: To all commercial customers where service is taken through one (1) meter at one (1) point of delivery and whose monthly peak demand has been at least 50 kW and less than or equal to 500 kW within the past twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
(2)  Character of service: A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240; volts; three-phase, 120/208, 120/240,240/480,277/480, 2,400/4,160, 7,200/12,470 volts, as available at point of service. 
(3)  Base rate: 
(A)  Customer charge: $30.00 per month, plus 
(B)  Distribution and wires charge: $0.0468 per kWb for all kWb. 
(4)  Minimum monthly charge: The customer charge plus applicable energy charge cost on the kilowatt hours used. 
(5)  Billing adjustment: In addition to the base rate charges, each customer's monthly bill shall include an appropriate wholesale power and transmission charge as described in section 11.1402. 
(6)  Tax adjustment: The above rate schedule shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes which the city may hereafter have to pay which are levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of this schedule. 
(d)  Schedule LP-2 (Industrial) 
(1)  Applicable: To all industrial customers where service is taken through one (1) meter at one (1) point of delivery and where the monthly peak kilowatt demand has been at least 500 kW Within the past twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
(2)  Character of service: A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase, 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480, 2,400/4,160, 7,200/112,470 volts as available at the point of service. 
(3)  Base rate: 
(A)  Customer charge: $50.00 per month, plus 
(B)  Demand charge: $3.00 per kW of monthly billing demand, plus 
(C)  Distribution and wires charge: $0.0155 per kWh for all kWh. 
(4)  Minimum monthly charge: The customer charge plus applicable power cost on the kilowatt hours used plus applicable demand charge on kWs used or calculated. 
(5)  Billing adjustment: The cost of wholesale power and transmission to serve the customer includes, but is not limited to, capacity, delivery, energy and fuel charges for the billing period plus adjustments applied to the current monthly billing to account for differences in actual purchased electricity costs billed in previous periods. The wholesale power and transmission cost will be calculated using the billing units defined in the same manner as defined in the applicable wholesale rate to the city including any ratchet provisions in the wholesale rate. The customer's billing units for wholesale power and transmission cost may be adjusted for line losses, as determined by the city, to calculate the customer's wholesale power and transmission cost at the wholesale supplier's metering point to the city. 
(6)  Billing demand: The billing demand shall be the maximum fifteen (15) minute interval measured in kilowatt demand in the billing period, but not less than sixty (60) percent of the peak demand measured in the preceding twelve-month period. 
(7)  Power factor: Should the power factor be lower than 0.97 lagging, the city may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.97 to the actual power factor for the month. 
(8)  Tax adjustment: The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes which the city may hereafter have to pay which are levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of this schedule. 
(e)  Schedule SL (Security Lights) 
(1)  Applicable: To service security lights installed and maintained by the city for customers at their request. Customers will be required to contract for this service for a period to be determined by the city. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
(2)  Character of service: Security lighting equipment, including lamps, fixtures, control units and the necessary security lighting circuits, transformers, guys, anchors, fittings, etc., will be furnished by the city subject to the payment of an installation fee as set up by the city. 
(3)  Rate: 
(A)  $11.00 per light per month. 
(4)  Tax adjustment: The above rate schedule shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes which the city may hereafter have to pay which are levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of this schedule. 
(Ord. No. 93-9 adopted 9-7-93; Ord. No. 2001-08, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-01; Ord. No. 2002-14, adopted 10-15-02; Ord. No. 2004-15, Sec. 2, adopted 12-7-04; Ord. No. 2005-23, Sec. 2, adopted 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-18-06; Ord. No. 2006-15, Sec. 1, adopted 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-21, Sec. 1, adopted 12-18-08; Ord. No. 2009-07, Sec. 1, adopted 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2012-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-21-12; Ord. No. 2015-11, Sec. 1, adopted 11-17-15) 
Sec. 11.1402 - Wholesale Power and Transmission Charge (WPTC) 
    The monthly charges for all customers other than those served under rate schedules providing for the direct recovery of wholesale power and transmission cost charges or credits may be increased or decreased on a uniform per-kWh basis computed monthly as follows: 
WPTC= A + or - 
  B 
kWhs 
Where: 
WPTC = Wholesale power and transmission cost factor (expressed in $ per kWh) to be applied to estimated energy sales for the billing period. 
A = Total estimated power cost from all suppliers, including fuel for the billing period. 
B = Adjustment to be applied to the current monthly billing to account for differences in actual power costs and actual WPTC revenues recovered in previous periods. 
kWhs = Total estimated energy sales for billing period (excluding kWh sales associated with direct recovery of power cost charges or credits). 
(Ord. No. 1018, Sec. 2, adopted 3-19-85; Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 1, adopted 7-18-06; Ord. No. 2006-15, Sec. 1, adopted 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-21, Sec. 1, adopted 12-18-08; Ord. No. 2013-17, Sec. 1, adopted 12-17-13; Ord. No. 2015-11, Sec. 1, adopted 11-17-15) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2015-11, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, changed the title of sec. 11.1402 from "Fuel Adjustment/Transmission Fees" to read as herein set out. 
ARTICLE 11.1500 - ELECTRICAL SERVICE DEPOSITS 
(a)  All new electric utility accounts will be required to pay a deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the applicable service and the trip charge of: 
(1)  Service and trip charge, normal working hours       $ 25.00 
(2)  Service and trip charge, after hours       $ 50.00 
(b)  Service and trip charge fees will be in addition to the electric utility deposit and not be subject to refund. 
(Ord. No. 1018, Sec. 3, adopted 3-19-85) 
ARTICLE 11.1600 - RECONNECTION CHARGES FOR NONPAYMENT OF ELECTRICAL BILL 
    Any account disconnected for nonpayment will have to pay all past due amounts, including any trip charges, and a deposit equal to one-fifth (1/5th) of the account's annual usage before service will be reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 1018, Sec. 4, adopted 3-19-85) 
ARTICLE 11.1700 - CUSTOMER SWITCHING POLICY 
(a)  In the event a customer who is receiving [electrical] service from the city in an area which is multiply certificated by the Public Utility Commission of Texas, requests in writing disconnection of service for the purpose of switching service to another utility, the city will disconnect customer at a date mutually agreeable to both city and customer. [The] customer will be responsible for payment of the following at the time such request is made: 
(1)  Amounts owed for electric service through the date of disconnection, including, but not limited to, any payments due under contract, any deferred payments, delinquent payments and penalties or fees otherwise applicable. 
(2)  A disconnection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  An amount equal to the original cost less book depreciation and salvage of any distribution facilities rendered idle and not usable elsewhere on the system. 
(4)  All costs incurred as a result of removing said facilities in subsection (3) above, if requested by the disconnecting customer, necessary for safety reasons, or if the salvage value exceeds removal costs. 
(b)  In the event a customer who is receiving service from a utility other than the city in an area which is multiply certificated by the Public Utility Commission of Texas requests service from the city, the city shall connect service to such customer in accordance with the city's rules and regulations governing electric service. 
(Ord. No. 92-20, Sec. 1, 2, adopted 9-15-92) 
ARTICLE 11.1800 - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-03, adopted an updated water convervation and drought contingency plan. The previous water conservation plan derived from Ord. No. 2009-12, sec. 1, adopted May 19, 2009. The drought contingency plan derived from Ord. No. 2009-11, sec. 1, adopted May 19, 2009. See appendix B for a complete derivation. 

Sec. 11.1801 - Approval of Plan 
    The Texas Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan 2014 attached hereto and made part hereof for all purposes be, and the same is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, sec. 1, adopted 3-18-14) 
Editor's note- The water conservation and drought contingency plan is not set out in detail herein but is available at the office of the city secretary. 
ARTICLE 11.1900 - SANITATION DEPARTMENT 
    The sanitation department shall be supervised by the public works director and comprised of the supportive positions authorized in the budget document or as amended from time to time by the mayor and city council as requested by the city manager. The public works director shall be responsible for the timely retrieval of solid waste within the city and shall maintain routes and schedules to that end. The public works director shall be responsible for the effective training and supervision of his personnel and the maintenance and repair of all equipment under his control. He shall maintain records of his activities and perform additional duties as directed. 
(Ord. No. 062684-C, Sec. 5, adopted 6-26-84) 
ARTICLE 11.2000 - COVERING OF VEHICLES USING LANDFILL 
(a)  All vehicles or trailers hauling waste or refuse to the municipal landfill shall be enclosed or provided with a tarpaulin, net or other means to properly secure the load to prevent the escape of materials by blowing or spilling. 
(b)  For any person or operator not securing the load of the respective vehicle or trailer, there shall be assessed an additional surcharge equivalent to one-half times the applicable or equivalent permit fee. Payment of surcharge shall be made in advance to the city prior to the disposal of any waste or refuse at the municipal landfill. 
(Ord. No. 051689-A, Sec. 1, 2, adopted 5-16-89) 
ARTICLE 11.2100 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION 

Sec. 11.2101 - Solid Waste Collection Service 
    The city shall hereafter provide to its residents a service waste collection. Such service may be provided by an official department of the city or a duly authorized service provider. All individuals, firms or corporations located within the incorporated limits shall be required to make use of such service. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 1, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2102 - Customer Definitions 
    The following definitions will be used to determine appropriate solid waste collection fees: 
(1)  Residential - A standard detached or attached single-family dwelling unit located within the corporate limits of the city. Such unit is occupied by a family or group of individuals not to exceed twelve (12) in number. Apartments, mobile homes or condominiums, whether of single or multi-story construction, shall be considered as single dwelling units for billing purposes. 
(2)  Small business - Retail, office, service, professional, industrial, commercial or any other type of occupancy located within the corporate limits of the city generating no more than one (1) cubic yard of solid waste per week. Such customers may elect to utilize container collection service solely at their discretion and cost. 
(3)  Container collection - Any retail, service, professional, institutional, residential, industrial, commercial or any other type of occupancy located within the corporate limits of the city generating an equivalent of more than one (1) cubic yard of solid waste per week will be required to be collected through the use of containers. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 4, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2103 - Collection Service Standards 
(a)  Residential customers: 
(1)  All common trash, rubbish or garbage shall be placed and enclosed in a plastic garbage bag commonly sold in retail establishments. Garbage bags shall be limited in size not to exceed thirty (30) gallons in size and loaded as to prevent the bag from bursting. The contents of all bags shall be secured in a manner to prevent the blowing or scattering of materials over adjacent public and private properties. 
(2)  All trees and tree limbs shall be rendered to a manageable size of not more than four (4) feet in length and forty (40) pounds in weight for collection purposes. 
(3)  All loose materials such as paper goods, household discards, yard clippings and grass shall be contained in disposable containers for collection purposes. Disposable containers shall not exceed an equivalent of thirty (30) gallons in size and shall be loaded as to prevent the container from bursting. 
(4)  All boxes, shipping containers, shipping crates, pallets and other such materials shall be broken down, dismantled, collapsed, or crushed for collection purposes. Such materials shall be bundled or placed in disposable containers in lots not to exceed forty (40) pounds in weight and four (4) feet in length. 
(5)  Furniture and appliances shall be collected on special established collection days. 
(6)  Residential or home occupancy businesses will be assessed the applicable small business or container rate in lieu of residential rates. 
(b)  Small business: 
(1)  The standards and service requirements for this class of customer will be subject to the regulations as a residential customer. 
(2)  Customers exceeding volume requirements will be required to use container service. 
(c)  Container collection: 
(1)  The city shall provide container collection service for customers generating an equivalent of more than one (1) cubic yard of solid waste per week. The individual customer will be contacted by a representative of the city in order to provide adequate solid waste disposal. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to increase the number of containers and/or the frequency of collection for the individual customer in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the community and to bill the customer for such changes in services accordingly. 
(3)  All refuse/garbage generated by the customer must be held in the provided container. Any waste, refuse or garbage not placed in container shall not be collected. 
(4)  Containers shall be placed so that they are readily accessible in all weather conditions at the outside location and on a hard surface. Collection service may be refused for containers not so placed. 
(5)  The customer shall be responsible for properly maintaining the drive or accessway required to empty the containers. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 5, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2104 - Point of Collection for all Classifications 
(a)  Residential - All bags and/or bundles shall be placed at the curbside for collection purposes. Such items for collection shall be placed as close as practical to the roadway without interfering or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(b)  Small business - The point of collection for such customers will be established by the city or authorized service provider. 
(c)  Container - The point of collection for such customers will be established by the city or authorized service provider. 
(d)  Final determination - The city acting through the city manager's office shall be the final determiner of the point of collection for all customers. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 6, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2105 - Wastes Generated by Contractor for Hire 
    Waste and refuse generated by contractors for hire, including, but not limited to, construction, remodeling, repair, tree trimming, tree removal, debris removal, razing, land clearing, roofing, appliance repair and installation, will be collected only at prenegotiated rate with the authorized representative of the city. Nothing herein is construed to prevent a contractor from hauling and disposing of such materials in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Texas Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 7, adopted 9-4-90) 
Editor's note- Effective March 1, 1992, all powers duties, rights, and obligations of the Texas Department of Health were transferred to the Texas Water Commission and then on September 1, 1993, the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission became the successor. 
Sec. 11.2106 - Removal or Collection by Unauthorized Individuals 
    The removal of refuse/garbage by any individual, firm or corporation, except as specified in Section 11.2105, other than the city or its authorized agents is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 8, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2107 - Unauthorized Use of Container Service 
    The placement of refuse/garbage in a collection container without the express written permission of the container customer is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 9, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2108 - Collection of Nonresident Refuse/Garbage 
    The placement for collection of any nonresident refuse/garbage within the city is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 10, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2109 - Termination of Out-of-City Collection Services 
    The city will terminate all solid waste collection services made outside its incorporated limits effective September 30, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 11, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2110 - Movement of Refuse from One Premise to Another 
    The relocation or movement of refuse from one premise to another premise for collection purposes is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 12, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2111 - Refusal to Collect Solid Waste 
    Nothing herein is construed to prohibit the city from refusing to collect any solid wastes that are inconsistent with the rules and regulations issued by the Texas Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 13, adopted 9-4-90) 
Editor's note- Effective March 1, 1992, all powers duties, rights, and obligations of the Texas Department of Health were transferred to the Texas Water Commission and then on September 1, 1993, the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission became the successor. 
Sec. 11.2112 - Penalty for Violations 
    Any person, firm or corporation failing to meet the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 17, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2113 - Method of Charging and Billing Fees 
(a)  Residential customers - All residential solid waste collection and disposal charges shall be billed through the city's present utility billing system. The collection shall be due and payable on the same date as the city's utility billings. 
(b)  All other customers - All other fees for service shall be billed and collected through the authorized service provider. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 2, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2114 - Fees Mandatory 
    The fees fixed under the terms and provisions of this article shall be directed to the property owner, occupant or tenant of the premises located within the incorporated city limits. Utility services may be disconnected for failure to pay the collection service fee. Any person making application for city utility service shall be deemed to have applied for solid waste collection service and such service will continue until the applicable utility service is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 090490-B, Sec. 3, adopted 9-4-90) 
Sec. 11.2115 - Monthly Rates and Collection Fees 
    The following collection fees are established for solid waste collection: 
As set out in Appendix C "Schedule of Fees" City of Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 93-11 adopted 9-21-93; Ord. No. 2018-08, Sec. 1, adopted 8-27-18) 
ARTICLE 11.2200 - GREASE TRAPS/INTERCEPTORS/SEPARATORS 

Sec. 11.2201 - Purpose, Policy and Administration 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the regulation of the generation and disposal of grease interceptor waste for the protection of the Bowie Water Resource Center (BWRC) and the environment. 
(b)  The objective of this article is to reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the BWRC by preventing the accumulation of grease within the collection system lines. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who, by contract or agreement with the city, are users of the city's BWRC. 
(d)  This article does not apply to residential dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2202 - Compliance Date 
(a)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an existing facility shall be required to install an approved, adequately sized, and properly operated and maintained grease interceptor when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  It is found by the City of Bowie to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the sanitary sewer collection system BWRC in order to keep main line stoppages from occurring. 
(2)  Its interceptor allows a discharge of oil or grease in excess of 500 mg/l. 
(b)  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinance to maintain a grease interceptor equipped with an undersized grease interceptor shall, within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(c)  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor not equipped with a grease interceptor shall, within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the ordinance, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(d)  New facilities required by 2003 IPC or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor shall install such a unit prior to commencement of discharge to the BWRC. 
(e)  Any requests for extensions to installation dates must be made in writing to the control authority, at least thirty (30) days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the reasons for the grease generator's failure or inability to comply with the compliance date set forth, the additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future delays. The control authority shall determine the date for compliance. 
Sec. 11.2203 - Requirements for Grease Interceptors 
(a)  All commercial and industrial facilities dealing with grease shall, at owners expense and as required by the City of Bowie: 
(1)  Provide an adequately sized grease interceptor. Requirements for grease trap sizing and the design criteria are provided in subsection (b). 
(2)  Locate the interceptor in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Obtain a written interceptor service agreement with a licensed transporter for a term of at least one (1) year, or for the duration of the operation of the establishment, whichever is less, to maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. A service agreement must be in effect as long as the facility is in operation. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified by the city, service the interceptor every ninety (90) days and maintain backup copies of trip tickets and a service log, on the premises of the facility, for at least five (5) years. 
(5)  Report to the city yearly, as defined in section 11.2206 of this article regarding items (3) and (4). 
(6)  Allow demand inspection of the facility and of records by inspectors during reasonable hours. 
(b)  Requirements for grease trap sizing and design criteria. 
(1)  Introduction. Information contained within this document is based on standard industry practices and guidance found in both the 2003 International Plumbing Code (IPC) Commentary and the 2003 International Plumbing Code. Size, type and location of grease traps shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the requirements of the 2003 IPC. 
(2)  Applicability. These requirements are applicable to all commercial food service establishments, including those that are undergoing: 
(A)  New construction. 
(B)  Interior remodeling to accommodate expansion or operational modifications;. 
(C)  Changes of ownership/occupancy. 
(D)  Facilities which may be experiencing difficulty in achieving compliance with maintenance and/or wastewater discharge limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2204 - Grease Interceptor Construction 
(a)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a grease interceptor shall, at his own expenses and as required by the city, provide plans and specifications for equipment and facilities of a design type and design capacity approved by the inspection department of the city. The grease interceptor must be in compliance with the current applicable city plumbing codes. The person shall locate the interceptor in a manner that provides easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection and maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. The City of Bowie Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the interceptor during construction and upon completion. All interested parties, including the inspection department of the city shall make a final inspection before any service connections are made. 
(b)  Construction of items listed herein in accordance herewith or in accordance to the city's specifications shall not constitute a defense to unlawful discharge and shall not limit the generator's liability for any surcharge stated in this chapter. 
(c)  If the city determines that there is a need for installation or upgrading of sample ports or grease interceptors on an existing establishment, the city may order the installation or upgrading of such interceptors on that existing establishment. If the control authority orders such installation, then the control authority shall serve notice of such order upon the grease generator. Within ten days of receipt of such order, the grease generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the control authority shall schedule a hearing to review such order within thirty (30) days of receiving the demand for review from the grease or grit generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the control authority shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order upon the grease generator at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the grease generator may present evidence, and the control authority may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of the order to install or upgrade ports or interceptors on an existing establishment, it shall be unlawful for a grease generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer not in compliance with such order. 
(d)  Where the process wastewaters are generated in only part of the facility, the process wastewaters may, at the option of the control authority, discharge into a grease interceptor servicing only those areas that provide a suitable sampling port. 
(e)  The control authority may waive the requirement for a grease interceptor provided the grease generator can verify that only domestic sewage is being discharged, with no floor drains or process water. The city may require testing by the user in connection with this request, with all costs for this testing being at the users expense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2205 - Discharge Criteria 
(a)  Where oil and grease are a byproduct of food preparation and/or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to separate waste oil and grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except as contained in byproducts of food preparation and/or clean up, waste oil and grease shall not be discharged into any drains or grease interception. Such waste shall be placed in a container to hold such waste and either utilized by industry or disposed of at suitable locations. 
(b)  None of the following agents shall be place directly into a grease interceptor, or into any drain that leads to the interceptor: 
(1)  Emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers, surface active agents, enzymes, degreasers, or any type of product that will liquefy grease interceptor wastes; 
(2)  Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the BWRC; or 
(3)  Any substance capable of passing the solid or semi-solid contents of the grease interceptor to the BWRC. 
(c)  The influent to interceptors shall not exceed one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit. The temperature at the flow control device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the influent. 
(d)  Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge through a grease interceptor. 
(e)  All waste shall only enter the grease interceptor through the inlet flow control device, then the inlet pipe. 
(f)  Where food-waste grinders are installed, the waste from those units shall discharge directly into the building drainage system without passing through a grease interceptor. Living quarters, as defined in 2003 IPC, are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2206 - Required Reporting 
    All interceptor waste generators shall, at a frequency and time determined by the city, but no case less than once per year, submit to the city: 
(a)  Copies of all manifests made by liquid waste transporters servicing their grease interceptor during the reporting period; 
(b)  A copy of the interceptor maintenance log; 
(c)  A copy of the interceptor service contract; and 
(d)  Any other information requested by the City of Bowie. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2207 - Interceptor Maintenance 
(a)  Interceptor maintenance service contract. 
(1)  All grease generators having interceptors shall perform all business transactions relating to interceptors pumping, cleaning, and servicing, and to liquid waste collection, transportation and/or disposal on a contractual basis via a written contract having a duration of at least one (1) year, and provide copies of all such contracts to the control authority. Any modifications or changes to the contract must be submitted to the control authority within ten (10) working days of the change or modification. It is a violation for a grease generator to discharge through an interceptor without a service contract. 
(2)  A contract shall at a minimum: 
(A)  From the customer : 
1.  Contain the customer name, address and telephone number, and the name, address, and telephone number of the facility to be serviced if different: 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person for the facility; 
3.  Contain the grease interceptor facility physical address: 
4.  Indicate the size of each interceptor: 
5.  Indicate the precise and unambiguous location of the interceptor or interceptors to be serviced, including a diagram if necessary: 
6.  Indicate the frequency of pumpage required; and 
7.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract. 
(B)  From the vacuum truck cleaning service : 
1.  Contain the vacuum truck company name, address, and telephone number; 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person; 
3.  Provide the TCEQ permit number; 
4.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract; 
5.  Provide the name, address, and telephone number of the disposal site; and 
6.  Provide the TCEQ registration number of the disposal site. 
(C)  Additionally, the transporter shall provide a : 
1.  Certificate of insurance; 
2.  Certificate of assurance; and 
3.  Certificate of indemnification. 
(D)  Other. Contain a statement of the duration of the contract, to be not less than one year, or for the duration of the operation of the facility, whichever is less. 
(e)  Required pumping frequency. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified by the control authority, each interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once every quarter or more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the BWRC, unless it can be demonstrated to the control authority that the pumping frequency can be performed at lesser intervals. The control authority may specify cleaning more frequently when quarterly pumping is shown to be inadequate. Additional pumping may be required during time periods where increased loading is anticipated. Any grease generator desiring a schedule less frequent than quarterly shall submit a request to the control authority along with testing (as required by the control authority) and copies of the cleaning records for the last four interceptor cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the surface scum/grease layer. 
(2)  At any time if an inspection finds the interceptor to be full, immediate steps shall be taken by the grease generator to pump out and clean it as soon as is practicable. The inspector shall make an evaluation of the advisability of allowing discharge to continue, and may at his or her discretion order an immediate cessation of all discharge from the facility. In any case, the wastewater discharge permit of the facility may be amended so as to compel more frequent pumping and cleaning of the interceptor. 
(f)  All interceptors shall be maintained by the grease generator at the grease generator's expense. 
(g)  Requirement for increase pumpage or servicing. If the control authority finds that a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor is necessary for an establishment to meet the discharge limits stated in this article, the control authority may order a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor. If the control authority orders a change in the pumpage or servicing, then the control authority shall serve notice of such order upon the generator. Within ten (10) days of receipt of such order, the generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the control authority shall schedule a hearing to review such order within thirty (30) days of receiving the demand for review from the generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the control authority shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the generator may present evidence, and the control authority may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of an order by the control authority to change the frequency and/or methods of pumpage or servicing, it shall be unlawful for a generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer (BWRC) not in compliance with such order. 
(h)  Interceptor maintenance log. 
(1)  Every generator having an interceptor shall maintain an interceptor maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous twelve (12) months. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site, and shall be kept in a conspicuous location on the premises of the facility for inspection. Food service establishments shall keep the log posted. Said log shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(2)  The information required in the maintenance log must be submitted to the control authority annually. The reporting period shall be January 2 through December 31 of each year. The report shall be submitted within thirty (30) days after the end of the reporting period to the control authority. 
(i)  Cleaning procedures. 
(1)  The owner or an employee of the facility shall supervise the interceptor cleaning, and shall be physically present and observe the entire cleaning operation. 
(2)  A generator shall cause the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids, of all grease and/or grit interceptors and other interceptors during servicing. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. The suction of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete evaluation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall then be thoroughly scraped and the residue removed. The interceptor shall then be steam cleaned and the residue removed. Upon completion of the servicing, the manager of the facility shall make an inspection of the interior of the interceptor and then personally sign the trip ticket. The manager shall make an appropriate entry in the facility interceptor maintenance log, and post the generator section of the trip ticket in a conspicuous place with the log on the premises. Food service establishments shall keep all trip tickets posted. Said trip tickets and maintenance logs shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a generator to allow, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids back into an interceptor during and/or after servicing. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. 
(4)  Each interceptor pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the interceptor volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the interceptor is fully evacuated within 24-hour period following the transporter's inability to fully evacuate the interceptor. 
(j)  Disposal of interceptor pumpage. All waste removed from each interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and authorized to receive such waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the BWRC, without prior written approval from the control authority, nor may it be returned to any portion of the BWRC not specifically designated by the wastewater collections/treatment superintendent. Additionally, grease removed from an interceptor shall not be recycled so as to become a food product or part of a food product for animal or human consumption. 
(k)  Vacuum truck cleaning service. It shall be unlawful for a grease or grit generator to allow grease or grit interceptor waste to be removed from his premises by a transporter who does not have all applicable federal, state, or local permits or registrations, and a TCEQ waste hauler's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2208 - Facility Closure 
    When a facility with a grease interceptor closes for business, and is subsequently: 
(a)  Razed or demolished, then any grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall be either: 
(1)  Physically removed; or 
(2)  Have all effluent pumped out, a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the tank filled with soil or sand. 
(b)  Remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used, then the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps may be left in place, however: 
(1)  The grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall have all effluent pumped out, the trap cleaned thoroughly, and the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps left dry and empty; and 
(2)  Be re-plumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business; or 
(c)  Replaced with a type of business that will not utilize the grease interceptor, then that business may have any existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps: 
(1)  Physically removed; or 
(2)  Re-plumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business; or 
(3)  Re-plumbed with a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps filled with soil or sand. 
In all instances, the owner of the premises shall appropriately inform the city and perform the closure at such a time so as to permit an inspector to be physically present during the removal or filling of the interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2209 - Violation 
(a)  It is unlawful for any grease generator to discharge into the BWRC in any manner that is in violation of this article, or of any condition set forth in this article. Additionally, a person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a grease interceptor or the BWRC, including alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to rise above the design capacity of the interceptor. 
(b)  No person, and/or facility shall discharge grease in excess of 500 mg/l to the BWRC. If such discharge occurs, the person or facility shall be considered in violation of this article and subject to the remedies described herein. 
(c)  The city may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
(1)  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; 
(2)  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer collection system; 
(3)  Causes interference to the BWRC; or 
(4)  Causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(d)  Any person notified of a suspension of the water or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water or sewer service, to prevent or minimize damage to the BWRC system or sewer connection or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the water or sewer service when such conditions causing the suspension have passed or been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the grease generator describing the cause(s) of the harmful discharge and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within the fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(e)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, association, LLC, LLP or PS legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(f)  Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(g)  A person/facility is liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasional by the city for reason of appropriate clean-up and proper disposal of said waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half (1/2) of assessed clean-up costs may be levied by the city against the guilty party. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11.2210 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative authority means the Code Enforcement Department which shall have enforcement responsibility for this article. 
    BWRC means Bowie Water Resource Center. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water. 
    Disposal site means a permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which such waste will remain after closure. 
    Disposer means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste. 
    Generator means a person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
    Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grease trap waste means greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
    Grit trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacles is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grit trap waste means petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
    Hazardous waste means any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste or combination of wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; 
(2)  Pose a hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise improperly managed and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 and as may be amended. 
    Liquid waste means waterborne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
    Manager means the person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
    Manifest system means a system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Permit means the formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
    Permittee means a person granted a permit under this article. 
    Person means an individual, corporation including a government corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or any other legal entity. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm waters, surface waters and ground waters are not normally admitted. 
    Septage means wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank. 
    Special wastes means any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
    Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage. 
    Tank means a device designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage which is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
    TDH means the Taxes Department of State Health Services. 
    Toxic waste means any liquid, semiliquid, or solid waste material that has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body. 
    TPDES means Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Transporter means a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste. 
    Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the approving authority. 
    Vehicle means mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, Sec. 1, adopted 12-7-04) 
CHAPTER 12 - PLANNING & ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City planning commission, 3.04. 
State Law reference- Zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Ch. 211. 

ARTICLE 12.100. - ZONING ORDINANCE REPEALED 
    Ordinance No. 91-6 adopted on August 20, 1991 which adopted a new comprehensive zoning ordinance and map dividing the city into several zoning districts is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 94-14 adopted 11-22-94) 
ARTICLE 12.200. - ZONING FEES 
    The following fee structure [is hereby] established: 
Application Fee Permits: Temporary Use $25.00 Specific Use Permit $50.00 Adult Entertainment $500.00 Alcohol $25.00 Flood Damage Prevention $25.00 Site Plans: First Review $100.00 Each Additional Review $25.00 Re-zoning Less than five acres $150.00 More than five acres $150.00 + $10.00 acre To Planned Unit Development $500.00 Appeals: Conditional Use Permit $25.00 Administrative $50.00 Other $25.00 Waiver $50.00 Site Plan $25.00 Letters and Certifications Building encroachment $25.00 Zoning Certification $25.00 Flood Plain Certification $25.00 Miscellaneous Variance Request $100.00 Rights-of-Way and Easement Closure $100.00 Annexation Request $500.00 Street Name Change $500.00 Landmark Designation $100.00  
(Ord. No. 2000-06 adopted 3-7-2000) 
CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 00-02 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS, AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 91-6, A COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP AND DIVIDING THE CITY INTO SEVERAL ZONING DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING ZONING REGULATIONS FOR EACH DISTRICT; REGULATING THE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; REGULATING THE HEIGHT, SIZE AND LOCATIONS OF BUILDINGS; ESTABLISHING DENSITY, OPEN SPACE, SCREENING, LANDSCAPING AND MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS; REGULATING THE ERECTION, REPAIR AND ALTERATION OF ALL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR CERTAIN USES; RECOGNIZING NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES AND PROVIDING RULES FOR THE REGULATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE; PROVIDING FOR THE ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THIS ORDINANCE, DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS; PROVIDING A METHOD OF AMENDMENT; PROVIDING A PENALTY, NOT TO EXCEED TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ($2,000.00) FOR EACH VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE AND FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE VIOLATION OF SAID ORDINANCE; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND PROVIDING FOR THE SEVERABILITY OF EACH PART OF THIS ORDINANCE, AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS: 

SECTION 1: - THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE CITED AS THE OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS 
1.1  That this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance is hereby passed and approved. 
SECTION 2: - PURPOSE 
2.1  Zoning regulations and districts are herein established in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. They are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been established with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of each district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
SECTION 3: - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
3.1  The City of Bowie, Texas, is hereby divided into zoning districts as listed in this section. 
ABBREVIATED 
DESIGNATION ZONING DISTRICT NAME A Agricultural District SF-R Single Family Residential District SF-M Single Family Residential District withManufactured (HUD Code) Housing MH Manufactured Housing (HUD Code) Park District MF-R Multi-Family Residential District C Commercial District CBD Central Business District I-1 Industrial District, Light 1-2 Industrial District, Heavy PD Planned Development District FP Floodplain SUP Specific Use Permit  
3.2  Description and Purpose of Zoning Districts 
A  Agricultural District: This district provides for open land, and the continuance of farming, ranching and gardening activities on land now utilized for these purposes. When land in the "A" category is needed for urban purposes, it is anticipated the zoning will be changed to the appropriate zoning categories to provide for orderly growth and development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
SF-R  Single Family Residential District: The "SF-R" District provides for a minimum residential building site of 6,500 square feet. Development in this district will have low to medium densities and have characteristics similar to those now existing in most platted subdivisions. 
SF-M  Single Family Residential District With Manufactured (HUD Code) Housing: The "SF-M" District provides for a minimum residential building site of 6,500 square feet. Development in this district will also have medium densities and characteristics similar to those now existing in most platted subdivisions, however, the use of manufactured housing (HUD Code) is also permitted. 
MH  Manufactured Housing (HUD Code) Park District: The "MH" District establishes a category in which manufactured housing (HUD Code only) park development can occur. The minimum individual lot size shall be 5,000 square feet. Lots in this district are typically rented/leased by the landowner. 
MF-R  Multi-Family Residential District: The "MF-R" District permits low to high density multi-family residential development. The minimum individual lot size shall be 7,500 square feet. 
C  Commercial District: The General Commercial District is intended to provide commercial services to a city-wide or regional area. 
CBD  Central Business District: The Central Business District is established to accommodate the unique needs and role of the historically commercial center of the community. The "CBD" District includes zero lot line development, on-street parking, and a diversity of uses not present in other business districts. 
I-1  Light Industrial District: The Light Industrial. District is established to accommodate uses of a non-nuisance type located in relative proximity to residential and "C" business areas. Development in the "I-1" District is limited primarily to certain wholesale, jobbing, and warehouse uses and certain specialized manufacturing and research uses of a type which will not create nuisances. 
I-2  Heavy Industrial District: The Heavy Industrial District is established to accommodate industrial uses not appropriate for inclusion in the "I-1" District and likely to create noise, traffic, odor and/or other conditions incompatible with most residential and commercial uses. 
PD  Planned Development District: The planned Development District provides a zoning category for the planning and development of larger tracts of land or tracts of land with unique characteristics for a single or combination of uses requiring flexibility and variety in design to achieve orderly development with due respect to the protection of surrounding property. 
FP  Flood Plain District: Zoning districts located, in flood hazard areas which are subject to periodic inundation are preceded by the prefix "FP", indicating a subdistrict. Areas designated "FP" may be used only for those uses listed in the provisions of Section 21 until the area or any portion thereof located in "FP" subdistrict has been approved for other development by the City Council. Approval shall only be given after engineering studies determine that the area or any portion thereof is suitable for uses in the district and building construction or development would not create an obstruction to drainage nor a hazard to life or property and that such construction is not contrary to the public interest. 
SECTION 4: - ZONING DISTRICT MAP 
4.1  THE BOUNDARIES OF THE ZONING DISTRICTS SET OUT HEREIN ARE DELINEATED UPON THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP OF THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS, SAID MAP BEING HEREBY ADOPTED AS A PART OF THIS ORDINANCE AS FULLY AS IF THE SAME WERE SET FORTH HEREIN IN DETAIL. 
Two (2) original, official and identical copies of the Zoning District Map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
A.  One copy shall be filed with the City Secretary, to be retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner. 
B.  One copy shall be kept on public display and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing building permits, certificates of occupancy and compliance arid for enforcing the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Reproductions for information purposes may from time to time be made of the official Zoning District Maps. The map may be updated as individual zoning requests are approved. 
SECTION 5: - ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
5.1  THE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES SHOWN ON THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP ARE USUALLY ALONG STREETS, ALLEYS PROPERTY LINES OR EXTENSIONS THEREOF. WHERE UNCERTAINTY EXISTS AS TO THE BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS AS SHOWN ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP, THE FOLLOWING RULES SHALL APPLY: 
5.2  Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline of such street, highway or alley. 
5.3  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
5.4  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
5.5  Boundaries indicated as following railroad or utility lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way or if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 
5.6  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, drainageways or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
5.7  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in 5.1 through 5.6 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original Zoning Map shall be determined from the graphic scale on the map. 
5.8  Whenever the street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, or whatever street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side, of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
5.9  Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map, or if there arises a question as to how a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections 5-1 through 5-8 or the zoning of property is invalidated by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered as classified "A", Agricultural District, temporarily. In an area determined to be temporarily classified as "A", Agricultural District, no person shall construct, add to or alter any building or structure or cause the same to be done nor shall any use be located therein or on the land which is not permitted in an "A" District, unless and until such territory has been zoned to permit such use by the City Council. 
SECTION 6: - TEMPORARY ZONING-ANNEXED TERRITORY 
6.1  ALL TERRITORY HEREAFTER ANNEXED TO THE CITY OF BOWIE SHALL BE TEMPORARILY CLASSIFIED AS "A", AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT, UNTIL PERMANENT ZONING IS ESTABLISHED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOWIE. THE PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING PERMANENT ZONING ON ANNEXED TERRITORY SHALL CONFORM TO THE PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED BY LAW FOR THE ADOPTION OF ORIGINAL ZONING REGULATIONS. 
6.2  In an area temporarily classified as "A", Agricultural District: 
A.  No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City of Bowie without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate of occupancy from the building official or the City Council as may be required. 
B.  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Building Official other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in the "A" Agricultural District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than. the "A", Agricultural District, by the City Council in the manner prescribed by the law. 
SECTION 7: - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED 
7.1  ALL LAND, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR APPURTENANCES THEREON LOCATED WITHIN THE CITY OF BOWIE, TEXAS, WHICH ARE HEREAFTER OCCUPIED, USED, ERECTED, ALTERED, REMOVED, PLACED, DEMOLISHED, OR CONVERTED SHALL BE OCCUPIED, USED, ERECTED, ALTERED, REMOVED, PLACED, DEMOLISHED OR CONVERTED IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE ZONING REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED FOR THE ZONING DISTRICT IN WHICH SUCH LAND OR BUILDING IS LOCATED AS HEREINAFTER PROVIDED. 
SECTION 8: - "A" AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description - This district is intended to apply to land situated on the fringe of an urban area and used for agricultural or open land purposes, which may become an urban area in the future. Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in the "A" Agricultural District should not be detrimental to urban land uses and intensity of use permitted in this district is intended to encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made. Open or unused land may be deemed a natural area where vegetation is allowed to grow in a natural state of selection and maturity. 
8.1  Permitted Uses - A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  All general and special agricultural, farming, ranching, stables and related accessory buildings, stock and poultry raising, dairy, and other related uses so long as same do not cause a hazard to health by reason of unsanitary conditions, are not offensive by reason of odors, dust, fumes, noise or vibrations, and are not other-wise detrimental to the public welfare. 
B.  Accessory buildings and structures clearly incidental to the above operations, including but not limited to, barns, stables, equipment sheds, granaries, private garages, pump houses, and servants quarters not for rent, provided that accessory buildings and structures shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of the gross land area. 
C.  Temporary metal buildings less than six hundred (600) square feet which are used for tool and supply storage. 
D.  other uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
E.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in the "A" Agricultural District, when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
8.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side, and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
8.3  Parking Regulations: Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Section 25. 
SECTION 9: - DELETED 
SECTION 10: - "SF-R" SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description - This district is designed to accommodate the standard single family residential development. This district can also be appropriately located in proximity to multi-family residential areas. 
10.1  Permitted Uses: A building or premise in-an "SF-R" District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
B.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in an "SF-R" District, when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
10.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side, and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
10.3  Parking Regulations: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit behind the street right-of-way line. Other off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Section 25. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 11: - "SF-M" SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT WITH MANUFACTURED (HUD Code) HOUSING 
    General Purpose and Description - This district is also designed to accommodate the standard single family residential development as found in the "SF-R" District, except that the use of manufactured housing (HUD Code) is allowed. The "SF-M" District provides for a minimum residential lot area of 6,500 square feet. This district can also be appropriately located in proximity to multi-family residential areas. 
11.1  Permitted Uses: A building or premise in an "SF-M" District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
B.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in an "SF-M" District, when granted in accordance with Section 24. 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
11.2  Area: Yard: Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side, and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
11.3  Parking Regulations: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit behind the street right-of-way line. Other off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Section 25. 
11.4  Additional Restrictions Applicable to the Manufactured Housing (HUD Code) Uses in the "SF-M" District: 
A.  Manufactured housing design and construction will comply with construction and safety standards published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the requirements of the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, or as amended. All manufactured homes will be subject to inspection by the Building Official. 
B.  All manufactured homes shall be set on solid slab structures and/or 1811 to 2011 runners. Additional rooms and enclosed porches shall be constructed on a solid slab. 
C.  Tie-downs will be required and will be secured prior to occupancy. 
D.  Underpinning and skirting will be required and will be installed prior to occupancy. 
E.  Accessory buildings will be either manufactured or constructed in accordance with city codes. 
F.  All manufactured homes shall comply with all regulations of the State of Texas and such regulations are hereby incorporated into this section as if fully set out in length herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 12: - "MH" MANUFACTURED HOUSING (HUD Code) PARK DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: The Manufactured Housing (HUD Code) Park District is intended to provide for quality manufactured housing park development and maintenance. Manufactured housing parks are (defined as tracts or units of land under sole ownership where lots are rented or leased as space to be used for placement of a manufactured home. 
12.1  Use Regulations: A building or lot shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Manufactured homes. 
B.  Uses normally accessory to a manufactured housing park, including office and/or maintenance buildings for management and maintenance of the mobile home park only, recreation buildings and swimming pools, private clubs, laundry facilities, storage facilities and recreation areas for use by the residents of the manufactured housing park. 
C.  Other uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
D.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in the "MH" District when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Boat and recreational vehicle and travel trailer storage yard. 
2.  Travel trailer and commercial over-night camping park. 
3.  Other uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
12.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the mini-mum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side, and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot. coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
12.3  Parking Requirements: Two (2) spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit located on the lot plus additional spaces for accessory uses as required in Section 25. 
12.4  Additional Restrictions Applicable to the Manufactured Housing (HUD Code) Park District: 
A.  Manufactured housing design and construction will comply with construction and safety standards published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the requirements of the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, or as amended. All manufactured homes will be subject to inspection by the Building Official. 
B.  Tie-downs will be required and will be secured prior to occupancy. 
C.  Underpinning and skirting will be required and-will be installed prior to occupancy except for temporary installations less than 3 months. 
D.  Accessory buildings will be either manufactured or constructed in accordance with city codes. 
E.  All manufactured homes shall comply with all regulations of the State of Texas and such regulations are hereby incorporated into this section as if fully set out in length herein. 
SECTION 13: - "MF-R" MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: The "MF-R" District is intended to provide for low to high density residential development. This district functions as a buffer or transition between major streets, non-residential areas and lower density residential areas. 
13.1  Use Regulations: A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
B.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in an "MF-R" district, when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
13.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side, and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
13.3  Parking Regulations: Two and one-half (2.5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit. Required parking may not be provided within the required front yard. Other off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 25. 
13.4  Refuse Facilities: Every dwelling unit in a multi-family complex shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian and vehicular travel way. There shall be available at all times at least six (6) cubic yards of refuse container per thirty (30) multi-family dwelling units. For complexes with less than thirty (30) units, no less than four (4) cubic yards of refuse container shall be provided. Each refuse facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height or by an enclosure within a building. No refuse facility may be placed nearer than thirty (30) feet to another residentially zoned district. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
13.5  Screening Requirements: Border fencing of wood or masonry of not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height shall be installed by the builder, if not already in place, at the time of construction of any multi-family complex abutting a "SF-R", "SF-M", or "MH" District, along the property line on any perimeter not abutting a public street or right-of-way. This fence shall extend no further into the front yard than the front yard setback requirement for the "MF-R" District. The fence shall be maintained throughout the existence of the multi-family complex by the owner of the complex. 
13.6  Usable Open Space: Each lot or tract of land used for multi-family development in the "MF-R" District shall provide usable open space totaling twelve percent (12%) of the area of the lot or tract. The usable open space shall have a maximum slope of ten percent (10%) and shall be exclusive of street and alley right-of-way and/or easements, individually platted lots without open space areas, or private yards and patios. The twelve percent (12%) shall be computed as percentages of total platted area of a "MF-R" subdivision, excluding rights-of-way for major and secondary thoroughfares (as described in the current Comprehensive Plan) . At the time of site plan and/or subdivision plat approval, the Planning Commission and/or City Council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope or which are otherwise unusable if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and that their existence enhances the development. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 14: - DELETED 
SECTION 15: - DELETED 
SECTION 16. - "C" COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL 
    General Purpose and Description: The "C" District is intended to provide commercial services and products to the community. 
16.1  Use Regulations: A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
B.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in a "C" District, when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
16.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot, coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
16.3  Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 25. 
16.4  Refuse Facilities: Each refuse facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height or by an enclosure within a building. No refuse facility may be placed nearer than thirty (30) feet to a residentially zoned district. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
16.5  Screening Requirements: Border fencing of wood or masonry of not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height shall be installed by the builder, if not already in place, at the time of construction of any "C" development abutting any residential district or use or any industrial district or use, along the property line on any perimeter not abutting a public street or right-of-way. This fence shall extend no further into the front yard than the front yard setback requirement for the "C" District. The fence shall be maintained throughout the existence of the commercial development by the owner. 
16.6  Landscaping Requirements: 
A.  Landscape Plan: Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any use in the "C" District, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted and shall show location,name, quantity and size of any landscape plants or other landscape features.Such plan shall show all buildings, parking areas, drives, walks, adjacent streets and alleys. The Landscape Plan shall be drawn to scale and of such size as to be legible. 
B.  Minimum Standards: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the total area of any street yard, including areas which may be designated for vehicular use or parking areas, shall be landscaped in areas which are permeable and may include grasses, ground cover, shrubs, hedges, or trees. 
C.  Certificate of Occupancy: Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy all landscaping must be in place in accordance with the Landscape Plan required in Section 16.6-A. A Waiver of Compliance may be given by the Building Official when the owner agrees in writing to a specific date after which the landscaping shall be required to have been installed. Such date shall not be more than six (6) months after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
D.  Maintenance: All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such materials or plants not part of the landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant material which dies shall be replaced with plant material of a suitable variety and size. 
16.7  Mechanical Equipment: No mechanical equipment as an accessory facility may be placed nearer than one hundred twenty (120) feet to any residentially zoned district. Each mechanical equipment facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the side or adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height or by an enclosure within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 17: - "CBD" CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: The "CBD" Business District is intended to provide a zoning category to meet the special needs and interests of the historically central commercial area of the community. A variety of commercial uses are permitted although all permitted activities are conducted within a building or structure, or recreational facility. 
17.1  Use Regulations: A building or premise shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
B.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in a "CBD" District, when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
17.2  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
17.3  Parking Requirements: No requirements for parking and loading requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 25. 
17.4  Refuse Facilities: Each refuse facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height or by an enclosure within a building. No refuse facility may be placed nearer than thirty (30) feet to a residentially zoned district. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 18: - "L-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: The "L-1" District is established to accommodate those uses which are of a non-nuisance type located in relative proximity to residential areas, and to preserve and protect lands designated on the comprehensive plan for industrial development and use from the intrusion of certain incompatible uses which might impede the development and use of lands for industrial purpose. Development in the "L-1" District is limited primarily to certain wholesale and jobbing commercial uses and certain industrial uses, such as the fabrication of materials and specialized manufacturing and research institutions, all of a non-nuisance type. No use or types of uses specifically limited to the "I-2" District may be permitted in the "I-1" District. 
18.1  Use Regulations: Uses permitted in the "I-1" District are subject to the following conditions: 
A.  All business, servicing, or processing except for off-street parking, off-street loading, display of merchandise for sale to the public, and establishments of the "drive-in" type, shall be conducted within completely enclosed areas. 
B.  All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential district, except for motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened with screening not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the maximum height of such screening. 
C.  Permitted uses in the "I-1" District shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence. 
D.  Permitted uses in the "I-1" District shall produce no noise exceeding in intensity, at the boundary of the property, the average intensity of noise of street traffic. 
E.  Permitted uses in the "I-1" District shall riot create fire hazards on surrounding property. 
F.  Permitted uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
G.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in the "I-1" District when granted in accordance with Section 24: 
1.  Other uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
18.2  Exceptions: Other manufacturing and industrial uses which do not meet the general definition for manufacturing processes may be permitted by the City Council after public hearing and review of the particular operational characteristics of each such use, and other pertinent data affecting the community's general. welfare. Approval of uses under this subsection shall be made in accordance with Section 24. 
18.3  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
18.4  Parking Regulations: Off-street parking and load requirements shall be provided in accordance with the specific uses set forth in Section 25. 
18.5  Refuse Facilities: Each refuse facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height or by an enclosure within a building. No refuse facility may be placed nearer than thirty feet (30') to a residentially zoned district. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
18.6  Screening Requirements: Border fencing of wood or masonry of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height shall be installed by the builder, if not already in place, at the time of construction of any "I-1" District or use, along the property line on any perimeter abutting any residential or commercial district where said property line does not abut a street or right-of-way. This fence shall extend no further into the front yard than the front yard setback requirement for the "I-1" District. The fence shall be maintained throughout the existence of the commercial development by the owner. 
18.7  Landscaping Requirements: 
A.  Landscape Plan: Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any use in the "I-1" District, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted and shall show location, name, quantity, and size of any landscape plants or other landscape features. Such plan shall show all buildings, parking areas, drive, walks, adjacent streets, and alleys. The Landscape Plan shall be drawn to scale and of such size as to be legible. 
B.  Minimum Standards: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the total area of any street yard, including such areas which may be designated for vehicular use or parking areas, shall be landscaped in areas which are permeable and may include grasses, ground cover, shrubs, hedges, or trees. 
C.  Certificate of Occupancy: Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, all landscaping must be in place in accordance with the Landscape Plan required in Section 18.7-A. A Waiver of Compliance may be given by the Building official when the owner agrees in writing to a specific date after which the landscaping shall be required to have been installed. Such date shall not be more than six (6) months after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
D.  Maintenance: All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such materials or plants not part of the landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant material which dies shall be replaced with plant material of a suitable variety and size. 
18.8  Mechanical Equipment: No mechanical equipment as an accessory facility may be placed nearer than one hundred twenty feet (120') to any residentially zoned district. Each mechanical equipment facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the side or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height or by an enclosure within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 19: - "1-2" HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 
    General Purpose and Description: The "I-2" District is established to accommodate most industrial uses and protect such areas from the intrusion of certain incompatible uses which might impede the development and use of lands for industrial purposes. 
19.1  Use Regulations: Uses permitted in the "I-2" District are subject to the following regulations: 
A.  All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking, off-street loading, display or merchandise for sale to the public, and establishments of the "drive-in" type, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise indicated. 
B.  All storage within one hundred feet (100') of a residential district, except for motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened with screening not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, provided no storage located within fifty feet (50') of such screening shall exceed the maximum height of such screening. 
C.  All facilities involved in the manufacturing, fabrication, processing or assembly of products shall be allowed provided that such facilities are not detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, and further provided that the following performance standards and city ordinances are met: 
1.  Smoke: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to smoke emission; 
2.  Particulate Matter: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to emission of particulate matter; 
3.  Dust, Odor, Gas, Fumes, Glare, or Vibration: No emission of these matters shall result in a concentration at or beyond the property line which is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or which causes injury or damage to property; said emissions shall in all cases conform to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to said emissions; 
4.  Radiation Hazards and Electrical Disturbances: No operation shall be conducted unless it conforms to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations pertaining to radiation control; 
5.  Noise: No operation shall be conducted in a manner so that any noise produced is objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. Sound levels of noise at the property line shall not exceed 75 DB (a) permitted for a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour; said operation shall in all cases conform to the standards established by applicable state and federal health rules and regulations and to other city ordinances pertaining to noise; and 
6.  Water Pollution: No water pollution shall be emitted by the manufacturing or other processing. In a case in which potential hazards exist, it shall be necessary to install safeguards acceptable to the appropriate State and national health and environmental protection agencies prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing that said safeguards are acceptable to said agency or agencies. 
D.  Other uses as permitted in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
E.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in the "I-2" District when granted in accordance with Section 24. 
1.  Other uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: A bed & breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. "Block face" shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
19.2  Exceptions: Other manufacturing and industrial uses which do not meet the general definition for manufacturing processes may be permitted by the City Council after public hearing and review of the particular operational characteristics of each such use, and other pertinent data affecting the community's general welfare. Approval of uses under this subsection shall be made in accordance with Section 24. 
19.3  Area; Yard; Height; Lot Coverage; and Building Size Requirements: The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear.), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings, and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the "Schedule of District Regulations Adopted" (see Section 22) and any other applicable regulations as herein provided. 
19.4  Parking Regulations: Required off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided in accordance with the specific uses set forth in Section 25. 
19.5  Refuse Facilities: Each refuse facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the side or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six feet, (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height or by an enclosure within a building. No refuse facility may be placed nearer than thirty feet (30') to a residentially zoned district. Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy city public health and sanitary regulations. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
19.6  Screening Requirements: Border fencing of wood or masonry of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height shall be installed by the builder, if not already in place, at the time of construction of any "I-2" development abutting any residential district or use or any commercial district or use, along the property line on any perimeter not abutting a public street or right-of-way. This fence shall extend no further into the front yard than the front yard setback requirement for the "I-2" District. The fence shall be maintained throughout the existence of the commercial development by the owner. 
19.7  Landscaping Requirements: 
A.  Landscape Plan: Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for any use in the "I-2" District, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted and shall show location, name, quantity, and size of any landscape plants or other landscape features. Such plan shall show all buildings, parking areas, drive, walks, adjacent streets, and alleys. The Landscape Plan shall be drawn to scale and of such size as to be legible. 
B.  Minimum Standards: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the total area of any street yard, including such areas which may be designated for vehicular use or parking areas, shall be landscaped in areas which are permeable and may include grasses, ground cover, shrubs, hedges, or trees. 
C.  Certificate of Occupancy: Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy all landscaping must be in place in accordance with the Landscape Plan required in Section 19.7-A. A Waiver of Compliance may be given by the City Manager when the owner agrees in writing to a specific date after which the landscaping shall be required to have been installed. Such date shall not be more than six (6) months after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
D.  Maintenance: All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such materials or plants not part of the landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant material which dies shall be replaced with plant material of a suitable variety and size. 
19.8  Mechanical Equipment: No mechanical equipment as an accessory facility may be placed nearer than one hundred twenty feet (120') to any residentially zoned district. Each mechanical equipment facility shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the side or immediately adjoining property, by an opaque fence or wall of wood or masonry not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height or by an enclosure within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 20: - "PD" PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: The Planned Development District "PD" prefix is intended to provide for combining and mixing of uses allowed in various districts with appropriate regulations and to permit flexibility in the use and design of land and buildings in situations where modification of specific provisions of this ordinance is not contrary to its intent and purpose or significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is based and will not be harmful to the community. A "PD" District may be used to permit new and innovative concepts in land utilization. While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which will allow development not otherwise permitted, procedures are established herein to insure against misuse of the increased flexibility. 
20.1  Permitted Uses: Any use specified in the ordinance granting a Planned Development District shall be permitted in that district. The size, location, appearance and method of operation may be Specified to the extent necessary to insure compliance with the purpose of this ordinance. 
Development Standards: 
A.  Development standards for each separate "PD" District shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the "PD" District and may include but shall not be limited to: uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate. 
B.  In the "PD" District, the particular district(s) to which uses specified in the "PD" are most similar shall be stated in the granting ordinance. All "PD" applications shall list all requested variances from the standard requirements set forth throughout this ordinance (applications without this list will be considered incomplete). 
C.  The ordinance granting a "PD" District shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the "PD" granted wherein. A specific list is required of variances in each district or districts and a general statement for citing the reason for the "PD" request. 
D.  The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections of the ordinance unless specifically exempted in the granting ordinance. 
E.  The minimum acreage for a Planned Development District shall be three (3) acres. 
20.2  In establishing a Planned Development District in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve and file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each Planned Development District. During the review and public hearing process, the City Council shall require a conceptual plan and a development plan (or detailed site plan). 
A.  Conceptual Plan: This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed planned development district in a graphic manner and shall be supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. 
1.  A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares and preliminary lotting arrangements. For residential development which does not propose platted lots, the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas and other pertinent development data. 
2.  A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the City Council, may include, but is not limited to the types of use(s), topography and boundary of "PD" area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys and easements, location of future public facilities, building height and location, parking ratios and other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the final development plan. 
3.  Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building height or coverage of the site and which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site, or significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may, be authorized by the building official or his designated representative. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding whether or not a detail site plan conforms to the original concept plan the City Council shall review the request and render judgment as to the conformity. 
B.  Development Plan or Detail Site Plan: This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the Planned Development District and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan shall be on the basis for issuance of a building permit. For the districted "SF-R", "SF-M", "MH", and "MF-R" a final plat shall qualify as the development plan. The development plan may be submitted for the total area of the "PD" or for any section or part as approved on the conceptual plan. The development plan must be approved by the City Council. A public hearing on approval of the development plan shall be held by the City Council, unless such a hearing is waived pursuant to Subsection 3 below at the time of conceptual plan approval in the original amending ordinance. The development plan shall include: 
1.  A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing existing vegetation, natural water courses, creeks or bodies of water and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This should include a delineation of any flood prone areas. 
2.  A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing streets; general location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains; the location and width for all curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an. accurate survey of the tract with the topographical contour interval of not more than five feet (5'). 
3.  A site plan for proposed building complexes showing the location of separate buildings, and between buildings and property lines, street lines and alley lines. Also to be included on the site plan is a plan showing the arrangement and provision of off-street parking. 
4.  A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental planting, wooded areas and trees to be planted. 
5.  An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development in all districts except single-family and two-family may be required by the City Council if deemed appropriate. Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the building official or his designated representative. 
C.  All development plans may have supplemental data describing standards, schedules or other data pertinent to the development of the Planned Development District which is to be included in the text of the amending ordinance. The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in Section 37. This procedure is expanded as follows for approval of conceptual and development plans. 
1.  Separate public hearing shall be held by, the City Council for the approval of the conceptual plan and the development plan or any section of the development plan, unless such requirement is waived by the City Council upon a determination that a single public hearing is adequate. A single public hearing is adequate when: 
a.  The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the Planned Development District to fulfill the requirements for both plans; or 
b.  Information on the concept plan is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land and the detail site plan will not. deviate substantially from it; and 
c.  The requirement is waived at the time the amending ordinance is approved. If the requirement is waived the conditions shall be specifically stated in the amending ordinance. 
2.  The ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall not be approved until the conceptual plan is approved. 
a.  The development plan may be approved in sections. When the plan is approved in sections, the separate approvals by the City Council for the initial and subsequent sections will be required. 
b.  An initial development plan shall be submitted for approval within six (6) months from the approval of the conceptual plan or some portion of the concept plan. If the development plan is not submitted within six (6) months, the conceptual plan is subject to re-approval by the City Council. If the entire project is not completed within two (2) years, the City Council may review the original concept plan to ensure its continued validity. 
c.  Regardless of whether the public hearing is waived for the development plan, approval by the City Council is still required. 
20.3  When a "PD" is being considered, a written report may be requested of the applicant discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire and traffic. Written comments from the applicable public school district, and from private utilities may be submitted to the City Council. 
20.4  All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance in its original form, or by subsequent amendment thereto, shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts, together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained in the appendix of this ordinance. 
SECTION 21: - "FP" FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT 
    General Purpose and Description: To provide for the appropriate use of land which has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard, and to promote the (general welfare and provide protection from flooding portions of certain districts are designated with a Flood Plain Prefix, "FP". Areas designated on the Zoning District Map by an "FP" Prefix shall be subject to the following provisions: 
21.1  Permitted Uses: The permitted uses in that portion of any district having a Flood Plan ("FP") prefix shall be limited to the following: 
A.  Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal types of animal husbandry, but excluding construction of barns or other outbuildings. 
B.  Off-street parking incidental to any adjacent main use permitted in the district. 
C.  Private open space as part of a planned residential development. 
D.  Structures, installations and facilities installed, operated and maintained by public agencies for flood control purposes. 
E.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
F.  The following specific uses shall be permitted in a "FP" District, when granted in accordance with Section 24. 
1.  Uses as listed in Section 23 of this ordinance. 
21.2  No building or structure shall be erected in that portion of any district designated with a Flood Plain, "FP", prefix until and unless such building or structure has been approved by the City Council after engineering studies have been made, and it is ascertained that such building or structure is not subject to damage by flooding and would not constitute an encroachment, hazard, or obstacle to the movement of flood waters and that such construction would not endanger the value and safety of other property or the public health and welfare. 
SECTION 22: - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
    The following table is hereby adopted and shall be considered as part of each applicable zoning district regulation as previously described in this ordinance: 
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
Zoning 
District Min. Lot 
Area (Sq. Ft.) 
(a) Min. Lot 
Width 
(Ft) Min Lot 
Depth 
(Ft) Min. Front 
Yard Setback 
(Ft) 
(b) Min. Rear 
Yard Setback 
(Ft) 
(b) Min. Side 
Yard Setback 
(Ft) 
-int lot- Min. Side 
Yard Sideback 
(Ft) 
-Side Street- 
(b) Max. Height 
of Structure 
(Ft.) Max. Lot 
Coverage of 
Structures Min 
Dwelling 
Size 
Excl. Garages 
(Sq. Ft.) A 2 acre 200 200 30 30 25 25 30 30% 1,500 SF-R 
(o) 6,500 75 75 20 25 10 25 3- 40% 1,000 SF-M 
(o) 6,500 60 75 20 25 10 25 30 40% 840 MH 
(o) 5,000/D.U. 50 75 20 15 10 25 15 40% 720 MF-R 
(o) 7,500 75 100 25 25 
(d) 25 
(d) 25 45 50% 400 C N/A N/A N/A 25 25 
(d) 10 
(d) 25 45 
(g) 50% N/A CBD N/A N/A N/A N/A (e) N/A N/A 100 
(g) N/A N/A I-1 N/A 100 150 25 25 
(f) 25 
(f) 25 45 
(g) 50% N/A I-2 N/A 100 150 25 25 
(f) 25 
(f) 25 45 
(g) 50% N/A PD 3 acres (h) (h) (h) (h) (h) (h) (h) (h) (h)  
(a)  The minimum lot areas only apply to those properties served by public sewer systems. For those properties unserved by public sewer systems, compliance with standards established by the State for private sewer systems is required. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback for all properties abutting U.S. Highway 287. There shall also be a minimum thirty-five (35) foot setback for all side yards (street side) abutting a designated major thoroughfare or collector street. 
(c)  Accessory structures are allowed in rear yards only. These are to be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet inside the designated setback requirement for front yards, but may be placed in other areas of rear or side yards provided they meet the minimum setback requirements for these areas. 
(d)  There shall be a total of fifty (50) foot setback from the adjacent property line for buildings in excess of one (1) story in height when adjacent to a SF-R, SF-M or MH District. 
(e)  None required except where a CBD District abuts a residential district (whether separated by an alley or not) in which case a minimum backyard of ten (10) feet shall be provided. 
(f)  Unless adjacent to a residential district, in which case a fifty (50) foot setback shall be observed. 
(g)  Except cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys, vent stacks or mechanical equipment rooms which may project not more than twelve (12) feet beyond the maximum building height. 
(h)  See Section 20 for specific requirements. 
SECTION 23: - USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS 
    Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses but no land shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed., placed, demolished or converted which is arranged or designed to be used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following "Schedule of Uses": 
A.  Legend for Interpreting Schedule of Uses 
X 
Designates use permitted in district indicated 
____________ 
Designates use prohibited in district indicated 
S 
Designates use which may be approved as Specific Use Permit. 
B.  Index for Schedule of Uses 
CATEGORY SECTION PAGE # _____Agricultural Uses 23.1 31 Residential Uses 23.2 31 Commercial, Services Uses 23.3 31 Automobile Related Uses 23.4 33 Transportation Related Uses 23.5 34 Recreational and Entertainment Uses 23.6 34 Educational, Institutional and Special Uses 23.7 35 Utility Uses 23.8 36 General Manufacturing and Industrial Uses 23.9 36 Natural Resource Storage and Extraction Uses 23.10 39 Accessory and Incidental Uses 23.11 39  
    For alphabetical list of uses, Section 35. 
    Other permitted uses are listed in the sections describing regulations for each individual district (Sections 8 through 21 of this ordinance). 
23.1 
AGRICULTURAL USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Animal Feed Lot S Animal Pound (public or private) S X X Auction Barn S S S Garden or Orchard (commercial) X Garden or Orchard (non-commercial) X X X X X X Granary S S X Grain Elevator S X Greenhouse or Nursery (commercial) S S X X Hatchery, Poultry S X X Kennel S S X Open Land X X  
23.2 
RESIDENTIAL USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Bed & Breakfast S S S S S S S Boarding or Rooming House X S X X Hotel/Motel X S X X Mobile Home Park X Mobile Home Subdivision X Mobile/Manufactured Home as Fixed Dwelling S X X Multiple Family Dwelling (apartment) X S S S Single Family Dwelling - Attached X S S S Single Family Dwelling - Detached S X X X X X S S Two Family Dwelling S S X S S S  
23.3 
COMMERCIAL, SERVICE USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Alcoholic Beverage Sales (Nightclub) X X X Alcoholic Beverage Sales (Package) X X X X Alcoholic Beverage Sales (Wholesale) X X Antique Shop (Indoor Sales) X Antique Shop (Outdoor Sales) S X X Appliance - Retail Sales, Service, or Repair (No Outside Storage) X X X Appliance - Retail Sales, Service, or Repair (With Outside Storage) X X Art Supply Store X X Bakery or Confectionery Shop (Retail) X X Bakery or Confectionery Shop (Wholesale) X X Bank or Savings and Loan Office X X Barber or Beauty Shop X X Book Store, Stationery Shop or Newsstand X X Building Material Sales X X X X Cabinet or Upholstery Shop X X Cleaners (Small Shop Pickup) X X Clothing/Apparel (Retail) X X Contractor Storage or Equipment Yard S X X Contractor Office X X X X Custom Personal Service Shop X X Discount or Department Store X X Drapery, Needlework, or Weaving Shop X X Drug Store or Pharmacy X X Florist X X Feed, See, Fertilizer Store (Retail) X X Food Store (Less than 20,000 Square Feet) X S S S Food Store (Greater Than or Equal to 20,000 Square Feet) X S S Flea Market S S S S Furniture Store (retail) X X S Gift and Accessory Shop (Retail) X X Greenhouse or Plant Nursery (Retail) X X X Hobby/Handicraft Shop X X Hardware Store X X X Key/Locksmith Shop X X Laundry and Cleaning (Self-Service) X X Machinery Sales, Storage or Repair X X X Medical Appliances, Fitting, Sales or Rental X X X Medical, Optical or Dental Laboratory S X X Medical, Optical or Dental Office/Clinic X X X Mortuary or Funeral Home X Paint Store X X X X Pawn Store S X X Pet Shop S X Plumbing, Heating, or Air Conditioning Shop X X X Plumbing Supply (Wholesale/Retail) X S X Print Shop X X X X Professional Services X X X Restaurant or Cafeteria X X X X Retail Store Other Than Listed X S S S Sexually Oriented Business S S S Shoe/Boot Repair or Sales X X X Self-Storage Warehouse S X X Studio (Decorator, Artist, or Photographer) X X Studio (Health or Exercise) X X Tailor Shop X X Tool Rental X S X R.V. Trailer or Mobile Home Sales or Rental S X X Travel Agency X X Variety Store X X Veterinarian Office (No Outside Animals) X X S Veterinarian Office (With Office Animals) X S X X Welding or Machine Shop S X X  
23.4 
AUTOMOBILE RELATED USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Auto Glass Shop X X X Auto Muffler Shop X X X Auto Seat Cover Shop X X X Auto Painting and Body Shop S X X Auto Parts and Accessory Sales (Indoors) X X X X Auto Storage, Auction, Impound Yard S X X Car Wash (Automated) S S S Car Wash (Self-Service) S S S Fuel/Service Station (Auto) X X X Fuel/Service Station (Truck) X X Motorcycle Sales/Repair X X New or Used Auto Sales (Outdoor Lot) X X New or Used Auto Sales (Indoor Lot) X X X Repair Garage S X X Tire Retreading or Capping X X Trailer or Auto Rental S X X Wrecking or Salvage Yard S X  
23.5 
TRANSPORTATION RELATED USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Airport or Landing Field S S S Bus/Train Station or Terminal X X X X Hauling or Storage Company X X Heliport or Helistop S S S S Motor Freight Terminal X X Parking Lot or Structure - Commercial (Auto) X X X X Parking Lot or Structure - Commercial (Truck) S X  
23.6 
RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Amusement, Commercial (Indoor) X X X X Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor) S X X Bridle, Bicycle or Nature Trail X S S S S S S S X Camp (For Children) X S Country Club (Private) X S S S S S Dance Hall/Night Club S S S S Drag Strip or Commercial Racing S S S Golf Course (Public/Private) S S S S S S S S S Park or Playground (Public/Private) X X X X X X X X X X Ballfield or Stadium (Public/Private) X S S S S S X X S Pool/Billiard Hall S X X X Private Club S S S S Rodeo Grounds S S S X Roller or Ice Rink X X X Swim, Tennis or Handball Club S S S S S X S X X Swimming Pool X S S S S X S S S Swimming Pool (Home) X X X X X X X X X Theater or Playhouse (Indoors) X X X Theater (Drive-In) S X X Zoo (Public/Private) S  
23.7 
EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND SPECIAL USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Art Gallery, Library or Museum S X X Cemetery or Mausoleum S S S S Church or Rectory X S S S S X X S S College or University S S S S Community Center (Public) S S S S S X X S S Convent or Monastery S S S S S X S S Day Nursery S S S S X Fairgrounds or Exhibition Area S S S X Fraternal Organization, Lodge or Union Hall X X S S Home for Aged (Residence) S S X X S Hospital (Acute Care) X X S S Hospital (Chronic Care) X X S S Institution for Alcoholic, Narcotic or Psychiatric Patients S S S Institution of Religious, Charitable or Philanthropic Nature X X Kindergarten X X X X X School (Business) X X School (Public or Parochial/Private) S X X X X S S S School (Trade) X X  
23.8 
UTILITY USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Broadcasting Facilities S S S X X Cable Television/Telephone Lines X X X X X X X X X X Electrical Substation S S S X X Electrical Distribution Line and Poles X X X X X X X X X X Fire, Police or Municipal Building X S S S S X X X X Gas Regulating Station S S S S Gas Service Line X X X X X X X X X X Gas Transmission Line S S X S Electrical Transmission Line S X X Utility Line (Water, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer) X X X X X X X X X X Post Office X X X X X Radio, Television or Microwave Tower S S X X Radio or Television Transmitting Station S S X X Sewage Pumping Station X X X X X X X X X X Sewage Treatment Plant S S Telephone Exchange, Switching, Relay or Transmitting Station X S S S S X X X X X Utility Business Office X X X X Utility Shops, Storage Yards or Buildings (Public or Private) S S X X Water Reservoir, Well or Pumping Storage X S S S S X X X X Water Stand Pipe or Elevated Water Storage X S S S S X S X X X Water Treatment Plant S S S S S S X X S  
23.9 
GENERAL MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Acid Manufacturing S Advertising Displays Manufacturing X X Alcohol Manufacturing S Ammonia, Bleach or Chlorine Manufacturing X X Apparel and Other Products Assembled from Finished Textiles X X Arsenal S S X Asphalt or Concrete Batching Plant - Permanent S S X Asphalt or Concrete Batching Plant - Temporary S S S S S S S S Asphalt Manufacturing or Refining X Blast Furnace X Boats, Building or Repair X X Boiler Works X X Bookbinding X X X X Bottling Works X X Brick Kiln or Tile Plant X Brooms or Brushes, Manufacturing X X Building Materials (Inside Storage) X X X Building Materials (Outside Storage) S X X Cameras or Other Photographic Equipment Manufacturing X X Candle Manufacturing S X Carpet Manufacturing S X Celluloid Manufacturing Treatment X Cement, Lime, Gypsum or Plaster of Paris Manufacturing X Ceramics, Stone, Glass, Marble or Porcelain Products Manufacturing X Chemical Manufacturing S Cleaning and Dyeing (Dry Cleaning Plant) S X X Coal, Coke or Wood Yard X Cosmetic Manufacturing S X Cotton Gin S Cotton Seed Oil Manufacturing S Creosote Treatment S Dairy Products Processing S X Disinfectant Manufacturing S Distillation of Bones, Coal or Wood X Drugs or Pharmaceutical Products Manufacturing X X Dump or Sanitary Landfill S S Dyestuff Manufacturing X Electrical Appliances/Supplies Machinery, Assembly/Manufacturing X X Electronic Products, Assembly X X Electronic Products, Manufacturing S X Emery Cloth/Sandpaper Manufacturing X Explosives or Fireworks Manufacturing or Storage S S Fat Rendering X Fertilizer Manufacturing S Fiberglass Manufacturing S Fish Smoking and Curing X Food Products Processing S X Forge Plant X Foundry (iron, steel, brass or copper) X Fur Good Manufacturing S X Furniture/Upholstery Manufacturing X X Gas Manufacturing X General Manufacturing S X Glass Manufacturing X X Glue or Gelatin Manufacturing X Herbicide Manufacturing S Household Appliance Products Assembly and Manufacturing X X Ice Production, Dry or Natural X X Industrial Park S X Inset Poison Manufacturing S Junk or Salvage Yard S Jute, Hemp, Sisal or Oakum Products Manufacturing X X Laundry Plant X X Light Manufacturing X X Mattress Manufacturing or Renovation X Meat Processing/Locker Plant/Frozen Food Products S S X Metal Fabrication S X Mill (Grain, Flour, Food Products) X Musical Instrument Manufacturing X X Oilcloth or Linoleum Manufacturing X Oilfield Equipment Yard X X Offal or Dead Animal Reduction Or Dumping S Ore Reproduction X Orthopedic or Medical Appliance Manufacturing X X Paint, Oil, Shellac, Turpentine or Varnish Manufacturing S X Paper Products Manufacturing X Petroleum Products Manufacturing and Storage S X  
23.9 
GENERAL MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES, cont'd. 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Pipe Sales and Supply (Industrial) S X X Plastic Products Manufacturing S X Pump Sales, Repair and Maintenance S X X Scrap Metal Sales and Storage X Sports and Athletic Equipment Manufacturing X X Steel Fabrication S X Storage or Wholesale Warehouse X X Tools or Hardware Manufacturing S X Toys and Novelty Products Manufacturing X X Window Shade, Awnings, Venetian Blind Manufacturing S X Yeast Manufacturing S X  
23.10 
NATURAL RESOURCE STORAGE AND EXTRACTION USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Caliche Pit and Caliche Storage S S S Mining and Storage of Mining Waste S S Oil and Gas Extraction/Collection Facilities and Storage S S X S Sand/Gravel Extraction or Storage S S S Topsoil, Earth, Clay, or Stone Extraction or Storage S S S  
23.11 
ACCESSORY AND INCIDENTAL USES 
A SF-R SF-M MH MF-R C CBD I-1 I-2 FP Accessory Building (Residential) X X X X X S S S S Accessory Building (Commercial) X X X X Accessory Building (Farm) X Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use X X X X X X X X X X Stable (Commercial) X X Stable (Private) X S S X Tennis Court (Private) X S S S S S S S S X  
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07; Ord. No. 2011-15, Sec. 1, adopted 12-20-11) 
SECTION 24: - "SUP" SPECIFIC USE PERMIT 
24.1  General Provisions: The Building Official may grant a permit for a specific use of property as authorized by the zoning district in which the property is situated, after 10 day's notification of all owners of property located within 200'. An application for Specific Use Permit (SUP) shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn approximately to scale (a scale drawing may be required) and showing the general arrangements of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities; size, height, construction materials and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted; location and construction of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; visual screening such as walls, landscaping and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200'). The Building Official may require information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. 
24.2  Specific Use Permit Regulations: 
A.  The Building Official shall determine that such uses are harmonious and adaptable to building structures and uses of adjacent property and other property, in the vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of access to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, heights of structures and compatibility of buildings. 
B.  In granting a Specific Use Permit, the Building official may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or grantee before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for use of the building on such property pursuant to such Specific Use Permit, and such conditions precedent to the granting of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
C.  No Specific Use Permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner, and grantee of the specific use permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the specific use permit, as attached to the site plan drawing(s). No public hearing is necessary for site plan approval. 
D.  Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this ordinance are more or less restrictive than regulations imposed by any governmental authority through legislation, rule or regulation, the regulations, rules or restrictions which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. Regardless of any other provision of this ordinance, no land shall be used and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation. 
E.  When the Building Official authorizes granting of a Specific Use Permit, the Zoning Map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses, and said amendment is to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use and suffixed by the designation "SUP". 
F.  Appeals to the decision of the Building Official may be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 10 days. 
SECTION 25: - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
    Purpose: To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions. 
25.1  Special Off-Street Parking Provisions-Residential District: 
A.  All off-street parking spaces shall be located behind the front property line in all residential districts. 
B.  Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
C.  No off-street parking shall be allowed except on concrete paving or other similar paving surfaces (i.e., concrete paving stone, etc.). 
25.2  Special Off-Street Parking Provisions-Commercial and Industrial Districts: 
A.  All required off-street parking spaces shall be located five feet (5') behind the property line in all commercial and industrial districts. 
B.  Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
C.  No off-street parking shall be allowed except on concrete or asphalt paving or other similar paving surfaces. 
25.3  Size of Parking Spaces - All Districts: 
A.  Head-in Parking: 
1.  Each parking space shall measure not less than nine feet (9') by twenty feet (20') exclusive of access drives or aisles. 
2.  Each parking space located in a parking garage shall measure not less than nine (9') feet by eighteen feet (18'), exclusive of access drives or aisles. 
3.  Each small car parking space shall measure no less than eight and one-half feet (8.5') by sixteen feet (16'), exclusive of access drives or aisles. A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the required parking may he permitted as small car parking. Signage shall identify the small car spaces. 
B.  Parallel Parking: 
1.  Each parking space (on-street or off-street) designated for parallel parking shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet (8') by twenty-two feet (22'). 
25.4  Off-Street Loading Space - All Districts: 
A.  All retail, commercial and industrial structures having three thousand (3,000) square feet or more of gross floor area shall provide and maintain off-street parking facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods at a ratio of at least one (1) space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area. A loading space shall consist of an area of a minimum of ten (10) by twenty-five (25) feet. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. 
B.  Kindergartens, day schools and similar child training and care establishments shall provide paved off-street loading and unloading space on a private drive to accommodate one (1) motor vehicle for each ten (10) students or children cared for by the establishment. 
C.  Uses not listed in Section 22.3 shall provide required off-street parking according to the most similar use listed in Section 22.3. 
D.  Loading docks and areas shall be located within the building or on the lot adjacent to a public alley or private service drive. 
25.5  Schedule of Parking Requirements Based on Use: 
In all districts, except the Central Business District, there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Bank, savings and loan: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
B.  Bowling alley: Four (4) parking spaces for each alley or lane. 
C.  Business or professional office (general) one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
D.  Church or other place of worship: one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium. 
E.  Commercial amusement: Thirty (30) spaces plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area over two thousand (2000) square feet. 
F.  Day nursery: One and one-half (1.5) space per teacher. 
G.  Dwelling, single family: Two (2) spaces per dwelling. 
H.  Dwelling, two family: Three (3) spaces per dwelling. 
I.  Dwelling, multi-family: Two and one-half (2.5) spaces per unit. 
J.  Dwelling, single family attached: Two (2) spaces per dwelling and an additional one-half (1/2) space per unit for guest parking within the development. 
K.  Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service: one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. 
L.  Gasoline station: Minimum of four (4) spaces. 
M.  High school, college or university: One (1) Space per each three (3) students accommodated in the institution. 
N.  Hospital: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per each bed. 
O.  Hotel: One (1) parking space for each (1) sleeping room or suite plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
P.  Library, museum or art gallery: one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
Q.  Lodge or fraternal organization: one and one-fourth (1.25) spaces per two hundred (200) square feet. 
R.  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, processing or repairing: One (1) parking space for each two employees or one (1) space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
S.  Medical or dental office: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
T.  Mini-warehouse: Four (4) spaces per complex plus one (1) space per five thousand (5000) square feet of storage area. 
U.  Manufactured housing (HUD Code) park: Two (2) spaces for each lot plus additional spaces as required herein for accessory uses. 
V.  Manufactured housing (HUD Code) subdivision: Two (2) spaces per lot. 
W.  Mortuary or funeral home: one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main chapel under maximum seating arrangement. 
X.  Motel: one (1) parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
Y.  Motor-vehicle salesrooms and used car lots: one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of sales floor for indoor uses, or one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of lot area for outdoor uses. 
Z.  Nursing home: One (1) space per four (4) beds. 
AA.  Private club, country club or golf course: One parking space for each one hundred-fifty (150) square feet of floor area or for every five (5) members, whichever is greater (or a minimum of thirty (30) spaces). 
BB.  Restaurant, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One (1) parking space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement. 
CC.  Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: One (1) space per two hundred square feet of gross floor area. 
DD.  Rooming or boarding house: one (1) parking space for each sleeping room. 
EE.  Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution: One (1) parking space for each four (4) beds. 
FF.  School, elementary or junior: one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the auditorium or main assembly room and one (1) space for each classroom. 
GG.  Theater, auditorium (except school), sports arena, stadium or gymnasium: one (1) parking space for each three (3) seats or bench seating spaces. 
HH.  Warehouse, wholesale, manufacturing and other industrial type uses: One (1) space for one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) space per one (1) employee. 
25.6  Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces: In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses the following rules shall govern: 
A.  "Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
B.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
C.  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
D.  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements, of the various uses computed separately. 
25.7  Location of Parking Spaces: All parking spaces: required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
A.  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not more than three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building served and not more than three hundred (300) feet from any other non-residential building served. 
B.  Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, cafes, or similar uses and not more than eighty percent (80%) of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium or similar uses may be provided and used jointly by similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed; provided, however, that written agreement is properly recorded. 
In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
25.8  Use of Parking Spaces - All Districts: Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for parking and storage purposes and shall not be used for the display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, and products for sale. However, homeowners may display boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other personal property for sale on off-street parking spaces; provided such parking, storage, and display of such personal property does not exceed thirty (30) days and no more than two (2) times per year. 
SECTION 26: - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
    Purpose: The purpose of this section is to permit the conduct of some home occupations within residential districts which are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located. Some home occupations are a permitted accessory use in a residential district and are subject to the requirements of that district in which the use is located, in addition to the following: 
26.1  General Provisions: 
A.  No home occupation may be conducted within residential districts prior to the issuance of a Home Occupation permit by the Building Official. 
B.  Only the member of the immediate family occupying the dwelling shall be engaged in the home occupation. 
C.  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit, garage, or accessory structure. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structure located on the premises; 
D.  There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character of the dwelling unit and/or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district; 
E.  No use shall create smoke, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use within the district; 
F.  The home occupation shall not create any significant increase in vehicular flow or parking and shall not create greater pedestrian traffic than normal for the district; 
G.  No home occupation shall cause a significant increase in the use of any utilities, or general trash or refuse beyond the average of the residences in the neighborhood; and 
H.  No more than one (1) advertising sign with a maximum of four (4) square feet of a non-illuminating nature may be placed on the premises. 
26.2  Use Regulations: 
A.  The following are examples of uses which can often be conducted within the limits of this section. Uses listed in this section do not automatically qualify as a home occupation, nor does this listing limit the uses which may qualify as a home occupations: 
1.  Accountant; 
2.  Artist; 
3.  Author; 
4.  Consultant; 
5.  Day Nursery (no more than six (6) children; 
6.  Handicrafts; 
7.  Music/Art Instruction; 
8.  Notary; 
9.  Sewing; and 
10.  Tutor. 
B.  The following uses are incompatible with residential neighborhoods and thereby impair the character of residential areas. Therefore, these uses shall not be permitted as accessory uses in residential districts: 
1.  Auto Repair; 
2.  Barber/Beauty Shop; 
3.  Day Nursery (more than six (6) children; 
4.  Painting/Bodywork on Vehicles or Boats; 
5.  Television/Appliance Repair; and 
6.  Welding; 
26.3  Limitations: A use considered not within the scope of the home occupation provisions shall be subject to the provisions of the commercial or industrial zones of this ordinance. 
SECTION 26.5: - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 
General Purpose and Description: The purpose of Bed & Breakfast regulations is to provide for an alternate type of lodging for visitors, and to provide for the preservation and adaptive reuse of older structures and historic landmarks. Bed & breakfast establishments are described as a dwelling unit that contains no more than six (6) guest-rooms, where short-term lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Limited social functions such as receptions and private parties, with or without food service, may also be provided. However, this definition shall not permit the operation of a restaurant for customers other than the occupants of the guest-rooms and their guests, or the invitees to the reception or private parties. 
1.  Use Regulations: A bed & breakfast shall not be allowed in A, MH, or FP zones. A bed & breakfast may be allowed in SF-R, SF-M, MF-R, C, CBD, I-1, or I-2 zones with a specific use permit. 
2.  Spacing Requirements: In SF-R and SF-M zones, a Bed & Breakfast shall be limited to one (1) per block face. Block face shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
3.  Length of Stay and Rates: Length of stay of a guest shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days. Room rental rates shall be based on daily rental rates only. 
(4)  Signage: That only one (1) ground or wall sign, constructed of a non-plastic material, non-interior illuminated of six (6) sq. ft. maximum size be allowed. Any exterior illumination of signage shall be installed such that it does not directly illuminate any residential structures adjacent or nearby the bed and breakfast. 
5.  Health Requirements: Food service and other health requirements shall have to meet all Texas Department of State Health Services regulations. 
6.  Fire Safety: The facility must meet fire safety requirements of the City of Bowie. 
7.  Certificate of Occupancy: A bed & breakfast facility shall comply with the city's applicable codes and must be issued a certificate of occupancy prior to occupancy. 
8.  Hotel Occupancy Tax: Bed and breakfast facilities shall comply with the city and the state hotel occupancy tax laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 27: - SPECIAL AND ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS: 
27.1  Lot Regulations: 
A.  Lot Area: The minimum residential lot area for the various districts shall be in accordance with the regulations for each district, except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance may be used for a one-family-dwelling and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in area below the mini-mum requirements set forth in the respective district. 
B.  Location of Dwellings and Buildings: Only one (1) main building for one-family and two-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. More than one (1) main building for multi-family, commercial, or industrial use may be located on a lot or unplatted tract. Each building shall face or front on a public street, other than alley, and shall have at least one means of access with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet for a commercial or industrial lot and fifteen (15) feet for a residence. Whenever two or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings do not face upon a public street, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the City Council so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one (1) building shall be computed as being the open space, yard, or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use. 
C.  The minimum lot areas only apply to those properties served by public sewer systems. For those properties served by private sewer systems, compliance with minimum standards established by the state for private sewer systems is required. 
27.2  Front Yards: 
A.  On corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets (unless shown specifically otherwise on a final plat). 
B.  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage. 
C.  Where a building line has been established by a plat approved by the City Council or by ordinance and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this ordinance for the district in which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by such ordinance or plat provided no such building line shall be less than twenty (20) feet (except as approved by "PD") or is located in the "CBD" District. 
D.  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory buildings. Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet (41) and subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than thirty (30) inches above the average grade of the yard. 
E.  Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only one required front yard need be observed. 
F.  Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or landscaping obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley or driveway intersection. 
G.  On any corner lot for which front and side yards are required herein, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree, or other planting or slope terrace or embankment may be maintained higher than three (3) feet above the street grade so as to cause danger or hazard to traffic by obstructing the view of the intersection from a point twenty-five (25) feet back from the right-of-way corner. 
H.  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future or opening of a street or thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the front or side yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. 
27.3  Side Yards: 
A.  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for (a) accessory buildings as permitted herein; (b) the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not more than twelve (12) inches into the required side yard; and (c) roof eaves projecting not more than thirty-six (36) inches into the required side yard. Balconies shall not project into the required side yard more than thirty-six (36) inches. 
B.  For multi-family structures in the "MF-R" and "PD" Districts, a minimum side yard, or space between adjoining buildings, shall be thirty (30) feet between building walls. 
27.4  Rear Yards: 
A.  Eaves, covered porches, and roof extensions without structural support in the rear yard may extend into the rear yard a distance not to exceed four (4) feet. Balconies shall not project into the required rear yard more than four (4) feet. 
SECTION 28: - ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS 
28.1  In a residential or apartment district, an accessory building is a subordinate building exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor area, detached from the main building, without separate bath or kitchen facilities, not used for commercial purposes and not rented. 
28.2  In other districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and used only in conjunction with, the main building. 
28.3  No accessory building shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, nor shall it be greater in height than the main structure. 
28.4  Area Regulations for Accessory Buildings in Residential Districts: 
A.  Size of Yards: 
1.  Front yard: Accessory buildings shall be located in the area defined as the rear or side yard. 
2.  Side Yard: An accessory building shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from any side lot line, alley line or easement line and no closer than fifteen (15) feet from any side street right-of-way line. 
3.  Rear yard: An accessory building shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from any rear lot line, alley line or easement line; no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the main building; and no closer than five (5) feet from any side lot line. 
4.  Any detached garage constructed in a residential district shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from any street or alley line on which it faces, except that any provision of this ordinance requiring a greater setback shall prevail. 
SECTION 29: - PLATTING PROPERTY NOT PERMANENTLY ZONED 
29.1  The City Council shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the city limits until the area Covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the City Council 
29.2  The City Council shall not approve any plat or subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the City is pending before the City Council unless and until such annexation shall have been approved by ordinance of the City Council. 
29.3  In the event the City Council holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, hold a contemporaneous hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be applied to the area or tract to be annexed. The City Council may, at its discretion, act contemporaneously on the matters of permanent zoning and annexation. 
SECTION 30: - CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES 
30.1  It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the City. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
A.  The Building official shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the City Council requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which, such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product-, storage and amount, and nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. 
B.  The City Council shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be Permitted. 
C.  The City Council shall by resolution approve or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. 
D.  Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted as those of a similar Use. When determination of the minimum requirements cannot be readily ascertained, the same process outlined in paragraphs A, B, and C above shall be followed. 
SECTION 31: - CREATION OF BUILDING SITE 
31.1  No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract, or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
A.  The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly filed with the County Clerk of Montague County, Texas. 
B.  The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to the effective date of this ordinance or prior to annexation to the City, whichever is applicable, in which event a building permit for only one main building conforming to all the requirements of this ordinance may be issued on each such original separately owned parcel without first complying with Subsection 31.1-A preceding. 
C.  The plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the City Council and compliance has been made with provisions and improvements approved on such site plan. for all utility and drainage easements, dedication of streets, alleys and other public improvements required to meet the standards established for the platting of land. Any and all plots, tracts or lots must be provided access via a public street or drive. 
SECTION 32: - NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
32.1  A non-conforming status shall exist when a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance. Such nonconforming status shall be allowed to continue Subject to the other restrictions of this ordinance. 
32.2  No non-conforming use or structure may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract upon which such nonconforming use is located as of the effective date of this ordinance except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space. 
32.3  Repairs and normal maintenance, structural alterations, and extensions may be made to a non-conforming building providing such structure would not extend beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it was located prior to adoption of this zoning ordinance, and such structure conforms to all other statutes of this zoning ordinance. 
32.4  Any non-conforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use. 
32.5  Where a conforming use is located in a non-conforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by securing a Certificate of occupancy from the Building Official. 
32.6  Whenever a non-conforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease and the use of the premises shall thenceforth be in conformity with this ordinance. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a non-conforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Discontinuance of a business or the vacancy of a building or premises occupied by a nonconforming use for a period of one (1) year shall be construed as conclusive proof of intent to abandon the non-conforming use. Any non-conforming use not involving a permanent type of structure which is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
32.7  If a non-conforming structure or a structure occupied by a non-conforming use is damaged by fire, act of God or other cause, reconstruction will be permitted in accordance with all other statutes of the zoning ordinance. 
SECTION 33: - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION 
33.1  Establishment of a City Planning Commission: The City Council shall appoint a City Planning Commission consisting of five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of two (2) years, removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges after a public hearing if demanded by such members within ten (10) days. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. The City Council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Each appointed Commission member shall be a real property tax payer of the City of Bowie. The Commission shall serve all duties and responsibilities as authorized by Section 211.007 of the Local Government Code. 
33.2  Organization: The Commission shall meet not less than once each month and keep a public record of it's resolutions, findings, and determinations. The Commission shall elect it's chairman from among it's appointed members. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep records of such meetings consistent with this ordinance and the requirement of law 
33.3  Powers and Duties: The Planning Commission shall have the power and the duty to make recommendations on adoption and amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or Zoning Map for the future development and redevelopment of the City and all land under its control and also other such duties as provided in the ordinance. 
SECTION 34: - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
34.1  Establishment of a Board of Adjustment: The City Council shall appoint a Board of Adjustment consisting of five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of two (2) years, removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges after a public hearing. Two (2) alternate members shall also be appointed and serve in the absence of one or more regular members as requested to do so by the Mayor, so that all cases before the Board of Adjustment will be heard by a minimum of four (4) members. The alternate members shall serve for the same period as the regular members. The City Council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The Board shall serve all duties and responsibilities as authorized by Sections 211.008-211.011 of the Local Government Code, and this ordinance. 
34.2  Organization: The Board of Adjustment shall hold an organizational meeting in January of each year and shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson prior to other business. The Board shall also elect a Secretary, either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned by the chief administrative officer of the City. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman and other such times as deemed necessary by the Board. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep records of such meetings consistent with this ordinance and the requirements of law. 
34.3  Appeals: 
A.  Procedure: Appeals may be taken to and before the Board of Adjustment by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be made specifying the grounds thereof. The office or department from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all of the minutes constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
B.  Stay of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Building Official shall certify to the Board of Adjustment that by reason of facts in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order by a court of record, after notice to the office from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
C.  Notice of Hearing on Appeal: The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and shall mail notices of such hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within two hundred (200) feet of any point of the lot or portion thereof on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the Board of Adjustment to be affected thereby. Such owners and persons shall be determined according to the current tax rolls of the city. Depositing of such written notice in. the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance therewith. 
D.  Decision by the Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment shall decide the appeal within 45 days. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all powers of the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken. 
E.  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any variance in said ordinance. 
34.4  Powers and Duties of Board: 
A.  Appeals Based on Error: The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement of this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board of Adjustment shall have, in addition, the following specific powers: 
1.  To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for railroads if such uses are in general conformance with the Master Plan and present no conflict or nuisance to adjacent properties. 
2.  To permit a public utility or public service or structure in any district, or a public utility), of public service building of a ground area and of a height at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public utility or public service building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the public health, convenience, safety, or general welfare. 
3.  To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height or area regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in a single ownership on the effective date of this ordinance. 
4.  To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than ninety (90) percent of its fair market value, where the Board of Adjustment finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use. 
5.  To waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts, when (1) the character of use of the building is such to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities; or (2) when such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot. The Board of Adjustment shall not waive or reduce such requirements merely to the purpose of granting an advantage or a convenience. 
B.  Variances: An application or request for a variance shall not be heard or granted with regard to any parcel of property or portion thereof upon which a concept plan, detail site plan or development plan, preliminary plat or final plat required. by this ordinance has not been finally acted upon by the Code Enforcement Officer. All administrative procedures and requirements of this ordinance, applicable to concept plans, detail site plans, preliminary plats and final plats must be exhausted prior to requesting a variance from the terms of this ordinance. 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. In executing its power to grant such variances, the Board of Adjustment may: 
a)  permit a variance in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided such variance will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare; and 
b)  authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the construction or alterations of buildings or structures will impose upon him or her unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variances from the strict application of the terms of this ordinance as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the Board of Adjustment is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance from the standards or regulations established by this ordinance and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected. Financial hardship shall not be considered grounds for the issuance Of a variance. 
2.  A written application for variance shall be submitted together with the required fee, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, demonstrating: 
a)  that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
b)  that literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance; 
c)  that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
d)  that granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; and 
e)  no non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
C.  Changes: The Board of Adjustment shall have no authority to change any provisions of this ordinance and its jurisdiction is limited to time. The Board of Adjustment may not change the district designation of any land either to a more restrictive Or less restrictive zone. 
SECTION 35: - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL DEFINITIONS 
35.1  General Rules of Construction: The following rules of construction shall apply to the interpretation of words used in this ordinance: 
A.  words used in the present tense include the future tense; 
B.  words used in the singular number include the plural number; 
C.  words in the plural number include the singular number; 
D.  the words "building" and "structure" are synonymous; 
E.  the words "lot", "plot" and "tract" are synonymous; 
F.  the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; and 
G.  except to the extent a particular provision specifies otherwise, the following definitions shall apply throughout this ordinance: 
1.  Accessory Use, Buildings, or Facility - A use or building subordinate to and detached from the main building, greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in floor area, and used for purposes customarily incidental to the primary use of the premises. 
2.  Airport or Landing Field - An area improved for the landing or take-off of aircraft approved by the City of Bowie for operation as an aircraft landing facility. 
3.  Alley - A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
4.  Antique Shop - An establishment offering for sale, within a building, articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishings and decorations which have value and significance as a result of age, design or sentiment. 
5.  Apartment - A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment house designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals. 
6.  Apartment House - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
7.  Area of the Lot or Building Site - The area shall be the net area of the lot or site and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
8.  Art Gallery or Museum - An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art or science and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which facility is open to the general public. 
9.  Basement - A building story which is partly underground, but having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story in computing building height. 
9.5.  Bed & Breakfast - A dwelling unit that contains no more than six (6) guestrooms, where short-term lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Limited social functions such as receptions and private parties, with or without food service may also be provided. However, this definition shall not permit the operation of a restaurant for customers other than the occupants of the guest-rooms and their guests, or the invitees to the reception or private parties. 
10.  Block - An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; where this word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect said street. on said side. 
11.  Board of Adjustment - A five (5) member board appointed by the City Council for terms of two (2) years whose function is to hear cases where a citizen is not satisfied with a decision made concerning a zoning issue. 
12.  Boarding or Rooming House - A building, other than a hotel or multiple family dwelling, where lodging is provided for five (5) or more persons for compensation, and where facilities for food preparation are not provided in individual rooms. 
13.  Building - (Same as Structure.) 
14.  Building Ends - Those sides of a building having the least dimension as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used in the building spacing regulations for multiple-family dwelling, the term "building end" shall mean the most narrow side of a building regardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or adjoins the side lot line or another building. 
15.  Building Inspector - The Building Official or person charged with the enforcement of the zoning and building codes of the City. 
16.  Building Line - A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom constituting the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
17.  Building Material Sales - The sale of new building materials and supplies indoors with related sales for hardware, carpet, plants, electrical and plumbing supplies all of which is oriented to the retail customer, rather than contractor or wholesale customer. 
18.  Building Official - The Building Inspector. 
19.  Camp (for children) - A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children including outdoor activities overnight or on an extended basis. 
20.  Cellar - A building story with more than one-half (1/2) its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height. 
21.  Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance - An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcing official indicating conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizing legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
22.  Church or Rectory - A place of assembly and worship by a recognized religion including without limitation synagogues, temples, churches, instruction rooms and the place of residence for ministers, priests, rabbis, teachers and directors on the premises. 
23.  City Council - The governing body of the City. 
24.  City Manager - Chief administrator officer of the City. 
25.  Clinic, Medical or Dental - Facilities for examining, consulting and treating patients including offices, laboratories and outpatient facilities, but not including hospital beds and rooms for acute or chronic care. 
26.  Club, Private - A club room or suite of rooms or a building available to restricted membership for meetings, dining and/or entertainment. Such facilities may include a private tennis court, swimming pool or similar recreation facilities, none of which are available to the general public. 
27.  College or University - An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the state and covering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
28.  Commercial Amusement (Indoor) - An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed and operated within an acoustically treated building such as a bowling alley or pool hall. 
29.  Commercial Amusement (Outdoor) - An amusement enterprise offering entertainment to general public such as golf driving range, pitch. and putt course, archery, miniature golf and similar outdoor activities but not including go-cart racing, drag strips, auto racing or motorcycle racing. 
30.  Commercial Zoning District - Any zoning district included in this ordinance in which commercial uses constitute the primary permitted use classification, including the "C" and "CBD" districts. 
31.  Community Center (Private) - A building or (group of rooms designed and used as an integral part of a residential project by the tenants of such a project for a place of meeting, recreation or social activity and under the management and unified control of the operators of the project. A private community center shall not be operated as a place of public meetings or as a business nor shall the operation of such facility create noise, odor or similar conditions perceptible beyond the bounding property line of the project site. 
32.  Community Center(Public) - A building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the community served. 
33.  Convalescent Home - Any structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from infirmities of age. 
34.  Country Club (Private) - An area of twenty (20) acres or more containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to private specific membership; such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service facilities. 
35.  Court - An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space. 
36.  Coverage - The percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor of a building. 
37.  Day Nursery - An establishment where children are left for care or training during the day, including a recreation area with or without a building where children engage in supervised training or recreation during a portion of the twenty-four (24) hours of a day. 
38.  Depth of Lot - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
39.  District - A section of the City for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of land and buildings are uniform. 
40.  Dwelling, Multiple - Family - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is; occupied as a home or residence of three or more families. 
41.  Dwelling, One-Family - A dwelling unit having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one family, or by one family and not more than four (4) boarders and lodgers. 
42.  Dwelling, Two-Family - A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than two families, or by two families and not more than four (4) boarders and lodgers. 
43.  Dwelling Unit - A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
44.  Family - Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than four (4) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
45.  Farm Accessory Building - An accessory structure on a tract qualifying as a farm as herein defined for storing or housing the usual projects and animals raised or maintained on a farm, such as a barn, poultry house, stable, machinery shed or granary. No accessory building housing animals or poultry shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to the bounding property lines of the farm tract. 
46.  Fire, Police or Municipal Building - Any public service building of the municipal government including a library or City Hall, but excluding storage yards, utility shops and equipment centers. 
47.  Flea Market - A collection or group of outdoor stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangements, used by individual vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal property. 
48.  Floor Area - The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports, garages or porches. 
49.  Floor Area Ratio - The ratio of total building floor area to lot area. 
50.  Garden or Orchard (Commercial) - An area of more than one (1) acre which is used for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and/or grain. 
51.  Garden or Orchard (Non-Commercial) - An area of one (1) acre or less which is used for c[rowing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and/or grain. 
52.  Gate - An opening through an enclosure as a fence, wall, or other similar facility for the purpose of providing ingress and egress. All gates shall be of permanent construction, attached to the enclosure, and constructed of similar materials as the enclosure. 
53.  Golf Course (Commercial) - A golf course, privately owned but open to the public for a fee and operated as a commercial venture. 
54.  Guest House (detached) - A secondary structure on a lot or tract containing dwelling accommodations excluding kitchen facilities and separate utility services or meters and intended for the temporary occupancy by guests and not for rent or permanent occupancy. 
55.  Height - The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to (1) the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, (2) to the deck line of mansard. roofs or (3) to the mean height level between eaves and edge for hip and gable roof s and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding ten (10) feet. If the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard grade shall be used for a base level. 
56.  Heliport or Helistop - A landing facility for rotary wing aircraft which may include fueling or servicing facilities for such craft and be subject to approval by the City of Bowie. 
57.  Home for Aged, Residence - A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals without nursing care being a primary function. 
58.  Home Occupation - Any occupation or activity not involving the conduct of a business which is clearly incidental and secondary to use of the premise for dwelling purposes and which is carried on wholly within a main building or accessory structure by an immediate member of a family residing on the premises. Also, there is no advertising other than an identification sign of not more than four (4) square feet in area and no other exterior identification of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the main building or accessory structure; no equipment used which creates noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fire hazard, or electrical interference beyond that normally associated with the average residential use of the district; and the home occupation does not create any significant increase in vehicular flow, parking, pedestrian traffic, the use of utilities, or the generation of trash and refuse beyond the average of residences in the neighborhood. 
59.  Hospital (general acute-care) - An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is: licensed by the State of Texas. 
60.  Hospital (chronic care) - An institution where those persons suffering from generally permanent types of illness, injury, deformity, deficiency or age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis, and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
61.  Industrial Zoning District - Any zoning district included in this ordinance in which industrial uses constitute the primary permitted use classification, including "I-1" and "I-2" district classifications. 
62.  Institution for Alcoholic, Narcotic or Psychiatric Patients - An institution offering resident or outpatient treatment to alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients. 
63.  Kindergarten - A school for children of preschool age, the work of which is purely preliminary to the work of the public school, and which contemplates a planned program of games, songs, social exercises and object lessons. 
64.  Library, Art Gallery or museum (public) - Any institution for the loan or display of books, objects of art or science which is sponsored by a public or responsible quasi-public agency and which institution is open and available to the general public. 
65.  Light Fabrication and Assembly Processes - The fabrication, assembly or manufacture of products, including but not limited to jewelry, trimming decorations, signs, and similar items, which does not involve generation of noise, odor, vibration, dust or hazard. 
66.  Living Unit - The room or rooms occupied by a family and which includes cooking facilities. 
67.  Local Utility Line - The usual electric power, telephone, gas, water, sewer, and drainage lines designed and constructed by the municipality or a franchised utility company to serve a community with urban type services. 
68.  Lodging House - A building where lodging for five (5) or more persons is provided in exchange for compensation. 
69.  Lot Coverage - The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot or the area determined as the maximum cross-sectional area of the building. 
70.  Lot Depth - The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
71.  Lot Lines - The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
72.  Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Montague County; or a parcel of land, the deed for which is recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Montague County prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
73.  Lot or Building Site - Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
74.  Lot Width - The width of a lot at the front building lines. 
75.  Main Building - The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
76.  Manufactured Home - Same as "Mobile Home" except constructed on or after June 15, 1976. 
77.  Manufacturing Processes - Uses restricted from other zoning districts but permitted in the "I-1" and "I-2" Districts under this definition are manufacturing and industrial uses which do not emit dust, smoke, odor, gas, fumes, or present a possible hazard beyond the bounding property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use or uses are located, and which do not generate noise or vibration at the boundary of the lot or tract which is generally perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise or vibration in the adjacent areas. 
78.  Mobile Home - Means a structure constructed prior to June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. References in this ordinance to "mobile home(s)" shall be taken to be references to HUD Code manufactured home(s). 
79.  Manufactured Home Park - A tract or parcel of land used to accommodate manufactured home units and accessory structures as a semi-permanent place of residence. 
80.  Manufactured Home Subdivision - A tract of land subdivided into lots which are designed as permanent sites for manufactured or relocatable homes and which are served by separate utilities, dedicated street access on a legally filed plat, and are capable of being conveyed as separate lots. 
81.  Modular (Industrialized) Home - "Modular (Industrialized) Home" means a structure or building module as defined by statute and under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined by statute; nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
82.  Motel or Hotel - A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals and providing six (6) or more room units with customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone and upkeep of furniture. 
83.  Multiple Family Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
84.  Nightclub - A place where alcoholic beverages, of all types, are sold for consumption on the premises with or without food. Live entertainment may be provided and dancing permitted subject to other applicable city ordinances. 
85.  Non-conforming Use - A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
86.  Nursing Home or Residence Home for Aged - A place of residence or care for persons suffering from infirmities of age or illness where care is provided on a prolonged or permanent basis. This term shall include a convalescent home. 
87.  Occupancy - The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
88.  Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use - Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the requirements specified by this Ordinance and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use or within two hundred (200) feet of such lot or tract and located within the same zoning district as the main use or in an adjacent parking district. 
89.  Open Space - Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, porches and plant material. 
90.  Package Sales (alcoholic beverages) - Package sales refers to the sale of alcoholic beverages, of all types, in unbroken original containers on or from a premises at retail to consumers for off-premises consumption only and not for the purpose of resale. 
91.  Park or Playground (Public) - An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the City of Bowie or the School Board and available to the general public for neighborhood use but not involving lighted athletic fields for nighttime play. 
92.  Parking Lot or Structure, Commercial (auto) - An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee, may include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing of automobiles provided such facility is primarily an integral function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress or egress. 
93.  Permit - Written authorization from the City. 
94.  Planning Commission - A five (5) member board appointed by the City Council for terms of two (2) years whose function is to make recommendations on adoption and amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Zoning Map for the future development and redevelopment of the City and all land under its control. 
95.  Plant Nursery or Greenhouse - Retail or wholesale sales of plant materials and supplies either enclosed in a building, lathe house, or in the open and with related storage of equipment for landscape contracting. 
96.  Playfield or Stadium (Public) - An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium which may be lighted for night-time play. 
97.  Private Club - See Club, Private. 
98.  Private Garage - An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage space. 
99.  Private School - An academic institution other than a public or parochial elementary or secondary school, including private elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher learning. 
100.  Private Utility (Franchised) - A utility such as one distributing heat, chilled water, closed circuit television or similar service and requiring a franchise to operate in the City of Bowie. 
101.  Public Building, Shop or Yard of Local, State or Federal Agency - Facilities such as office buildings, other than City Hall, Library, Police or Fire Station, maintenance yards and shops required by branches of local, state or federal agencies for service to an area such as Highway Department yard, City Service Center or Experiment Station. 
102.  Radio, Television or Microwave Towers - Structures supporting antenna for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum but excluding non-commercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television. 
103.  Radio, T.V. and Appliance Repair - A shop for the repair of household and home equipment, such as electrical appliances, lawn mowers, tools and similar items where all such items are stored within a building. 
104.  Residence - Same as dwelling; when used with district, an area of residential regulations. 
105.  Residential Zoning District - Any zoning district included in this ordinance in which residential uses constitute the primary permitted use classification, including the "SF-R", "SF-M", "MH" and "MF-R" Districts. 
106.  Restaurant or Cafeteria - A building or portion of a building, not operated as a dining room in connection with a hotel or boarding house, where food is served for pay and for consumption in the building, as a drive through service, and/or where provisions may be made for serving food on the premises outside the building. 
107.  Retail Shop, Apparel, Gift, Accessory and Similar Items - Small retail shops such as dress shops or gift shops serving specific neighborhood areas as differentiated from department stores or discount stores having community wide service importance. 
108.  Rooming House - (see Lodging House). 
109.  School, Business - A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a service or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school, but not including manual trade schools. 
110.  School, Commercial, Trade or Craft - A business operating for profit and offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation and other similar manual trades. 
111.  School, Public or Parochial/Private - A school and customary accessory uses under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public, elementary or secondary schools, but not including private, trade or commercial schools. 
112.  Second Hand Store, Furniture or Clothing - An establishment offering for sale used merchandise, with the storage and display of such items wholly contained inside a building or structure.. 
113.  Sexually Oriented Business - Sexually oriented businesses shall mean commercial enterprises whose major business is the offering of a service or product which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or gratification to the customer, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas including, but not limited to, massage parlors, nude studios, modeling studios, love parlors, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult motion picture theaters, live nude entertainment club, and adult mini-motion picture theaters, and such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age. 
114.  Sign - An outdoor advertising device that is a structure or that is attached to or painted on a building or that is leaned against a structure for display on premises. 
115.  Single Family Dwelling (attached) - A building located on a platted lot or separate building site which is designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) family and which is attached by one or more common wall(s) to another similar single family dwelling unit. An attached dwelling shall be designed to permit separation from an adjoining dwelling in the event either dwelling is caused to be removed. 
116.  Single Family Dwelling (detached) - A detached building located on a platted lot or separate building site which is designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
117.  Stable (commercial) - A structure housing horses which are boarded or rented to the public or any stable other than a private stable; but not including a sale barn, auction or similar trading activity. 
118.  Stable (private) - An accessory building set back from adjacent property lines a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet and used for quartering horses, not to exceed one (1) horse per one (1) acre area of a farm or lot. 
119.  Street - Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, more than twenty two (22) feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
120.  Street Line - A dividing line between a lot tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way. 
121.  Street Yard - The area of a lot which lies between the street right-of-way line and the actual front wall line of the building, as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the buildings, parallel to the street, until it intersects the side property lines. On corner lots, the street yard shall consist of all the area of such lot between all abutting street right-of-way lines and their corresponding actual front building wall lines, as such lines are imaginarily extended in the manner provided above. 
122.  Story - The height between the successive floors of a building from the top floor to the roof. The standard height for a story is eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches. 
123.  Structural Alterations - Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams or girders. 
124.  Structure - Anything, other than a fence constructed or erected, which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having permanent location on the ground. 
125.  Studio: Art, Music, Ceramics, Drama, Speech, Dance and Similar Skills - A building or rooms in a building used for instructing, coaching or counseling in drama, speech, dance or similar personal skills or arts. 
126.  Swimming Instruction as a Home Occupation - The teaching of swimming in a private swimming pool. In a residential area, the offering of swimming instruction in a private pool is subject to the approval of a Specific Use Permit which may specify operating conditions and standards and may limit the number of students and operating time. 
127.  Swimming Pool (Commercial) - Any structure or contrivance intended to be used for the purpose of swimming, wading or bathing by human beings and having a depth of greater than one (1) foot where the facilities are available to the public for a fee. 
128.  Swimming Pool (Home) - Any structure or contrivance intended to be used for the purpose of swimming, wading or bathing by human beings and having a depth of greater than one (1) foot and constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a single family, two-family or apartment dwelling. 
129.  Telephone Exchange, Switching and Transmitting Equipment Only - A switching or transmitting station owned by a public utility but not including business office facilities, storage or repair shops or yards. 
130.  Temporary Field or Construction Office - Temporary office buildings and temporary building material storage areas to be used solely for construction purposes in connection with the property on which they are erected may be permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official. 
131.  Tennis Court, Private - A surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for night play in residential areas except as may be otherwise provided or restricted by the Specific Use Permit. 
132.  Thoroughfare - (Same as Street.) 
133.  Two Family Dwelling - A single detached building located on a platted lot or building Site designed for and occupied by not more than two (2) families. 
134.  Variance - An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. 
135.  Wrecking or Auto Salvage Yard - A yard or building where automobiles or parts of automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offered for sale in the open as whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed metal. 
136.  Yard - An open space, other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and. which is not obstructed from a point forty (40) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided for roof overhang and similar special architectural features and plant material. 
137.  Yard, front - An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or street line with the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building line as specified for the district in which it is located. 
138.  Yard, rear - An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted, extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the building and the rear lot line as specified in the district in which the lot is situated. 
139.  Yard, side - An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one side or two sides of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or front line shall be deemed a side yard. 
140.  Zoning District Map - the official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this ordinance. 
141.  Zoo (Private) - A facility housing and displaying live animals, reptiles or birds, privately owned and operated for a fee or for the promotion of some other enterprise. 
142.  Zoo (Public) - A publicly owned zoo or similar facility owned and operated by the City or a nonprofit zoological society where live animals, birds and reptiles are domiciled and displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, Sec. 1, adopted 2-20-07) 
SECTION 36: - BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
36.1  General Requirements: No permanent structure may be constructed or otherwise located within the city limits prior to issuance of a building permit by the Building Official. No permanent structure constructed or otherwise located within the city limits may be occupied prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official. No change in the existing conforming use of a permanent structure or of land to a use of a different classification under this ordinance, and no change in the legally conforming use of a permanent structure or of land may take place prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official. 
36.2  Procedure for New or Altered Buildings: Plans for any permanent structure to be constructed or otherwise located within the city limits must be approved by the Building Official who, upon approval, shall issue a building permit. A complete application for a, building permit shall contain details of foundation and structure sufficient to determine compliance with applicable provisions of the Building Code adopted by the City of Bowie. Upon submission of a complete application and payment of fees, the Building Official shall. issue a building permit. After issuance of a Building Permit and prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Official shall conduct a foundation, plumbing, electrical and framing inspection. After such inspection, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the plans and the results of the inspection comply with the provisions of all applicable ordinances and regulations. 
36.3  Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Use: Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a non-conforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to said Building Official. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application for same has been made. 
36.4  Contents of Certificate of Occupancy: Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of the building and fire laws and ordinances. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
36.5  Temporary Certificate: Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Issuance of a temporary certificate shall not be construed to alter the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owner or of the City relating to the use occupancy of the premise or any other matter covered by this ordinance. 
36.6  Certificates for Non-conforming Uses: A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the adoption of this zoning ordinance in order to distinguish them from an illegal use. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such non-conforming use to file an application with the Building Official for such Certificate of occupancy. Upon receipt of the application each owner or lessee shall be required to file an affidavit stating that such building or land occupied by the non-conforming use was in lawful use or lawfully existed as of the date of adoption. of this zoning ordinance. Upon receipt of such application for a Certificate of Occupancy and the affidavit, the Building official shall issue a Certificate of occupancy for any lawful non-conforming use. 
SECTION 37: - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO ALL ZONING ORDINANCES AND DISTRICTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
37.1  Declaration of Policy: The City declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures to be a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except: 
A.  To correct any error in the regulations or map. 
B.  To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality. 
C.  To recognize changes in technology, style of living, or manner of doing business. 
D.  To allow use deemed by the City Council to be in the best interest of the community as a whole. 
37.2  Authority to Amend Ordinance: The City Council may from time to time after public hearings required. by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the classification or boundaries of the zoning districts. Any amendment, supplement, or change to the text of the Zoning Ordinance and any change in the classification or boundaries of the zoning districts may be ordered for consideration by the City Planning Commission, may be initiated by the City Council, or may be requested by the owner of affected real property or the authorized representative of an owner of affected real property. 
37.3  Public Hearing and Notice: Prior to making a report to the City Council, the City Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application. Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district classification or boundaries shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same for city taxes, located within the area of application and within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the city tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice of hearings on proposed changes in the text of the Zoning Ordinance and on proposed changes in district classification or boundaries shall be published not less than fifteen (15) days prior thereto in the official newspaper of: the City 
37.4  City Planning Commission Consideration and Report: The City Planning Commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall prepare its report and recommendations on the proposed change stating its findings, its evaluation of the request, and of the relationship of the request to the City's Comprehensive Plan. The Commission may defer its report for not more than ninety (90) days until it has had the opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing thereon. In making its determination, the Commission shall consider the following factors: 
A.  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole. 
B.  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers and other utilities to the area and shall note the findings. 
C.  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unsuitable for development. 
D.  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
E.  The manner in which other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved, and whether such designation for other areas should also be modified. 
F.  Any other factors which will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals or general welfare 
37.5  Council Action on Proposed Changes: 
A.  Thirty Day Notice Requirement: No change in zoning classification shall be granted until after the 30th day following the notice to property owners required in Section 37.3. 
B.  Effective Date of ordinance: No ordinance change shall become effective until after the adoption of the ordinance and its publication as required by law. 
C.  Proposal Recommended for Approval: Every proposal which is recommended favorably by the City Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for a public hearing thereon. 
D.  Proposal Recommended for Denial: When the City Planning Commission determines that a proposal should be denied, it shall so report and notify the applicant. when a proposed zoning request is heard by the City Council that has been denied by the City Planning Commission, a three fourths (3/4) majority vote by the City Council shall be required for approval. A request which has been denied by the Commission and/or City Council may be resubmitted at any time for reconsideration by the City (a new filing fee must accompany the request). The City Council may specifically deny any request with prejudice. If a request has been specifically denied with prejudice, the request may not be resubmitted to the City for a period less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the original date of denial. 
E.  Three-Fourths Vote: A favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council shall be required to approve any change in zoning where written objections are received which comply with the provisions of Article 1011e, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of (a) the area of the lots or land included in such a proposed change or (b) the lots: or land immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom (measured without regard to city street or other public right: of way), such amendments shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the City Council. 
37.6  Final Approval and Ordinance Adoption: If the amending ordinance is not approved within six (6) months from the time of its original consideration, the zoning request, at the option of the City Council, may be recalled for a new public hearing. 
37.7  Changes in Zoning Regulations: Amendments to the zoning ordinance not involving a particular property but involving a change in the zoning regulations generally do not require notice to individual property owners. In such cases, notice of the required public hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city, stating the time and location of tile public hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of such publication. 
SECTION 38: - ILLEGAL AND NONCONFORMING USES 
    By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use specifically falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. 
SECTION 39: - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
    Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day; and each and every day that the provisions of this ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district where such property owner may be affected or invaded by a violation of the terms of the ordinance to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners. 
    In addition to the remedies provided above, the chief administrator may, in case any buildings or structures are erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, institute on behalf of the City of Bowie any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about such premises. 
SECTION 40: - VALIDITY, SEVERANCE AND CONFLICT 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall be severed from and shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so dedicated to be invalid or unconstitutional. To the extent any provision of this ordinance conflicts with other ordinances of the City of Bowie the terms of this ordinance shall control. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED on this the 25th day of January, 2000. 
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-09 [2] 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE BY DISPERSING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND LIMITING THEM TO A SPECIFIED ZONING DISTRICT; PRESCRIBING DEFINITIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; PROVIDING FOR LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES; AND PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONAL MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution and the State of Texas, be it enacted by the City Council of Bowie, Montague County, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- It is the intent of the city that Ord. No. 2006-09, Secs. 1-31, adopted August 15, 2006, amend the Zoning Ordinance. In order to preserve the format of the preceding Exhibit A, the editor has added on Ord. No. 2006-09 as herein set out. 

SECTION 1: - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Bowie and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented business materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented business materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented business entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 1, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 2: - DEFINITIONS. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal, accessory, or incidental business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less that ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Bowie or his designated agent. 
Customer means any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
(2)  Enters a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other sources offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private club. 
Employee means any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business or who works in or about a sexually oriented business and who received compensation for such services or work from the operator or owner of the sexually oriented business or from its customers. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers or privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement or any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually-oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Licensed day-care center means child care center or facility where a group day-care home that provides care or supervision for children who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day for more than twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14), whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Love parlor means an establishment that is operated for the purpose of giving massages at the establishment or at a home call basis that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification in combination with a massage. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breasts. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person is an owner part owner or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Principal means over thirty-five (35) percent of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas, or presentation time, or any combination thereof, in any three-month increment beginning from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Stock in trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or rental including those that are identical, considered as separate title or object. Regularly means featuring, promoting or advertising a happening or occurrence on a recurring basis. 
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, garden home, town house or multi-family district as defined in the Bowie Zoning Ordinance. 
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, garden home, town house or multi-family district as defined in the Bowie Zoning Ordinance. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration; 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult model, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, love parlor, sexual encounter center, or any combination thereof, the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to it's customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or whose employees or customers appear in a state of nudity. 
The term sexually oriented business shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapists, registered massage therapists, registered nurses, or licensed athletic trainers engaged in practiced such licensed professions; 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; 
(3)  Any retail establishment whose principal business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers and which does not exhibit merchandise on live models; or 
(4)  Any activity conducted or sponsored by any Texas Independent School District, licensed or accredited private school, or public or private college or university. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulate; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business of more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor area exists on the date of passage of this ordinance [Aug. 15, 2006]. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 2, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 3: - CLASSIFICATION 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude modeling studios; 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers; and 
(10)  Love parlors. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 3, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 4: - LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated, or expands a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet without regard to city boundaries, of: 
(1)  A church or synagogue; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school or licensed day-care center; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  A public library; 
(6)  The property line of a line devoted to a residential use as defined in this ordinance; or 
(7)  A another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structure or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a residential use, church, synagogue, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day-care center, public library, or to the nearest boundary of a public park or residential lot. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located or from the wall from the tenant space occupied, as applicable. 
(e)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of the location requirements of Subsections (a) or (b) shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use under this subsection shall not increase, enlarge, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating after the effective date of this ordinance that later becomes a nonconforming use because of an amendment to the regulations in this ordinance or any other ordinance or law shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day-care center, public park, public library, or a residential lot within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 4, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 5: - LICENSE REQUIRED 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually-oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions or the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 7 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dance hall license or public house of amusement license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually-oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually-oriented business and possesses a theater license, public house of amusement license or dance hall license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this section as well as the requirements and provisions of the Bowie Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 5, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 6: - LICENCE APPLICATION 
(a)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions or the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
(b)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 7 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(c)  All applications for license under this ordinance shall be accompanied by a non refundable application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). An application shall not be considered to have been filed until the fee is paid and all information required by the application form has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 6, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 7: - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE 
(a)  The chief of Police shall issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually-oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent, or untruthful information in answer to a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this ordinance, other than the offense of operating a sexually-oriented business without a license within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the denial of a license. 
(5)  The license or renewal fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in sexually-oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any provision of this ordinance. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in the Texas Penal Code; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in the Texas Penal Code; 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; and 
6.  Possession or distribution of a controlled substance. 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or deferred adjudication, or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or deferred adjudication, or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any two (2) year period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction of the applicant or applicant's spouse is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of same. 
c.  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in this section may qualify for a sexually-oriented business license only when the time period required by this section has elapsed. 
d.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. 
e.  The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(9)  The location of the sexually oriented business is or would be in violation of Section 4 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 7, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 8: - FEES 
The annual fee for a sexually-oriented business license is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 8, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 9: - INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time during the thirty (30) day application period or after it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his agent or employees commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time during the thirty-day application period or when it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his agent or employees commits an offense if he operates the establishment without maintaining a current list of all employees employed by the business, along with a complete updated employment application. Each employment application shall include a copy of a valid driver's license, state identification card or passport, all with a photograph. 
(d)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 9, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 10: - EXPIRATION OF LICENSE 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  A license may be renewed only by making application as provided in this ordinance. 
(c)  Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the new expiration date will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 10, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 11: - SUSPENSION 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this ordinance; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually-oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business as authorized by this ordinance; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented business premises; 
(5)  Demonstrated an inability to operate and manage a sexually-oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner; thus necessitating action by law enforcement officer. 
(6)  Failed to make payment and is thereby delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy tax, if imposed, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually-oriented business. 
(b)  When the chief of police is authorized to suspend a license under this section, she shall give the licensee the opportunity to pay a reinstatement fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) rather than have the license suspended. 
(1)  Payment of this reinstatement fee shall be considered administrative admission of the violation. However, this shall not be used as an admission of guilt in a criminal prosecution under this ordinance. 
(2)  If the licensee does not pay the reinstatement fee before the expiration of the third working day after notification, he loses the opportunity to pay it and the Chief of Police shall impose the suspension. 
(3)  Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate cause for suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 11, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 12: - REVOCATION 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension as described in this ordinance occurs and the license has been suspended or a reinstatement fee paid within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that; 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the sexually-oriented business premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the sexually-oriented business premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 7(a)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5) or (6) for which the time period required has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in this ordinance for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees or the sexually-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term sexual contact shall have the same meaning as it is defined in the Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually-oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection 12(b)(7) above does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under section 12(b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under Section 7 (a)(1)(b) has passed as provided by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 12, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 13: - APPEAL 
(a)  If the chief of Police is authorized to deny the issuance of a license, or suspend or revoke a license as provided in this ordinance, the chief of police shall give written notice to the applicant or licensee of such intention. 
(1)  The notice shall provide that the denial of issuance, suspension, revocation shall take effect within the third working day after notification unless the licensee provides a written response to the chief of police before the expiration of the third working day. 
(2)  If a written response from the applicant or licensee is received by the chief of police before the expiration of the third working day, the suspension, the denial of issuance or revocation will be stayed pending a decision by the chief of police. The chief of police shall review the response before rendered a decision. 
(3)  The chief of police shall give written notice of this decision to the applicant or licensee. 
(4)  The decision by the chief of police is effective immediately and final pending any appeals. 
(5)  Notice shall be deemed delivered by hand delivery to a licensee, owner or employee of the establishment or by posting of the notice at the usual business entrance of the establishment. Notice may also be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall be mailed to the address listed in the license application for receipt of notice. 
(b)  Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose application for license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to a state district court. 
(c)  An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of Police, or denial of the appeal by the license appeal board. 
(d)  The licensee or applicant shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 13, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 14: - TRANSFER OF LICENCE 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he transfers his license to another person or operates a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he counterfeits, changes, defaces, or alters a license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 14, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 15: - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 15, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 16.: - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity, semi-nudity, or simulated nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity, semi-nudity, or simulated nudity or knowingly allow another to appear in a state of nudity, semi-nudity, or simulated nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he places or permits a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises of a nude model studio, except that a sofa may be place in a reception room open to the public. 
(e)  A licensee or employee of nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customers access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk-through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding restrooms. 
(f)  An employee of a nude model studio, while appearing in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity, commits an offense if he touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(g)  A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 16, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 17: - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT PICTURE THEATERS 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a rest-room not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 17, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 18: - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this ordinance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually-oriented business license, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms rent or sub-rent mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 18, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 19: - ADDITIONAL REGULATION FOR ADULT CABARETS 
(a)  An employee of an adult cabaret while appearing in state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity commits an offense if he touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(b)  A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or simulated nudity. 
(c)  A licensee or employee of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by walk through of the premises without entering a closed area excluding restrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 19, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 20: - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application of the sexually-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architects' blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police of his designee. 
(4)  The licensee commits an offense if he or she permits a manager's station to be unattended by an employee at any time a patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's station. The view required in the subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  The licensee commits an offense if he permits access to a customer of any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's station for any purpose, excluding restrooms. 
(7)  The licensee commits an offense if he permits illumination of any area of the premises to which customers have access to be less than twenty (20) footcandles. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owner's, operator and any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this section. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having the duty under subsections (1) through (8) of subsection (a) above commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 20, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 21: - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
(a)  Public and employee restrooms in a sexually oriented business shall not, at any times, contain or be used for sexually oriented business activity, video reproduction equipment, or sexually oriented merchandise. 
(b)  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult service establishment, adult cabaret, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, nude model parlor, sex parlor and sexual encounter center shall at all times maintain at least one legible sign posted in a conspicuous place at each public entrance easily visible by all persons prior to entry into the establishment with lettering of at least one inch in height in English and Spanish which contains the following statement: 
"THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES [designation of the type of activity licensed to be conducted] IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU, DO NOT ENTER. NO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY [or "NO PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS ALLOWED ENTRY," if alcohol is served]. 
(c)  During hours of darkness when a sexually oriented business is in operation, all required parking and all outdoor pedestrian areas on the premises of the sexually oriented business shall be lighted to an intensity of not less five (5) footcandles measured as ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 21, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 22: - VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR 
Any person who violates any of the provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense affecting zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other offenses. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 22, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 23: - DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section display means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee or the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 23, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 24: - DEFENSES 
It is a defense to a prosecution under Sections 4, 5 and 16 that a person appearing in a state nudity, semi-nudity, or simulated nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure indicating a nude, semi-nude or simulated nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance to the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one (1) nude, semi-nude or simulated nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 24, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 25: - INJUNCTION 
A person who operated or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business without a valid license or in violation of the Bowie Zoning Ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
SECTION 26: - LICENSE APPEAL BOARD; EXEMPTION FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall serve as a license appeal board and shall have the power to rule on the appropriate disposition of application for exemptions from location restrictions for sexually oriented businesses set forth in Section 4. The license appeal board shall follow the rules and procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business is in violation section 4, the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the Chief of Police a written request for an exemption from the location restrictions. 
(c)  If the written request is filed with the chief of Police within the ten-day limit, a license appeal board shall consider the request. The chief of police shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the written request is received. 
(d)  A hearing by the board may proceed only if five of the board members are present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(e)  The license appeal board may grant an exemption from the location restrictions of section 4 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or wellfare; 
(2)  That the location of the sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban life; 
(3)  That the location of the sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(4)  That other applicable provisions of this ordinance will be observed. 
(f)  In making the findings specified in section 27, the board shall take into account, among other things: 
(1)  Crime statistics of the location and its one hundred-foot radius without regard to city boundaries maintained by the appropriate law enforcement agency for the previous six-month; 
(2)  Montague County Appraisal District appraisals for the location and its one hundred-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries taking into account any decline or increase in property values; 
(3)  Vacancy rates of residential, commercial, or other space within the surrounding one thousand-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries; and 
(4)  Any evidence regarding the award or denial of any public or private grants for neighborhood conservation, urban renewal, or restoration for any property located within one thousand-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries. 
(g)  The board shall grant or deny the exemption by majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote approving the exemption shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the license appeal board is final. 
(h)  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid one year from the date of board's action. Upon the expiration of the exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the location restrictions in section 7 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(i)  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(j)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any provisions of this ordinance other than the location restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 26, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 27: - AMENDMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE 
Section 4 may be amended only after compliance with procedure is required to amend zoning ordinance. All other sections of this ordinance may be amended by an ordinance approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 27, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 28: - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 
This ordinance shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the city of bowie, texas, except where the provisions of this ordinance are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances, in which event the conflicting provisions of such ordinances are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 28, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 29: - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE 
It is hereby declared that it is the intention of the city council that the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not effect any of the remaining phrases, clause, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 29, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 30: - SAVINGS PROVISION 
All rights and remedies of the City of Bowie are expressly saved as to any and all violations of any other ordinances establishing regulations for sexually oriented businesses in the City of Bowie that have accrued at the time of the effective date of this ordinance; and as to such accrued violations and all pending litigations, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under such ordinances, same shall not be effected by this ordinance but may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 30, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 31: - PROVISIONS RELATING TO DUTIES OF CITY SECRETARY 
The city secretary of the City Bowie is hereby authorized to publish this ordinance in book or pamphlet form for general distribution among the public, and operative provisions of this ordinance are as so published shall be admissible in evidence in all courts without further proof than the production thereof. 
The city secretary of the City of Bowie is hereby directed to engross and enroll this ordinance by copying the caption, penalty clause, publication clause and effective date clause in the minutes of the city council and by filing the ordinance in the ordinance records of the city. 
The city secretary of the City of Bowie is hereby directed to publish in the official newspaper for the city, caption, penalty clause, publication clause and effective date clause of this ordinance as authorized by Section 52.011 of the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 31, adopted 8-15-06) 
SECTION 32: - EFFECTIVE DATE 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication is required by law, and it is so ordained. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, Sec. 32, adopted 8-15-06) 
CHAPTER 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-13,  1, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, amended and restated former Ch. 13, Arts. 13.100-13.400, in its entirety. Former Ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07,  1, adopted March 20, 2007. 
State Law reference- Municipal parks and recreation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015c et seq.; public improvements, bonds, occupancy tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1269j-4.1; city parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6081h et seq.; local parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 315, 331 et seq.; lease of land from state parks and wildlife department, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  13.006; local boating regulations, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.092; safety standards for publicly funded playgrounds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  756.061. 

ARTICLE 13.100 - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13.100 - Hours of Operation 
    The city parks shall be closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be found in city parks between such hours, except for events approved or scheduled by the parks and recreation department or city council or approved camping. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.101 - Overnight Camping and Parking 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, to park a vehicle or to place camping equipment overnight in any public park, except in areas designated by signage for such purpose or use unless authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. The city shall be authorized to cause such person to discontinue camping activities and to have the vehicle and/or equipment removed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.102 - Parking Obstruction 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle in any public park or on or along any street in or adjacent to a public park in such a manner as to block, obstruct or otherwise render inaccessible or unusable a vehicle, vehicle entryway or exit or traffic circulation lane or any designated point of ingress/egress on multipurpose or equestrian trails, or any access ramp, curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid or accommodate handicapped or disabled or pedestrian traffic. The city shall be authorized to have such vehicle removed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.103 - Unlawful to Leave Child Under Age Nine Unattended 
    It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other adult having care, custody, and control of a child to abandon or in any way leave unattended a child under nine (9) years of age in any park or recreational facility except for a supervised program or activity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.104 - Liability of City 
    The city shall not be held liable or bound for any loss or damage claimed by reason of the loss or damage to personal property taken or in any way on account of any personal injury of or death to any person entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.105 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
ARTICLE 13.200 - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD 

Sec. 13.200 - Repeal of Selma Park Improvement Board 
    The previously created Selma Park Improvement Board is hereby repealed and the parks and recreation board shall serve in the advisory capacity to the city council on matters that pertain to Selma Park as stated in Section 13.205 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.201 - Composition 
    The park board shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than nine (9) members. The members do not have to be qualified voters of the city, but do have to reside within Montague County. The members shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms. Members shall be appointed to numbered places on the board. Even-numbered places are appointed on even-numbered years, and odd-numbered places are appointed on odd-numbered years. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.202 - Vacancies 
(a)  If a replacement member of the park board has not been designated by the end of a member's term, that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. 
(c)  Any member may be removed by the city council for cause. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.203 - Officers 
    The park board shall elect annually the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. 
(3)  Secretary/public relations administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.204 - Duties of Officers 
(a)  Chairman. The chairman of the park board shall preside at all meetings, shall appoint standing committee members, and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to his office or as may be instructed by the board. 
(b)  Vice-chairman. It shall be the duty of the vice-chairman to perform the duties of the chairman in his absence. 
(c)  Secretary/public relations administrator. The secretary/public relations administrator shall maintain a file of all minutes, keep minutes of each meeting, read last minutes for review and approval, maintain scrapbook of park and leisure services activities, publish an agenda in advance to inform the public of what is to be discussed, publicize and publicly recognize citizens who have made contributions to the park and leisure services movement, and encourage the help of all citizens at the recommendation of the entire park board. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.205 - Powers and Duties 
    The park board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties: 
(1)  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation services. 
(2)  To acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and inspection of the complete park and recreation services. 
(3)  To follow a master planning guide for park buildings, structures, facilities, athletic areas or other improvements on park areas. 
(4)  To recommend the adoption of standards on areas, facilities, programs and financial support. 
(5)  To recommend to the city council rules and regulations governing the use of facilities. 
(6)  To advise the director of parks and recreation services, city council and city manager of recommendations and reasons therefore. 
(7)  To perform such other duties as the city council may prescribe by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.206 - Subcommittees 
(a)  Appointment. The park board by a majority vote of the quorum present at any regular or special meeting, may appoint such members and citizens, as they see fit, to subcommittees to serve the purposes of the park board. 
(b)  Termination. The subcommittees may be terminated in the same manner as they are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.207 - Meetings 
(a)  The park board shall meet on a monthly basis, as needed. 
(b)  The park board shall meet for a special meeting if called by the chairman or by written notice sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by four (4) members of the board. 
(c)  A majority of the members of the park board shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  Any member absent from any meeting shall be identified in the minutes of such meeting. In the absence of a quorum for a meeting, the chairman will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council stating all members absent. 
(e)  The director of parks and recreation, or designee, shall be in attendance at board meetings. 
(f)  The director of parks and recreation, or designee, shall participate in meetings to provide staff assistance, reports and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
ARTICLE 13.300 - CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 13.300 - Driving and parking vehicles 
    Where vehicle parking lots or areas have been set aside in a park in the city, no vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass, or lawn within such park, but shall be parked in such parking lots or areas and not otherwise. Exceptions are park maintenance vehicles and overflow parking for special events such as "Second Monday" or as may be directed by police or park department personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec 13.301 - Unlawful Acts 
    Within the limits of any city park, including Selma Park, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts except as may be otherwise provided: 
(1)  To hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind, except in designated areas. 
(2)  To ride or drive any horse or other animal, except in designated areas, or during approved riding events and areas. 
(3)  To carry or discharge any firearm, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, air guns, BB or pellet guns, bows and arrows or slingshots, or hit golf balls except in designated areas. Nothing in this section shall preclude the carrying of a firearm when in possession of a valid license holder as provided by the state law governing the right to carry any unloaded, unconcealed firearms for trade or sale during Second Monday Trade Days. The city manager or designee may authorize fireworks celebrations of the July 4 th or any other special planned events. 
(4)  To damage, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, table or other structure, apparatus or property; or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface any building, monument, fence, bench, table or other structure. 
(5)  To cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer. 
(6)  To swim, bathe, or wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond or other water supply within a city park, except in designated swimming areas of Selma Park and public swimming pools. 
(7)  To make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, braziers or other devices intended for cooking, but then only in designated areas. 
(8)  To empty salt water or other waste liquids except in areas provided. 
(9)  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided for their disposal. 
(10)  To participate or engage in any activity on any park area when such activity will create a danger to the public, or that may be considered a public nuisance. The director of parks may designate particular locations within park areas for specific activities. Overnight camping is prohibited on any park property unless, and in the manner, so posted. 
(11)  To use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language in any of the public parks; and no person shall commit in any park any obscene, lewd or indecent act, or create any nuisance. 
(12)  To disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition. 
(13)  To distribute, post, place or erect any advertising handbill, circular, billing notice, paper or other advertising device without prior permission of the city director of parks. 
(14)  To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services unless and for a duration of time approved by the director of parks. 
(15)  To remain, stay or loiter in any park other than open hours. 
(16)  For any person over the age of six (6) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(17)  For any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on any park or athletic field within the city, including all areas or structures within the boundaries of any park or athletic field within the city. Special permission may be granted by the city manager, or his designee, to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage for organized sports or special events. 
(18)  For any person to possess any glass beverage container within any city park or athletic field in the city, including all areas or structures within the boundaries of any park or athletic field within the city. Special permission may be granted by the city manager, or his designee, to possess glass beverage containers for organized sports or special events. 
(19)  To use any remote-controlled or radio-controlled airplane or other aeronautical device outside of designated areas. 
(20)  To operate any motorized type vehicle upon any walking track on city parks located within the city. An exception to this will be for equipment used by the parks department to maintain the city parks and handicap vehicles. 
(21)  For a person seven (7) years of age or older to appear nude or in a state of nudity as defined below: 
a.  The appearance of a human bare anus, female breasts, male or female genitals; or 
b.  A state of dress, which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male or female genitals or the areola of the female breast. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.302 - Merchandising; Advertising; Signs 
(a)  Vending and peddling. No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing upon any city park property. Exception is here made to the event known as "Second Monday" and to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the park director. 
(b)  Advertising. No person shall announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(c)  Signs. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any signs, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be any sign whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public land or highway or roads adjacent to the park. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.303 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
ARTICLE 13.400 - SELMA PARK 

Sec. 13.400 - Hours of Operation 
    Selma Park shall be open year-round. No person shall camp in said park for a period of more than fourteen (14) days within any thirty (30) consecutive day period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.401 - Admission Fees 
    The following fees for Selma Park will be charged daily for Sunday through Saturday of each week and will apply on all holidays falling within that time period: 
As set out in Appendix C "Schedule of Fees" City of Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2018-06, Sec. 1, adopted 6-25-18) 
Sec. 13.402 - Regulations of Conduct 
    No person in any area designated for overnight camping shall: 
(1)  Camp in any area unless such area is designated for camping; such as tent camping areas or recreational vehicle camping areas. 
(2)  Allow to accumulate in a camping area trash or litter in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage or other refuse. Such items shall be placed in receptacles. 
(3)  Create any loud noise after 10:00 p.m. 
(4)  Dispose of human waste or sewage except at places so designated. 
(5)  Leave any item of personal property in a camping space not rented. 
(6)  Sleep outside of a camper, tent or similar unit designed for overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(7)  Permit any domestic pet outside of the camper unit unless such pet is on a chain or leash; and unattended pets shall not be left outside of the camper unit. 
(8)  Fail to pick up any pet's feces and dispose of same daily. 
(9)  No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic beverage within Selma Park. The prohibition against consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall not apply as follows: 
a.  To a person who has rented a campsite and consumers or possesses the alcoholic beverage within the immediate area of the rented campsite while camping; or 
b.  Is a family member or guest of a person who has rented a campsite and consumes or possesses the alcoholic beverage within the immediate area of the rented campsite while camping. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.403 - Space Reservation 
    Any person desiring to reserve a campsite space in a designated area shall pay the fees set forth herein and shall place a rented sign on such site. No such sign shall be removed without the permission of the director of parks or park host. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.404 - Occupancy Restricted 
    There shall be no more than one (1) camper unit per space or stall unless permission is given by the director of parks or park host. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.405 - Motorcycles and All-Terrain Vehicles 
    The operation of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and go-carts are strictly prohibited from being operated within the boundaries of Selma Park. Road motorcycles when used as transportation to the park are acceptable with park host approval. Handicap vehicles are allowed at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.406 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE 13.500 - PELHAM PARK 

Sec 13.500 - Hours of Operation 
    Pelham Park shall be open year-round. No person shall camp in said park for a period of more than seven (7) days. Campers must leave for two (2) days before they can return. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec 13.501 - Admission Fees 
    The following fees for Pelham Park will be charged daily for Sunday through Saturday of each week and will apply on all holidays falling within that time period. There is an honor box with envelopes for travelers to pay for overnight stay and dumping: 
(1)  The cost for all overnight camp locations in the park and on Second Monday grounds is fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day. Envelopes will have information on them and ask travelers to put their name and location of where they are from. Our parks supervisor will pick up the money from the honor box as needed. No advance reservation, first come first serve. We can reserve the Second Monday grounds for big group and overflow for big events. 
(2)  Pavilion use shall be the current method of reserving the pavilions at the city office. The cost will be ten dollars ($10.00) per day and the pavilion will need to be reserved forty-eight (48) hours in advance. If the pavilion is not reserved it is a first come first serve. The user will have a receipt to show they have the facility reserved. This is for Amon Carter, Amphitheater, Pool, and Second Monday pavilions. Commercial use for the pavilion will be assessed a higher fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(3)  Reserve basketball, soccer or sand lot volleyball courts at the city office forty-eight (48) hours in advance with the fee for civic and private uses of ten ($10.00) per day and five dollars ($5.00) for half a day 8:00 a.m.-2:00 p.m. or 2:00 p.m.-midnight. A posting board will be installed at the locations of the facility. A receipt will be issued. All other times first come first serve, no fee charged. 
(4)  Pool admission is as follows: 
As set out in Appendix C "Schedule of Fees" City of Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Reservation of Bowie Rodeo Grounds: All money collected and reservations made for the use of the Bowie Rodeo Arena Grounds will be at the city office. The user will be provided a receipt to show they have the facility reserved. 
Bowie Rodeo Arena Grounds fees are as follows: 
Youth Event $50.00 per day plus lighting cost of $10.00 an hour if used at night Civic Event $100.00 per day plus lighting cost of $10.00 an hour if used at night Commercial Event $150.00 per day plus lighting cost of $10.00 an hour if used at night  
No livestock shall be left at the arena for more than a 24-hour period after the event is concluded. 
(Special permission to waive such event fees may be granted by the city council) 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2008-01, Sec. 1, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2013-14, Sec. 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 2017-03, Sec. 1, adopted 5-2-17; Ord. No. 2018-04, Sec. 1, adopted 5-30-18) 
Sec. 13-502 - Regulations of Conduct 
    No person in any area designated for overnight camping shall: 
(1)  Camp in any area unless such area is designated for camping; such as tent camping areas or recreational vehicle camping areas. 
(2)  Allow to accumulate in a camping area trash or litter in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage or other refuse. Such items shall be placed in receptacles. 
(3)  Create any loud noise after 10:00 p.m. 
(4)  Dispose of human waste or sewage except at places so designated. 
(5)  Leave any item of personal property in a camping space not rented. 
(6)  Sleep outside of a camper, tent or similar unit designed for overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(7)  Permit any domestic pet outside of the camper unit unless such pet is on a chain or leash; and unattended pets shall not be left outside of the camper unit. 
(8)  Fail to pick up any pet's feces and dispose of same daily. 
(9)  No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic beverage within Pelham Park. The prohibition against consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall not apply as follows: 
a.  To a person who has rented a campsite, or a Second Monday vendor camping overnight at his/her space and consumes or possesses the alcoholic beverage within the immediate area of the rented campsite while camping; or 
b.  Is a family member or guest of a person who has rented a campsite, or a Second Monday Vendor and consumes or possesses the alcoholic beverage within the immediate area of the rented campsite while camping. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13-503 - Occupancy Restricted 
    There shall be no more than one camper unit per space or stall unless permission is given by the director of parks or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.504. - Motorcycles and All-Terrain Vehicles 
    The operation of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and go-carts are prohibited from being operated within the boundaries of Pelham Park. Road cycles used for transportation and handicap vehicles are not subject to this restriction. Road cycles used for transportation and handicap vehicles are not subject to this restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.505 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
ARTICLE 13.600 - MEYER PARK 

Sec. 13.600 - Hours of Operation 
    Meyer Park shall be open year-round. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.601 - Admission Fees 
    The following fees for Meyer Park will be charged. 
(1)  Pavilion use shall be the current method of reserving the pavilions at the city office. The cost will be ten dollars $10.00) per day and the pavilion will need to be reserved forty-eight (48) hours in advance. If the pavilion is not reserved it is a first come first serve. The user will have a receipt to show they have the facility reserved. Commercial use for the pavilion will be assessed a higher fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.602 - Regulations of Conduct 
    Reserved. 
Sec. 13.603 - Motorcycles and All-Terrain Vehicles 
    The operation of motorcycles, all-Terrain vehicles and go-carts are strictly prohibited from being operated within the boundaries of Meyer Park. Road cycles used for transportation and handicap vehicles are not subject to this restriction. Road cycles used for transportation and handicap vehicles are not subject to this restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 13.604 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, Sec. 1, adopted 9-4-07) 
ARTICLE 13.700 - BOWIE COMMUNITY CENTER 
    The Community Center use contemplated under this article shall be effective for all uses of the facility with the exception of the facility's use for purposes of Second Monday. Second Monday reservations, hours and uses are set out in Chapter 4, Bowie Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-11) 

Sec. 13.700 - Hours of Operation 
    Per the terms of the rental agreement entered into by and between Parks and Recreation Department or Community Center employees and User. License and rental agreement terms shall be authorized by the city council. 
    All events must end no later than 12:00 a.m., for all nights and the building must be vacated by 1:00 a.m. New Year's Eve events must end no later than 1:00 a.m. and the building vacated by 2:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-11) 
Sec. 13.701 - Fees 
    The City of Bowie reserves the right to change, alter, amend or cancel the rental rates at any time. 
    Fees shall be established by license agreement or fee schedule duly authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-11) 
Sec. 13.702 - Regulation of Conduct 
    The city reserves the right to change, alter, amend or cancel any of the rules, regulations, and conduct relating to the Center at any time. 
    Rules, regulations and information concerning the rental, accepted uses and terms of use shall be established in the "Rules and Regulations " document promulgated for use and distribution by Parks and Recreation Department and Community Center employees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-11) 
Sec. 13.703 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
    Additionally, any person violating the terms of use, rules or regulations concerning the use of the Community Center may be removed from the property without notice and any reservation or upcoming reservation may be suspended or cancelled without refund of reservation fees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, Sec. 1, adopted 9-20-11) 
ARTICLE 13.800 - RICHWOOD HILLS LAKE ESTATES PARK 
    The use contemplated under this article shall be effective for all uses of the park. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 

Sec. 13.800 - Hours of Operation 
    Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park shall be open year round. 
    The park shall be open from daylight until 10:00 p.m. on any given day. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13.801 - Regulation of Conduct 
    Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park shall be utilized for the purposes of a "day use" park only. 
    The use of Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park in violation of Bowie Code of Ordinances section 13.302 is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13.802 - Unlawful Acts 
    Conduct in the Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park shall be governed by Bowie Code of Ordinances section 13.301. 
    The City of Bowie reserves the right to change, alter, amend or cancel any of the rules, regulations, and conduct relating to Richwood Hills Lake Estate Park at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13.803 - Driving and Parking Vehicles 
    Where vehicle parking lots or areas have been set aside, no vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass, or lawn within such park, but shall be parked in such parking lots or areas and not otherwise. Exceptions are park maintenance and trash pickup vehicles. 
    The operation of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and go-carts is strictly prohibited from being operated within the boundaries of Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park. Road cycles used for transportation and handicap vehicles are not subject to this restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13.804 - Swimming Prohibited 
    Swimming shall not be permitted within ten (10) feet of the ramp area used for loading and unloading watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13.805 - Violation; Penalty 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
    Additionally, any person violating this article may be removed from the property without notice. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, Sec. 1, adopted 10-2-12) 
APPENDIX A - CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location or gives the disposition of the chapters, sections and subsections of the 1991 Code of Ordinances within this revised code. The abbreviation "NIC" means the provision is not included in this code, though not necessarily repealed. 
1991 Code 1995 Code Chapter 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec. 1-1 How code designated and cited Sec. 1.101 Sec. 1-2 Catchlines of sections Sec. 1.102 Sec. 1-3 Definitions and rules of construction Sec. 1.103 Sec. 1-4 Severability of parts of code Sec. 1.104 Sec. 1-5 General penalty; continuing violations Repealed by Ordinance 
 adopting Code Sec. 1-6 Certain ordinances not affected by code Sec. 1.106 Sec. 1-7 Amendments or additions to code Sec. 1.107 Sec. 1-8 Supplementation of code Sec. 1.108 Sec. 1-9 Effect of repeal of ordinances Sec. 1.109 CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION Article I: In General Sec. 2-1 Signature on checks, warrants, vouchers Art. 1.200 Sec. 2-2 Boards, commissions, committees-Supervision Sec. 1.301 Sec. 2-3 Same-Limitation of activity Sec. 1.302 Sec. 2-4 Same-Requests for service, information Sec. 1.303 Sec. 2-5 Supervision of departments Art. 8.100 Sec. 2.5-8 Penalty for violation Sec. 1.508 CHAPTER 3: ANIMALS Sec. 3-1 Definitions Art. 2.100 Sec. 3-2 Enforcement officer Art. 2.200 Sec. 3-3 Authority of animal warden Art. 2.300 Sec. 3-4 Authorization of pound Art. 2.400 Sec. 3-5 Violations Art. 2.500 Sec. 3-6 Impoundment, sale, disposal of animals Art. 2.600 Sec. 3-7 Redemption of impounded animals Art. 2.700 Sec. 3-8 Impoundment fee Art. 2.800 Sec. 3-9 Adoption fees Art. 2.900 Sec. 3-10 Collection of fees Art. 2.1000 Sec. 3-11 Records to be kept Art. 2.1100 Sec. 3-12 Confinement of certain animals Art. 2.1200 Sec. 3-13 License required Art. 2.1300 Sec. 3-14 License; identification tags Art. 2.1400 Sec. 3-15 License fees Art. 2.1500 Sec. 3-16 Rabies control; report of rabid animals Art. 2.1600 Sec. 3-17 Quarantine; testing Art. 2.1700 Sec. 3-18 Vaccination required Art. 2.1800 Sec. 3-19 Exposure to harmful, hazardous substances, apparatus Art. 2.1900 Sec. 3-20 Sanitary maintenance Art. 2.2000 Sec. 3-21 Determination of nuisance Art. 2.2100 Sec. 3-22 Keeping of hogs Art. 2.2200 Sec. 3-23 Fowl at large Art. 2.2300 Sec. 3-24 Staking animals on public ways Art. 2.2400 Chapter 4: BUILDINGS Article I. In General Sec. 4-1-4-25 Reserved Article II. Building Code Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-26 Fire limits described Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-27 Construction required within fire limits Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-28 Frame building in fire limits Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-29 Roofs Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-30 Repairs and additions Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-31 Moving building into fire zone Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-32 Moving building within fire zone Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-33 Using stoves in fire zone Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-34 Secondary fire limits described Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-35 Construction required within secondary limits Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-36 Penalty for violations Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Sec. 4-37 House moving permit Repealed by Ord. 97-6 Article III. Electrical Code Repealed by Ord. 97-14 Sec. 4-56 Adoption Repealed by Ord. 97-14 Sec. 4-57 Penalty for violations Repealed by Ord. 97-14 Sec. 4-58 Attached to Ord. No. 011988 Repealed by Ord. 97-14 Sec. 4-59-4-69 Reserved Article IV. Plumbing Code Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-70 Adopted Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-71 Area of application Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-72 Modifications of code-Provisions repealed Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-73 Same-Amendments Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-74 Same-Additions Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-75-4-85 Reserved Article V. Dangerous Buildings Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-86 Definitions Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-87 Declared public nuisance Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-88 Standards for repair, vacation or demolition Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-89 Inspection of buildings, schools, churches, etc. Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-90 Notice to vacate and/or repair or demolish Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-91 Hearing Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-92 Emergency cases Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-93 Placarding Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-94 Administrative liability Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-95 Reports of suspected dangerous buildings Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-96 Disconnecting public utilities Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-97 Dangerous structure determination board established; composition; actions Superseded by Ord. 96-11 Sec. 4-98 Securing of unoccupied buildings Superseded by Ord. 96-11 CHAPTER 5: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT Article I. In General Sec. 5-1-5-25 Reserved Article II. Emergency Operations Plan Art. 1.600 Sec. 5-26 Authority Sec. 1.601 Sec. 5-27 References Sec. 1.602 Sec. 5-28 Purpose Sec. 1.603 Sec. 5-29 Situation and assumptions Sec. 1.604 Sec. 5-30 Organization generally Sec. 1.605 Sec. 5-31 Assignment of responsibilities and tasks Sec. 1.606 Sec. 5-32 Department and agency functions Sec. 1.607 Sec. 5-33 Line of succession Sec. 1.608 Sec. 5-34 Status, conflict of laws Sec. 1.609 Sec. 5-35 Review, amendment Sec. 1.610 CHAPTER 6: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION Sec. 6-1 Fire department generally; appointment, qualifications of chief Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-2 Designation of acting chief Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-3 Return of chief to rank Sec. 5.103 Sec. 6-4 Chief to act as fire marshal Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-5 Investigation of fires Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-6 Reports to city manager Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-7 Additional duties of chief Superseded by Ord. 95-3 Sec. 6-8 Assignment of personnel Sec. 5.108 Sec. 6-9 Police authority of personnel Sec. 5.109 Sec. 6-10 Uniforms, badges Sec. 5.110 Sec. 6-11 Additional certification of personnel Sec. 5.111 Sec. 6-12 Temporary appointments Sec. 5.112 Sec. 6-13 Suspension of personnel Sec. 5.113 Sec. 6-14 Crossing hoses Sec. 5.114 Sec. 6-15 Injury to equipment Sec. 5.115 Sec. 6-16 Interference with personnel Sec. 5.116 Sec. 6-17 Complaints for violations Sec. 5.117 Sec. 6-18 Fireworks Art. 5.200 CHAPTER 7: HEALTH Article I. In General Sec. 7-1-7-25 Reserved Article II. Ambulances Art. 4.600 Sec. 7-26 Base rates Sec. 4.601 Sec. 7-27 Schedule of commodity costs Sec. 4.602 Sec. 7-28 Limitation of service area Sec. 4.603 Sec. 7-29 Basis of nonemergency transportation for nursing home patients Sec. 4.604 Sec. 7-30 Medicaid and Medicare patients Sec. 4.605 Sec. 7-31 All other patients Sec. 4.606 Sec. 7-32-7-50 Reserved Article III. Hospital Authority Art. 1.1200 Sec. 7-51 Creation, name Sec. 1.1201 Sec. 7-52 Board of directors Sec. 1.1202 CHAPTER 8: LAKE AREAS; PONDS; SWIMMING; POOLS Article I. In General Sec. 8-1-8-25 Reserved Article II. Swimming Pools Art. 3.700 Sec. 8-26 Definitions Sec. 3.701 Sec. 8-27 Scope of article Sec. 3.702 Sec. 8-28 Enclosures required Sec. 3.703 Sec. 8-29 Specifications for gates Sec. 3.704 Sec. 8-30 Permit required; plot plan Sec. 3.705 Sec. 8-31 Permit fee Sec. 3.706 Sec. 8-32-8-50 Reserved Article III. Ponds Art. 3.800 Sec. 8-51 Definitions Sec. 3.801 Sec. 8-52 Scope Sec. 3.802 Sec. 8-53 Fence required Sec. 3.803 Sec. 8-54 Nonconforming fences Sec. 3.804 Sec. 8-55 Continuing violations Sec. 3.805 Sec. 8-56-8-70 Reserved Article IV. Lake Amon G. Carter Area Art. 1.1300 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 8-71-8-95 Reserved DIVISION 2. BUILDINGS; SANITATION Sec. 8-96 Temporary restriction of activities Sec. 1.1301 Sec. 8-97 Construction permit Sec. 1.1302 Sec. 8-98 Installation of septic tanks, toilets, privies prohibited Sec. 1.1303 Sec. 8-99 Activities prohibited near intake Sec. 1.1304 Sec. 8-100 Restriction of industrial activities Sec. 1.1305 Sec. 8-101 Disposal of solid wastes Sec. 1.1306 Sec. 8-102 Camping limited Sec. 1.1307 Sec. 8-103-8-120 Reserved DIVISION 3. BOATS Art. 1.1400 Sec. 8-121 Definitions Sec. 1.1401 Sec. 8-122 Application; conflict with other laws Sec. 1.1402 Sec. 8-123 License for rental boats Sec. 1.1403 Sec. 8-124 Operation generally Sec. 1.1404 Sec. 8-125 Rules of the road Sec. 1.1405 Sec. 8-126 Anchoring restricted Sec. 1.1406 Sec. 8-127 Prohibited in swimming areas Sec. 1.1407 Sec. 8-128 Loading beyond capacity Sec. 1.1408 Sec. 8-129 Toilet facilities Sec. 1.1409 Sec. 8-130 Water skiing Sec. 1.1410 Sec. 8-131-8-145 Reserved Article V. Fishing in Bowie Lake Art. 1.1500 Sec. 8-146 Definition Sec. 1.1501 Sec. 8-147 Fishing permitted Sec. 1.1502 Sec. 8-148 Prohibited devices Sec. 1.1503 Sec. 8-149 Seining for minnows Sec. 1.1504 Sec. 8-150 Daily bag limit Sec. 1.1505 Sec. 8-151 Lake custodian-Appointment, bond Sec. 1.1506 Sec. 8-152 Same-Compensation Sec. 1.1507 Sec. 8-153 Same-Disposition of receipts Sec. 1.1508 Sec. 8-154 Penalty for violations Sec. 1.1509 Sec. 8-155-8-170 Reserved Article VI. Bowie Reservoir Area Art. 1.1600 Sec. 8-171 Scope of article Sec. 1.1601 Sec. 8-172 Structures restricted Sec. 1.1602 Sec. 8-173 Prohibited activities Sec. 1.1603 Sec. 8-174 Boating generally Sec. 1.1604 Sec. 8-175 Obstruction of boat ramps Sec. 1.1605 Sec. 8-176 Fishing generally Sec. 1.1606 Sec. 8-177 Federal, state laws applicable Sec. 1.1607 Sec. 8-178 Regulation of tournaments Sec. 1.1608 Sec. 8-179 Dedication of water rights Sec. 1.1609 Sec. 8-180 Accumulation of solid waste Sec. 1.1610 Sec. 8-181 Pollution violations Sec. 1.1611 CHAPTER 9: LIBRARIES Article I. In General Sec. 9-1 Department created Sec. 1.1101 Sec. 9-2 Board of trustees-Created, general authority Sec. 1.1102 Sec. 9-3 Same-Appointment, terms Sec. 1.1103 Sec. 9-4 Same-Fiscal restriction Sec. 1.1104 Sec. 9-5 Same-Advisory function Sec. 1.1105 Sec. 9-6 Library director Sec. 1.1106 Sec. 9-7-9-25 Reserved Article II. Library Property Sec. 9-26 Acceptance of gifts, donations Sec. 1.1107 Sec. 9-27 Promulgation of policies Sec. 1.1108 Sec. 9-28 Responsibility of card holder Sec. 1.1109 Sec. 9-29 Status of lost, destroyed properties Sec. 1.1110 Sec. 9-30 When property due; overdue fines Sec. 1.1111 Sec. 9-31 Schedule of fines Sec. 1.1112 Sec. 9-32 Maximum fines Sec. 1.1113 Sec. 9-33 Suspension of borrowing privilege Sec. 1.1114 Sec. 9-34 Return of property upon request Sec. 1.1115 Sec. 9-35 Damage of property Sec. 1.1116 Sec. 9-36 Penalty for violations Sec. 1.1117 CHAPTER 10: LICENSES, PERMITS, AND BUSINESS REGS. Article I. In General Sec. 10-1 Vending stands on public ways Art. 4.100 Sec. 10-2-10-25 Reserved Article II. Itinerant Vendors Art. 4.200 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 10-26 Definition Sec. 4.201 Sec. 10-27 Certain activities deemed misdemeanor Sec. 4.202 Sec. 10-28 Exemption Sec. 4.203 Sec. 10-29-10-45 reserved DIVISION 2. PERMIT Sec. 10-46 Contents; duration Sec. 4.204 Sec. 10-47 Issuance; appeal from denial Sec. 4.205 Sec. 10-48 Responsibility of land owner Sec. 4.206 Sec. 10-49 Application information Sec. 4.207 Sec. 10-50 Fee Sec. 4.208 Sec. 10-51 Revocation of permit Sec. 4.209 Sec. 10-52-10-70 Reserved Article III. Reserved Sec. 10-71-10-95 Reserved Article IV. Oil and Gas Wells Art. 4.300 Sec. 10-96 Compliance with article; license or permit required Sec. 4.301 Sec. 10-97 Application Sec. 4.302 Sec. 10-98-10-115 Reserved Article V. Second Monday Regulations Art. 4.400 Sec. 10-116 Use of public property Sec. 4.401 Sec. 10-117 Days, hours of operation Sec. 4.402 Sec. 10-118 Appointment of personnel Sec. 4.403 Sec. 10-119 Vendor activities classification Sec. 4.404 Sec. 10-120 Rate schedule Sec. 4.405 Sec. 10-121 Reservation of lots Sec. 4.406 Sec. 10-122 Use of lots restricted Sec. 4.407 Sec. 10-123 Overnight charges Sec. 4.408 Sec. 10-124 Regulations Sec. 4.409 Sec. 10-125 Authority of manager Sec. 4.410 CHAPTER 11: MOBILE HOMES Sec. 11-1 Definition Sec. 3.501 Sec. 11-2 Proximity to other structures Sec. 3.502 Sec. 11-3 Application of technical codes Sec. 3.503 CHAPTER 12: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Article I. In General Sec. 12-1 One-way alley Art. 10.100 Sec. 12-2 U-turns restricted Art. 10.200 Sec. 12-3 Vehicle storage facility act adopted Art. 10.300 Sec. 12-4-12-20 Reserved Article II. Speed Limits Art. 10.400 Sec. 12-21 Determinations Sec. 10.401 Sec. 12-22 Speed streets Sec. 10.402 Sec. 12-23 Penalty Sec. 10.403 Sec. 12-24-12-40 Reserved Article III. Truck Routes Art. 10.500 Sec. 12-41 Definition Sec. 10.501 Sec. 12-42 Load limits Sec. 10.502 Sec. 12-43 Deviation Sec. 10.503 Sec. 12-44 Evidence of destination Sec. 10.504 Sec. 12-45 Parking restricted Sec. 10.505 Sec. 12-46 Parking prohibited in residential areas Sec. 10.506 Sec. 12-47 Parking on residential streets Sec. 10.507 Sec. 12-48 Nonconforming facilities Sec. 10.508 Sec. 12-49 Application to tank vehicles Sec. 10.509 Sec. 12-50-12-65 Reserved Article IV. Junked Vehicles Art. 7.500 Sec. 12-66 Definitions Sec. 7.501 Sec. 12-67 Deemed public nuisance; declared unlawful Sec. 7.502 Sec. 12-68 Notice to owner to abate nuisance-When on public property Sec. 7.503 Sec. 12-69 Same-When on private property Sec. 7.504 Sec. 12-70 Description of vehicle in order Sec. 7.505 Sec. 12-71 Trial in municipal court-Preliminaries Sec. 7.506 Sec. 12-72 Same-Findings of judge; penalty Sec. 7.507 Sec. 12-73 Removal with permission of owner Sec. 7.508 Sec. 12-74 Removal by city Sec. 7.509 Sec. 12-75 Notice to state Sec. 7.510 CHAPTER 13: OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS Article I. In General Sec. 13-1 Arson reward Art. 5.300 Sec. 13-2-13-25 Reserved Article II. Unused Wells, Cisterns, etc Art. 7.100 Sec. 13-26 Definitions Sec. 7.101 Sec. 13-27 Purpose, scope of article Sec. 7.102 Sec. 13-28 Capping Sec. 7.103 Sec. 13-29 Filling in Sec. 7.104 Sec. 13-30-13-45 Reserved Article III. Nuisances Art. 7.200 Sec. 13-46 Conditions enumerated Sec. 7.201 Sec. 13-47 Notice of violation Sec. 7.202 Sec. 13-48 Notice to unknown party Sec. 7.203 Sec. 13-49 Penalty for violation Sec. 7.204 Sec. 13-50 Abatement by city; lien Sec. 7.205 CHAPTER 14: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT Article I. In General Sec. 14-1-14-26 Reserved Article II. Flood Damage Prevention Art. 3.900 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 14-27 Definitions Sec. 3.901 Sec. 14-28 Statutory authorization Sec. 3.902 Sec. 14-29 Findings of fact Sec. 3.903 Sec. 14-30 Statement of purpose Sec. 3.904 Sec. 14-31 Methods of reducing flood losses Sec. 3.905 Sec. 14-32 Application of article Sec. 3.906 Sec. 14-33 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard Sec. 3.907 Sec. 14-34 Establishment of development permit Sec. 3.908 Sec. 14-35 Compliance Sec. 3.909 Sec. 14-36 Abrogation and greater restrictions Sec. 3.910 Sec. 14-37 Interpretation Sec. 3.911 Sec. 14-38 Warning and disclaimer of liability Sec. 3.912 Sec. 14-39-14-55 Reserved DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION Sec. 14-56 Floodplain administrator-Designation Sec. 3.913 Sec. 14-57 Same-Duties and responsibilities Sec. 3.914 Sec. 14-58 Permit procedures Sec. 3.915 Sec. 14-59 Variance procedures Sec. 3.916 Sec. 14-60-14-75 Reserved DIVISION 3. FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION Sec. 14-76 General standards Sec. 3.917 Sec. 14-77 Specific standards Sec. 3.918 Sec. 14-78 Standards for subdivision proposals Sec. 3.919 Sec. 14-79 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones) Sec. 3.920 CHAPTER 15: POLICE Art. 8.800 Article I. In General Sec. 15-1 Composition of department Sec. 8.801 Sec. 15-2 Chief of police generally Sec. 8.802 Sec. 15-3 Return of chief to rank Sec. 8.803 Sec. 15-4 Designation of acting chief Sec. 8.804 Sec. 15-5 Commission of appointment, oath, bond Sec. 8.805 Sec. 15-6 Special police restricted Sec. 8.806 Sec. 15-7 Authority of officers Sec. 8.807 Sec. 15-8 Management of city prison Sec. 8.808 Sec. 15-9 Uniforms, badges Sec. 8.809 Sec. 15-10 Suspension of personnel; appeal Sec. 8.810 Sec. 15-11 Reports Sec. 8.811 Sec. 15-12 Additional duties of chief Sec. 8.812 Sec. 15-13 Central dispatch unit Sec. 8.813 Sec. 15-14-15-30 Reserved Article II. Reserve Force Art. 8.900 Sec. 15-31 Established, objectives Sec. 8.901 Sec. 15-32 Number; scope, intent of force Sec. 8.902 Sec. 15-33 Qualifications Sec. 8.903 Sec. 15-34 Authority, responsibility of officers Sec. 8.904 Sec. 15-35 Discrimination prohibited Sec. 8.905 CHAPTER 16: SOLID WASTE Article I. In General Sec. 16-1 Sanitation department generally Art. 11.1900 Sec. 16-2 Covering of vehicles using landfill Art. 11.2000 Sec. 16-3-16-30 Reserved Article II. Litter Art. 6.100 Sec. 16-31 Definitions Sec. 6.101 Sec. 16-32 On private property Sec. 6.102 Sec. 16-33 On public property Sec. 6.103 Sec. 16-34 Duty of property owner Sec. 6.104 Sec. 16-35-16-44 Reserved Article III. Solid Waste Collection Art. 11.2100 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 16-45 Solid waste collection service Sec. 11.2101 Sec. 16-46 Customer definitions Sec. 11.2102 Sec. 16-47 Collection service standards Sec. 11.2103 Sec. 16-48 Point of collection for all classifications Sec. 11.2104 Sec. 16-49 Wastes generated by contractor for hire Sec. 11.2105 Sec. 16-50 Removal or collection by unauthorized individuals Sec. 11.2106 Sec. 16-51 Unauthorized use of container service Sec. 11.2107 Sec. 16-52 Collection of nonresident refuse/garbage Sec. 11.2108 Sec. 16-53 Termination of out-of-city collection services Sec. 11.2109 Sec. 16-54 Movement of refuse from one premise to another Sec. 11.2110 Sec. 16-55 Refusal to collect solid waste Sec. 11.2111 Sec. 16-56 Penalty clause Sec. 11.2112 Sec. 16-57-16-66 Reserved DIVISION 2. RATES AND FEES Sec. 16-67 Method of charging and billing fees Sec. 11.2113 Sec. 16-68 Fees mandatory Sec. 11.2114 Sec. 16-69 Monthly rates and collection fees Sec. 11.2115 CHAPTER 17: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS Article I. In General Sec. 17-1 Street department generally Art. 8.700 Sec. 17-2 Street improvements, assessments Art. 3.100 Sec. 17-3 Drainage of wastes onto streets Art. 7.300 Sec. 17-4-17-20 Reserved Article II. Obstructions Art. 7.400 Sec. 17-21 General prohibitions Sec. 7.401 Sec. 17-22 Penalty for violation Sec. 7.402 Sec. 17-23 Railroad crossings Repealed by Ordinance adopting Code Sec. 17-24 Barrels, boxes, etc. Sec. 7.404 Sec. 17-25 Signs, awnings Sec. 7.405 Sec. 17-26 Crowds Sec. 7.4.6 Sec. 17-27 Ingress, egress at public places Sec. 7.407 Sec. 17-28 Horses Sec. 7.408 Sec. 17-29 Merchants receiving, forwarding goods Sec. 7.409 Sec. 17-30-17-45 Reserved Article III. Excavations Art. 3.600 Sec. 17-46 Permit required Sec. 3.601 Sec. 17-47 Application for permit; issuance, contents Sec. 3.602 Sec. 17-48 Restoration of streets of alleys Sec. 3.603 Sec. 17-49-17-65 Reserved Article IV. Regulation of Franchise Art. 4.500 Sec. 17-66 Required for certain services Sec. 4.501 Sec. 17-67 Removal of equipment after expiration Sec. 4.502 Sec. 17-68 Declaration of nuisance, abatement Sec. 4.503 CHAPTER 18: TAXATION Article I. In General Sec. 18-1 Sales and use tax Art. 1.700 Sec. 18-2 Tax on bingo game Repealed by Ordinance adopting Code Sec. 18-3-18-20 Reserved Article II. Ad Valorem Tax Art. 1.900 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 18-21 Conveyance of transfers, deeds Sec. 1.901 Sec. 18-22-18-50 Reserved DIVISION 2. HOMESTEAD OF PERSONS 65 OR OLDER Sec. 18-51 Amount of exemption Sec. 1.902 Sec. 18-52 Effective date Sec. 1.903 Sec. 18-53 Application Sec. 1.904 Sec. 18-54 Determination; appeal Sec. 1.905 Sec. 18-55 Status Sec. 1.906 Sec. 18-56-18-70 Reserved Article III. Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax Art. 1.1000 Sec. 18-71 Levied, amount Superseded by Ord. 97-10 Sec. 18-72 Collection by owners Sec. 1.1002 Sec. 18-73 Quarterly accounting Sec. 1.1003 Sec. 18-74 Violations Sec. 1.1004 Sec. 18-75 Uses for proceeds Sec. 1.1005 Sec. 18-76 Advisory board Sec. 1.1006 CHAPTER 19: UTILITIES Article I. In General Sec. 19-1 Duties of utility service supervisor Art. 11.100 Sec. 19-2 Director of water and wastewater utilities Art. 11.200 Sec. 19-3 Prohibited acts Sec. 11.301 Sec. 19-4 Prima facie evidence of knowledge of violation Sec. 11.302 Sec. 19-5 Sales and services of water and wastewater system Secs. 11.503(b); 11.601; Art. 11.700 - 11.900 Sec. 19-6 Reserved Sec. 19-7 Meter testing fee Art. 11.1000 Sec. 19-8 Defective meters Art. 11.1100 Sec. 19-9 Broken lines, defective plumbing Art. 11.1200 Sec. 19-10-19-25 Reserved Article II. Delinquent Accounts Sec. 19-26 Generally Sec. 11.501 Sec. 19-27 Billings Sec. 11.502 Sec. 19-28 Collections Sec. 11.503 Sec. 19-29 Service disconnect Sec. 11.505 Sec. 19-30 Service connects Sec. 11.506 Sec. 19-31 Bad checks Sec. 11.601 Sec. 19-32 Meter tampering Sec. 11.507 Sec. 19-33 Unauthorized connections Art. 11.400 Sec.19-34-19-50 Reserved Article III. Electricity Sec. 19-51 Director of electric utilities Art. 11.1300 Sec. 19-52 Rates Sec. 11.1401 Sec. 19-53 Fuel adjustment charge Sec. 11.1402 Sec. 19-54 Deposits Art. 11.1500 Sec. 19-55 Reconnection charges Art. 11.1600 Sec. 19-56 Bad checks Sec. 11.1700 Sec. 19-57 Customer switching policy Art. 11.1700 Sec. 19-58-19-75 Reserved Article IV. Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan Art. 11.1800 Sec. 19-76 Approval of plan Sec. 11.1801 Sec. 19-77 Reports Sec. 11.1802 Sec. 19-78 Threshold conditions Sec. 11.1803 Sec. 19-79 Penalty Sec. 11.1804 APPENDIX A Subdivision Regulations. CHAPTER 9, Exhibit A APPENDIX B Zoning Ordinance Repealed by Ord. 94-14  
APPENDIX B - ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 
This table is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the City of Bowie supplied by the city to the certifier setting out their location in this Code of Ordinances. Ordinances which are not of a general and permanent nature have not been included in the code. Whenever the abbreviation "NIC" appears, it shall mean that these ordinances are not included in this code and they have not been either repealed or superseded. 
ORD. # DATE DESCRIPTION DISPOSITION 93-10 9/7/93 Prohibiting discharge of fireworks in city Art. 5.200 93-11 9/21/93 increases solid waste collection fees Sec. 11.2115 93-12 9/7/93 Adopting FAA 93-94 budget NIC 93-13 9/21/93 Tax rate levy rate for FAA 1993-94 NIC 93-14 1/4/94 Prescribing regulations for CATV rates Art. 4.800 94-1 2/1/94 Amends FAA 93-94 budget NIC 94-2 3/1/94 Calling election on May 7, 1994 NIC 94-3 3/17/94 Prescribing utility policies and charges Art. 11.600 Sec. 11.506 94-4 6/21/94 Abandoning alley and street extension in Breiger Addition NIC 94-5 Abandoning alleys in Whaley Addition Voided 94-6 7/5/94 Establishing procedures for abandoning streets and alleys NIC 94-7 7/19/94 Amending Ordinance No. 91-6 (zoning ordinance) Failed 94-8 9/6/94 Adopting FY 94-95 budget NIC 94-9 9/6/94 Tax rate levy for FY 94-95 NIC 94-10 9/20/94 Increase in water rates Superseded by Ord. 96-12 94-11 9/20/94 Increase in sewer rates Sec. 11.802 94-12 Amending FY 94-95 budget Failed 94-13 Adopting the various standard construction codes Failed 94-14 11/22/94 Repealing zoning ordinance (991-6) and maps Art. 12. 100 95-1 1/17/95 Establishing fair housing regulations Art. 4.700 95-2 2/21/95 Calling election for May 6, 1994 NIC 95-3 5/2/95 Ordinance adopting Code NIC 95-3 7/11/95 Chief of fire department Art. 5.100 95-5 9/5/95 Adopting annual budget NIC 95-6 9/5/95 Levy of taxes NIC 95-7 9/19/95 Budget amendment NIC 95-8 10/17/95 Budget amendment NIC 95-9 10/17/95 Budget amendment NIC 95-10 11/21/95 Budget amendment NIC 96-1 2/20/96 Uniform address designation system 96-2 2/20/96 Budget amendment NIC 96-3 2/20/96 General election for council positions NIC 96-4 3/5/96 Budget amendment NIC 96-7 6/4/96 Amending 95-96 municipal budget NIC 96-5 7/2/96 Enterprise zone NIC 96-8 7/2/96 Amending 95-96 municipal budget NIC 96-9 9/17/96 Adopting 96-97 municipal budget NIC 96-10 9/17/96 Levying 1996 tax rate NIC 96-11 9/17/96 Adopting Standard Codes Sec. 3.102 96-12 10/22/96 Water rates Sec. 11.108 96-13 10/22/96 Building code amendments Sec. 3.103 96-14 11/5/96 Election for sales and use tax Secs. 1.702, 1.703 97-1 2/4/97 Building code amendments Sec. 3.103 97-2 2/4/97 Election for city council NIC 97-4 2/18/97 Building code amendments Sec. 3.103 97-3 3/4/97 Renewal of CATV franchise NIC 97-5 4/15/97 Abandoning alley NIC 97-6 5/20/97 Establishing a fire district Sec. 3.101 97-7 9/16/97 Adopting annual budget for '97-'98 fiscal year NIC 97-8 9/16/97 Levying tax rate for '97 tax year NIC 97-9 9/16/97 Amending Sections 1.1300, 1.1400, 1.1500, and 1.1600 Secs. 1.1308, 1.1411, 1.1510, 1.1612 97-10 10/21/97 Setting and effective hotel/motel tax rate Secs. 1.1001, 1.1005(3) 97-11 10/7/97 Increasing water rates Superseded by Ord. 98-15 97-12 10/7/97 Increasing sewer rates Superseded by Ord. 98-16 97-13 12/9/97 Extending franchise agreement between city and Southwestern Bell Telephone NIC 97-14 12/9/97 Adopting 1996 National Electrical Code Superseded by Ord. 99-5 98-1 1/27/98 Amending 1997-1998 municipal budget NIC 98-2 2/3/98 Regulating use of force during nonviolent civil rights demonstrations Chapter 8, Article 8.1000 98-3 2/3/98 Ordering special election NIC 98-4 3/13/98 Providing for fee on all misdemeanor convictions Chapter 8, Article 8-1100 98-5 4/21/98 Amending 1997-1998 municipal budget NIC 98-6 7/7/98 Amending 1997-1998 municipal budget NIC 98-7 7/21/98 Amending definition in offenses and nuisances Chapter 7, Article 7.200, Section 7.206 98-8 9/1/98 Authorizing health benefits for city retirees Chapter 8, Article 8.600, Section 8.606 98-9 9/l/98 Adopting 1998-1999 budget NIC 98-10 9/1/98 Levying tax rate for 1998 NIC 98-11 9/1/98 Certificate for ordinance authorizing issuance of utility system revenue refunding bonds NIC 98-12 10/20/98 1996 national electric code Chapter 3, Article 3. 100, Section 3.103(h) 98-13 10/20/98 Municipal budget NIC 98-14 12/1/98 Rights-of-way, telecommunications Chapter 4, Article 4.900 98-15 12/1/98 Decreasing water rates Superseded by Ord. No. 99-12 98-16 12/1/98 Decreasing sewer rates Superseded by Ord. No. 99-12 99-1 1/19/99 General election NIC 99-2 1/19/99 Municipal budget NIC 99-3 3/2/99 Levy & collections of sales & use tax Sec. 1.703 99-4 7/6/99 Municipal budget NIC 99-5 8/3/99 1999 national electric code Chapter 3, Article 3. 100, Section 3.102(10) 99-6 8/17/99 Texas municipal retirement system Chapter 8, Article 8.600, Section 8.607 99-7 9/7/99 Traffic control, speed zones Chapter 10, Article 10.400, Sections 10.404, 10.405, 10,406, 10.407 99-8 9/7/99 Comprehensive emergency management program Chapter 1, Article 1.1700 99-9 9/7/99 Annual budget NIC 99-10 9/7/99 Levying tax rate 1999 NIC 99-11 10/11/99 Revising drought contingency plan Chapter 11, Article 11. 1800, Section 11.1803 99-12 10/5/99 Increasing water rates Chapter 11, Article 11.800, Section 11-801 99-13 10/5/99 Increasing sewer rates Chapter 11, Article 11.800, Section 11.802 99-14 12/14/99 Municipal court technology fund Chapter 8, Article 8.1200 99-15 1/4/00 Occasional and garage sales Chapter 4, Article 4.1000 2000-01 1/4/00 Amending budget NIC 2000-02 1/25/00 Zoning ordinance Chapter 12, Exhibit "A" 2000-03 2/15/00 Calling general election NIC 2000-04 3/7/00 Amending budget NIC 2000-05 3/7/00 Calling election NIC 2000-06 3/7/00 Fee structure relating to zoning activities 12.200 2000-07 3/21/00 Amending subdivision ordinance Chapter 9, Exhibit "A" 2000-08 3/21/00 Amending budget NIC 2000-05 3/7/00 Providing for an election NIC 2000-10 5/23/00 Rezoning NIC 2000-11 5/23/00 Budget for fiscal year 1999/2000 NIC 2000-12(a) 5/9/00 Water Conservation Plan NIC 2000-12 6/20/00 Rezoning NIC 2000-13 7/18/00 Amending budget for 1999/2000 NIC 2000-14 9/5/00 Special credit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System Sec. 8.607 2000-15 9/5/00 Standard Fire Prevention Code Sec. 3.102 2000-16 9/5/01 Budget for fiscal year 2000/2001 NIC 2000-16(A) 11/14/00 Amends sewer rates Sec. 11.802 2000-17 9/5/00 Levy of a tax NIC 2000-17(A) 12-12-00 Amublance service rates Amend. Sec. 4.601, Repealed Secs. 4.602-4.606 2001-01 1/16/01 Rezoning NIC 2001-02 2/6/01 Providing for an election NIC 2001-03 5/8/01 Adopts official boundary for city Sec. 1.1801 2001-04 8/7/01 Adopts 2000 International Codes for building, etc. Sec. 3.102 2001-05 9/4/01 Authorizes lien for unpaid utility bills Sec. 11.508 2001-06 9/4/01 Adopts annual budget for fiscal year beginning 10/1/01 NIC 2001-07 8/18/01 Levies tax rate for 2001 NIC 2001-08 12/2/01 Amends electric rates Sec. 11.1401 2002-01 2/19/02 Amends FY 2001/2002 municipal budget NIC 2002-02 3/19/02 Rezoning NIC 2002-03 3/19/02 Provides for general election NIC 2002-04 4/2/02 Cable TV franchise renewal NIC 2002-05 4/2/02 Amends municipal budget NIC 2002-06 4/16/02 Employee service credits 8.608 2002-07 6/4/02 Amends municipal budget NIC 2002-08 8/6/02 Municipal airport rules 4.1101-4.1108 2002-09 7/16/02 Amends gas franchise NIC 2002-10 8/20/02 Amends gas rates NIC 2002-11 9/3/02 Levys tax rate NIC 2002-12 9/3/02 Adopts annual budget NIC 2002-13 8/20/02 Public hearing of annexation NIC 2002-14 10/15/02 Industrial electric rate 11.1401(d) 2002-15 11/5/02 Annexation NIC 2002-16 12/3/02 Amends annual budget NIC 2002-17 11/5/02 Amends annual budget NIC 2003-01 1/7/03 Amends annual budget NIC 2003-02 2/18/03 Sets election date NIC 2003-03 5/6/03 Amends annual budget NIC 2003-04 8/5/03 Denies gas rate increase NIC 2003-05 9/2/03 Utility system refunding bonds NIC 2003-06 9/2/03 Annual budget NIC 2003-07 9/16/03 Levies tax rate for 2003 NIC 2003-08 9/16/03 Rezoning NIC 2003-09 9/16/03 Amends short-form plat fees Chapter 9, Exh. A,  7.02C 2003-10 10/7/02 Adopts new building codes 3.102 2003-11 10/21/03 Bicycle, skate, and toy vehicle regulations 10.601, 10.602 2003-12 10/21/03 Rezoning NIC 2003-13 11/18/03 Annexation NIC 2003-14 12/18/03 Drilling for oil and gas 4.302(14) 2003-15 12/16/03 Restrictions for building in the Bowie Reservoir area 1.1602(a) 2003-16 1/6/04 Adopts standard building codes 3.102 2004-01 2/17/04 Provides for general election NIC 2004-02 3/2/04 Amends municipal budget NIC 2004-03 3/16/04 Amends municipal budget NIC 2004-04 3/16/04 Associate municipal judge 8.214 2004-05 3/16/04 Prohibits drilling and mining in city park 4.302(15) 2004-06 5/25/04 Rezoning NIC 2004-07 9/7/04 annual budget> NIC 2004-08 9/7/04 Tax rate for year 2004 NIC 2004-09 9/21/04 Amends 2003/2004 budget NIC 2004-10 Did not pass 2004-11 Did not pass 2004-12 12/7/04 Grease traps/intersectors/separators 11.2200-11.2209 2004-13 Tabled to future date 2004-14 1/4/05 Amends 2004/2005 budget NIC 2004-15 12/7/04 Electrical rates 11.1401 2005-01 3/1/05 Provides for general election NIC 2005-02 3/1/05 Hearing for land use change 2005-03 3/15/05 Amends 2004/2005 budget NIC 2005-04 4/5/04 Adopts 2005 National Elec. Code 3.102 2005-05 4/5/05 Amends 2004/2005 budget NIC 2005-06 4/19/05 Substandard and dangerous buildings 3.201-3.214 2005-07 7/5/05 National Incident Management System 1.611 2005-08 Tabled 2005-09 9/20/05 Animal Control Repealed Arts. 2.100-2.2400, Added 2.2100-2.2812 2005-10 7/19/05 Denies gas rate increase NIC 2005-11 8/16/05 Regulation fo fences 3.901, 3.904-3.909, 3.911-3.917 2005-12 8/16/05 Utility service reconnects 11.506 2005-13 8/16/05 Water and sewer tap fees 11.900 2005-14 8/2/05 Election for land use change NIC 2005-15 8/30/05 Adopts 2005/2006 annual budget NIC 2005-16 9/20/05 Collection of ambulance service fees 4.602 2005-17 8/20/05 Designates polling places NIC 2005-18 9/20/05 Ad valorem tax rate for 2005 NIC 2005-19 9/20/05 Amends 2005/2006 budget NIC 2005-20 Did not pass 2005-21 Did not pass 2005-22 11/15/05 Water conservation plan 11.1801 11.1811-11.1819 2005-23 12/15/05 Electric rates 11.1401 2005-24 12/13/05 Drought contingency plan Repealed 11.1802-11.1804, Amended 11.1801, added 11.1802, 11.1831-11.1846 2006-01 2/21/06 Bulk water sales 11,801(a)(5) 2006-02 3/7/06 Provides for general election NIC 2006-03 4/4/06 Rezoning NIC 2006-04 4/4/06 Bulk water sales 11.1801(a)(5) 2006-05 6/6/06 Amendments to standard codes 3.103 2006-06 6/20/06 Pole attachment rate 4.1200 2006-07 6/20/06 Gas rates NIC 2006-08 8/1/06 Sex offender residency 7.600-7.604 2006-09 8/15/06 Sexually oriented businesses Ch. 12, Exh. A 2006-10 8/1/06 Flood damage prevention 3.1101-3.1122 2006-11 7/18/06 Electrical rates 11.1401, 11.1402 2006-12 9/19/06 Annual budget NIC 2006-13 9/19/06 Ad valorem tax rate NIC 2006-14 9/19/06 Amends budget NIC 2006-15 9/19/06 Electric rates 11.1401, 11.1402 2006-16 12/12/06 Amends budget NIC 2006-17 1/16/07 Airport manager 1.500 2007-01 2/6/07 Amends budget NIC 2007-03 2/20/07 Standard codes adopted 3.102 2007-04 2/20/07 Beds & Breakfasts Ch. 12, Exh. A,  10, 11, 13, 16-19, 23.1, 26.5, 35.1.G 2007-05 3/6/07 General election NIC 2007-06 3/6/07 Special election NIC 2007-07 3/20/07 Parks and recreation 13.100-13.406 2007-08 3/20/07 Landfill project NIC 2007-09 4/17/07 Amends budget NIC 2007-10 5/15/07 Amends budget NIC 2007-11 7/3/07 Fire department Repealed 5.101-5.117 Added 5.101-5.118 2007-12 Did not pass 2007-13 9/4/07 Parks and recreation repealed 13.100-13.104, 13.200-13.207, 13.300-13.300, 13.400-13.406 Added 13.100-13.105, 13.200-13.207, 13.300-13.303, 13.400-13.406, 13.500-13.505, 13.600-13.604 2007-14 9/18/07 FY 2007/2008 Budget NIC 2007-15 9/18/07 FY 2006/2007 Budget NIC 2007-16 9/19/07 2007 tax rate NIC 2007-17 Did not pass 2007-18 Did not pass 2007-19 11/20/07 Smoking restrictions 6.200-6.216 2007-20 11/20/07 Tax. of per. prop. in transit 1.800 2007-21 12/18/07 Electric rates 11.1401 2008-01 2/5/08 Rodeo grounds fees 13.501(5) 2008-02 2/19/08 Rezoning NIC 2008-03 2/19/08 Settlement agreement NIC 2008-04 3/4/08 General election NIC 2008-05 4/15/08 Unopposed candidates NIC 2008-06 Did not pass 2008-07 5/20/08 Amends gas franchise NIC 2008-08 6/3/08 Rules of ethical conduct 1.1901-1.1923 2008-09 Did not pass 2008-10 9/2/08 FY 2008-2009 Budget NIC 2008-11 9/2/09 Natural gas service rates NIC 2008-12 9/16/08 Ad Valorem tax rate NIC 2008-13 9/16/08 Budget amendments NIC 2008-14 10/7/08 Trees obstructing rights-of way 7.701-7.708 2009-01 2/17/09 Rezoning NIC 2009-02 2/17/09 Fire code amenments 3.103 2009-03 3/3/09 General election NIC 2009-04 Did not pass 2009-05 4/7/09 Cancels general election NIC 2009-06 4/7/09 Amends budget NIC 2009-07 4/21/09 Electric rates 11.1401 2009-08 4/21/09 Amends budget NIC 2009-09 4/21/09 Annexation NIC 2009-10 4/21/09 Identity theft program 11.551-11.557 2009-11 5/19/09 Drought contingency plan Repealed 11.1802, 
11.1831-11.1846 
Amended 11.1801 2009-12 5/19/09 Water conservation plan Repealed 11.1811-11.1819 
Amended 11.1801 2009-13 5/19/09 Speed limits 10.402(15) 2009-14 7/7/09 Nuisance conditions 7.201 2009-15 7/7/09 Budget amendment NIC 2009-16 8/4/09 Natural gas service rate NIC 2009-17 9/1/09 Speed limits NIC 2009-18 9/15/09 Budget amendments NIC 2009-19 9/15/09 2009-2010 budget NIC 2009-20 9/15/09 Ad valorem tax rates NIC 2009-21 11/3/09 Rezoning NIC 2010-01 2/16/10 General election NIC 2010-02 2/16/10 Utility service charges 11.701, 11.702 2010-03 2/2/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-04 4/6/10 Building codes 2.102, 3.103 2010-05 4/20/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-06 5/4/10 Tax and revenue certificates of obligation NIC 2010-07 5/18/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-08 9/7/10 Budget amendment5s NIC 2010-09 9/7/10 Adopts budget for FY 2010-2011 NIC 2010-10 9/21/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-11 9/21/10 Gas rates NIC 2010-12 9/21/10 Ad valorem tax rate NIC 2010-13 Did not pass 2010-14 9/21/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-15 11/16/10 Budget amendments NIC 2010-16 1/18/11 Illegal products 6.301-6.306 2011-01 3/15/11 General election NIC 2011-02 4/5/11 General election NIC 2011-03 4/19/11 Flood damage prevention Repealed 3.1101-3.1122 Added 3.1101-3.1123 2011-04 5/3/11 Rezoning NIC 2011-05 8/2/11 FY-2010/2011 budget NIC 2011-06 8/16/11 Gas rate agreement NIC 2011-07 9/6/11 ATMOS Energy Franchise NIC 2011-08 9/20/11 Budget amendments NIC 2011-09 9/20/11 FY 2011/2012 budget NIC 2011-10 9/20/11 Bowie Community Center 13.700-13.703 2011-11 9/20-11 Ad valorem rate NIC 2011-12 11/1/11 Did not pass NIC 2011-13 11/1/11 Wastewater reuse sales rate Added 11.802(a)(3) 2011-14 12/20/11 Budget amendments NIC 2011-15 12/20/11 Alcoholic beverage sales Ch. 23, Exh. A,  23.3 2011-16 12/20/11 Alcoholic beverages Added 6.401-6.408 2012-01 2/21/12 General election NIC 2012-02 No action taken NIC 2012-03 2/21/12 Budget amendments NIC 2012-04 2/21/12 Electrical Rates 11.1401(d)(3) 2012-05 4/3/12 General election NIC 2012-06 5/1/12 Criminal enforcement Added 7.801-7.812 2012-07 8/23/12 Rezoning NIC 2012-08 9/4/12 Budget amendments NIC 2012-09 10/2/12 Richwood Hills Lake Estates Park Added 13.800-13.805 2012-10 9/18/12 Ad valorem rate NIC 2013-08 5/21/13 Economic Development Type A Corporation Added 1.704 8/20/13 Ethical conduct 1.1916(c)(note) Added Ch. 1, Art. 1.1900, Exh. A 2013-13 9/17/13 Sewer rates 11.802(a)(1), (2) 2013-14 9/17/13 Pool admission fees 13.501(4) 2013-17 12/17/13 Fuel adjustment/transmission fees 11.1402 2014-02 2/4/14 2012 codes adopted 3.102 2014-03 3/18/14 Water conservation and drought contingency plan-2014 11.1801 2014-05 5/6/14 Rezoning NIC 2014-06 5/6/14 Rezoning NIC 2014-07 5/20/14 Budget amendments NIC 2014-08 5/20/14 Water rates 11.801(a)(1)-(4) 2014-09 5/20/14 Sewer rates 11.802(a)(1), (2) 2014-10 Did not pass NIC 2014-11 Did not pass NIC 2014-12 9/2/14 Budget amendments NIC 2014-12 9/2/14 Budget amendments NIC 2014-13 9/16/14 Budget amendments NIC 2014-14 9/16/14 Ad valorem rate NIC 2015-01 2/3/15 General election NIC 2015-02 2/3/15 Use of revenues Rpld. 1.1005 Added 1.1005 2015-03 3/3/15 Street closure NIC 2015-04 3/17/15 Ambulances Amend. and Rnbd. 4.601 as 4.606 Rnbd. 4.602 as 4.607 Added 4.601-4.605 2015-06  9/1/15 Budget amendments NIC 2015-07  9/15/15 Use of public property; rate schedule 4.401 4.405 2015-08  9/15/15 Budget amendments NIC 2015-09  9/15/15 Ad valorem rate NIC 2015-10 10/6/15 Budget amendments NIC 2015-11 11/17/15 Electrical rates and wholesale power and transmission charge 11.1401, 11.1402 2015-12 12/1/15 Ambulance service fees 4.607 2015-13 12/15/15 Alcoholic beverages-hours 6.408 2015-14 12/21/15 Lease/purchase agreement NIC 2016-01 3/1/16 Rezoning NIC 2016-02 6/7/16 Negotiated settlement between ATMOS Cities Steering Committee and ATMOS Energy Corporation NIC 2016-03 6/7/16 Vendors and solicitors; mobile food units Repealed Art. 4.100 
Added 4.101-4.115 
Repealed 4.201-4.209 
Added 4.201-4.203 2016-04 8/16/16 Providing for a general election NIC 2016-05 9/20/16 Adopting an annual budget NIC 2016-06 9/20/16 Annual ad valorem tax rate NIC 2016-07 10/4/16 Budget amendments NIC 2017-01 Tabled NIC 2017-02 2/21/17 Telecommunications tax Added 1.705 2017-03  5- 2-17 Pelham Park admission fees 13.501(4) App. C 2017-04  5- 2-17 Animal control Rpld. Ch. 2, App. C 2.105(c) 2.301, 2.302 2.307 2.607(3), (9) 2.804(1), (3), (4) 2.811(b), (c) 2.812(a)(1) Added App. C 2017-08  6-20-17 Ambulance violations Added 4.604(6)j. 2017-10  8-29-17 Right-of-way management requirements for network providers Added 4.1301-4.1316 2018-02  5-14-18 Amendments to model codes 3.103 2018-03  5-30-18 U-turns restricted Rpld. 10.200 2018-04  5-30-18 Pelham Park admission fees 13.501(4) App. C 2018-05  5-30-18 Variable speed limits established in school zones 10.407(c), (e), (g)-(i), (l)-(q), (s), (t) 2018-06  6-25-18 Selma Park admission fees 13.401 App. C 2018-08  8-27-18 Solid waste collection fees 11.2115 App. C 2018-09  8-27-18 Restricting oversized loads Added 10.510 2018-11  9-18-18 Water rates 11.801(a) App. C 2018-12  9-18-18 Sewer rates 11.802(a) App. C  
APPENDIX C - FEE SCHEDULE 
  
Police Department 2017 
Administrative fee: Vehicle impound fee/per day $20.00 Crash report $10.00 Incident/offense report $6.00 + .10 page after 10 pages Open records request Charges will be determined in accordance with state law in effect at the time of receipt of the request Open records request requiring CD/DVD Charges will be determined in accordance with state law in effect at the time of receipt of the request Fingerprinting $10.00 to non-residents of Bowie Notarize/certified copies $10.00 Animal Control: Euthanasia fee $10.00 Special permit fee for keeping more than four animals $35.00 Registration of cats and dogs application fee $15.00 Registration of sterilized animal application fee $3.00 Registration of animals less than six months old $3.00 Duplicate metal registration certificate $5.00 Non-registration fee for impounded animal $20.00 Registration fee for dangerous animal $150.00 Daily boarding fees $10.00 Late fee for not having registered impounded animal $20.00 Impoundment fee rebate for first time impoundment $10.00 Impoundment fee during 12-month period-First impoundment $20.00 Second time $50.00 Third time $75.00 Daily shelter fee $5.00 Quarantine fee $10.00 + $10.00/day of impoundment Adoption fee $25.00 Animal surrender (w/in city limits only) $20.00 Owner animal release fee $25.00 per animal  
  
Pool 2018 
Admission $3.00 all ages Pool passes $60.00 individual residents 
$70.00 non-resident 
$115.00 family of three and $5.00 for each additional person Parties $100.00 for two hours Water aerobics $2.00 per person Summer rec $2.00 day 
$23.00 season pass Swim lessons $30.00 week  
  
Selma Park 2018 
1. Overnight primitive camping (those sites without use of water/electric service), ten dollars ($10.00) per 24-hour period; overnight camping is not to exceed fourteen (14) days in one (1) consecutive 30-day period and campsites are to be designated areas only. 2. Overnight camping at those campsites with electric only service, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per 24-hour period; overnight camping is not to exceed fourteen (14) days in one (1) consecutive 30-day period. 3. Overnight camping at those campsites with water and electric service, twenty dollars ($20.00) per 24-hour period; overnight camping is not to exceed fourteen (14) days in one consecutive 30-day period. 4. Pavilion use shall be the current method of reserving the pavilions at the city office. The cost will be ten dollars ($10.00) per day and the pavilion will need to be reserved forty-eight (48) hours in advance. If the pavilion is not reserved it is a first come first serve. The user will have a receipt to show they have the facility reserved. Commercial use for the pavilion will be assessed a higher fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 5. A reduced camping fee shall be granted to seniors with a State of Texas or National Park Service senior pass; the reduced fee to be ten dollars ($10.00) per 24-hour period for those campsites with water and electric service and five dollars ($5.00) per 24-hour period for the primitive campsites.  
  
Sewer Rates-2018 
(1) Residential Sewer Rates -Monthly usage charge to be based on the monthly metered water usage: Inside City Limits Base rate per month: $17.02 Usage charge: $2.96 per 1,000 gallons (2) Outside City Limits Base rate per month: $18.70 Usage charge: $3.39 per 1,000 gallons *Residential sewer is capped at 25,000 gallons max (2) Commercial and Industrial -Monthly usage charge to be based on the monthly metered water usage: Inside City Limits Base rate per month: $24.12 Usage charge: $3.60 per 1,000 gallons Outside City Limits Base rate per month: $24.90 Usage charge: $3.73 per 1,000 gallons (4) Wastewater Reuse Sales Rate: $2.88 per 1,000 gallons of treated wastewater  
  
Solid Waste Collection 2018 
A.  Single-family residential unit services: 
$13.47 per month. 
$6.23 per each additional can per month. 
* These rates apply to all single-family residential that are billed by the city for water and sewer services, regardless of whether such units are located within the city's incorporated limits. 
B.  Commercial, industrial and multi-family residential unit services: the charge per month for each container utilized is the following rate: 
Container Size 1 Collection a Week 2 Collections a Week 3 Collections a Week Extra Lifts Casters Can $18.34 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1.5 cubic yards $38.82 N/A N/A $29.73 $4.54 3 cubic yards $60.24 $111.50 $160.61 $29.73 $4.54 4 cubic yards $80.95 $161.89 $242.83 $29.73 $4.54  
Prior to any collection that the service provider is required to make in excess of the above weekly figures, the service provider shall negotiate the charge for such additional collection with the commercial, industrial or multi-family residential unit requesting such additional collection. The foregoing rates apply to all commercial, industrial and multi-family residential units that are billed by the city for water and sewer services, regardless of whether such units are located within the city's incorporated limits. 
C.  Roll-off services. The services provider will negotiate agreements with each commercial, industrial or residential unit on an individual basis regarding the roll-off services to be provided. The roll-off services will be billed directly to such commercial, industrial or residential unit and will be collected by the service provider. The roll-offs provided pursuant to this section must be located within the city in accordance with city ordinances and policies. 
  
Water Rates-2018 
(1) Residential Water Rates -Monthly usage charge to be based on the monthly metered water usage: Inside City Limits Base rate per month: $19.96 Usage charge: $4.73 per 1,000 gallons (2) Outside City Limits Base rate per month: $22.96 Usage charge: $5.44 per 1,000 gallons (3) Commercial and Industrial Water Rates -Monthly usage charge to be based on the monthly metered water usage: Inside City Limits Base rate per month: $22.79 Usage charge: $4.73 per 1,000 gallons (4) Outside City Limits Base rate per month: $25.51 Usage charge: $5.44 per 1,000 gallons Amon Carter WSD: Service charge per month: $55.46 Usage charge: $1.95 per 1,000 gallons (5) Bulk water sales: $10.30 per 1,000 gallons Sales of bulk water at the rate set out herein, or as that rate may be changed by future city council action, shall continue until such time as the level of Lake Amon G. Carter falls below nine hundred thirteen (913) feet. At such time said bulk water sales shall cease until the lake level has risen above nine hundred thirteen (913) feet.  
(Ord. No. 2017-03, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 5-2-17; Ord. No. 2017-04, Sec. 3, adopted 5-2-17; Ord. No. 2018-04, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 5-30-18; Ord. No. 2018-06, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 6-25-18; Ord. No. 2018-08, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 8-27-18; Ord. No. 2018-11, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 9-18-18; Ord. No. 2018-12, Sec. 2(Exh. A), adopted 9-18-18) 
