CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CROCKETT, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: February 4, 1985 
Effective: February 5, 1985 
____________ 
Published in 1985 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CROCKETT, TEXAS 
____________ 
Howard Edmiston 
Mayor 
____________ 
Charles Arnold 
Bernice Brimberry 
Rev. E. J. Jones 
Dr. John A. McCall, Jr. 
Elmer Murray 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles L. Carter, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
B. N. Tucker, Jr. 
Assistant City Attorney 
____________ 
Philip Cook 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Cary Ann Alford 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the 1960 Code of ordinances of the City of Crockett together with all subsequent ordinances of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1960 Code and ordinances adopted by the Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1960 Code and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various- sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 8 is 8-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 3-16 and 3-17 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-16.1, 3-16.2 and 3-16.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 10 and 11, it will be designated as Chapter 10.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Thomas B. Calhoun, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Cary Ann Alford, City Secretary, Philip Cook, City Administrator and B. N. Tucker, Jr., Assistant City Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE No. O-2-85 
An  Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Crockett, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained By the City Council of the City of Crockett, Texas: 
    Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 20, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crockett, Texas," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before October 1, 1984, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2. All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after February 4, 1985, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before October 1, 1984, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the Code. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), as provided in section 1-11 of such Code. 
    Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-11 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7. All ordinances adopted after October 1, 1984, which amend or refer to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section 8. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective the 5th day of February, 1985. 
    Passed and Approved this 4th day of February 1985. 
/s/ Howard Edmiston 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
  
/s/ Cary Ann Alford 
      City Secretary     
CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF HOUSTON 
    This Code of Ordinances of the City of Crockett, adopted and enacted on this the 4th day of February, 1985, as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crockett, Texas," by ordinance of the City Council effective the 5th day of February, 1985, and after the adoption and publication of the adopting ordinance as required by law, is hereby duly authenticated and approved. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto subscribed my name as Mayor of the City of Crockett, attested by the City Secretary, with the seal of the City affixed hereto, this 4th day of February, 1985. 
(SEAL) 
/s/ Howard Edmiston 
      Mayor     
ATTEST: 
  
/s/ Cary Ann Alford 
      City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. O-04-09  4-20-09 Include 11 O-06-09  6-15-09 Omit 11 O-10-09 10- 5-09 Omit 11 O-11-09 11- 2-09 Include 11 O-12-09 12- 7-09 Omit 11 O-04-10  4- 5-10 Include 11 O-04B-10  4- 5-10 Include 11 O-07-10  7-12-10 Include 11 O-08B-10  8-16-10 Include 11 O-08C-10  8-16-10 Include 11 O-09B-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09C-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09D-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09E-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09F-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09G-10  9- 7-10 Include 11 O-09H-10  9-20-10 Include 11 O-10-10 10- 4-10 Include 11 O-01-11  1-11-11 Include 11 O-03-11  3-21-11 Include 11 O-03B-11  3-21-11 Include 11 O-08B-11  8-29-11 Include 12 O-01-12  1- 9-12 Omit 12 O-03B-12  3-20-12 Include 12 O-04-12  4-16-12 Include 12 O-08-12  8-6-12 Include 12 O-09B-12  9- 4-12 Include 13 O-09C-12  9- 4-12 Include 13 O-09D-12  9- 4-12 Include 13 O-09E-12  9- 4-12 Include 13 O-02-13  2- 4-13 Include 13 O-03-13  3- 4-13 Include 13 O-09B-13  9- 9-13 Include 13 TMRS-20 10- 7-13 Include 13 O-12-13 12- 9-13 Include 13 O-12B-13 12- 9-13 Include 13 O-03-14  3-17-14 Include 13 O-04-14  4-28-14 Include 13 O-07-14  7-14-14 Include 13 O-08C-14  8-18-14 Include 13 O-02-15  2- 2-15 Include 13 O-09B-15  9-21-15 Include 13 O-09C-15  9-21-15 Include 13 O-09D-15  9-21-15 Include 13 O-12-15 12- 7-15 Include 14 O-12B-15 12- 7-15 Include 14 O-12C-15 12- 7-15 Include 14 O-12D-15 12- 7-15 Include 14 O-12E-15 12- 7-15 Include 14 O-01-16  1-11-16 Include 14 O-02-16  2-22-16 Include 14 O-03-16  3- 7-16 Omit 14 O-05-16  6- 1-16 Omit 14 O-08-16  8- 1-16 Include 14 O-08B-16  8-15-16 Omit 14 O-08C-16  8-15-16 Include 14  
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER[1] 
HOME RULE CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF CROCKETT, TEXAS 
    PREAMBLE: We, the Citizens of Crockett, Texas, in order to establish a Home Rule Municipal Government, provide for the future progress of our City and obtain more fully the benefits of local self government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter in accordance with the Statutes of the State of Texas. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city's charter, as amended. The charter was adopted by the people at an election held on April 7, 1964. Amendment notes, giving the date of the election effecting the amendment, follow the text of the amended provisions. In order to conform the print style and system of capitalization to that of the Code of Ordinances, minor capitalization, obviously misspelled words and style changes have been made without note. Explanatory material is indicated by footnotes. The user is urged to use the footnotes to state law in view of the fact that there have been many changes in state law since the adoption of this charter which affect its substantive provisions. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Crockett in Houston County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner prescribed by this charter, shall be and continue to be a municipal corporation and the inhabitants thereof shall be a body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Crockett", possessing all powers, property and interest which it possessed immediately prior to the time this charter takes effect or may hereafter acquire, and having the duties, obligations and liabilities incumbent upon or hereafter incurred by the city as a municipal corporation. 
Section 1.02. - Form of government. 
    Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elected council hereinafter referred to as "the council", which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and confirm the city administrator, the chief of police, and such other officials as may be prescribed herein. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 1.03. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City of Crockett shall be the same as have heretofore been established, or the same as may be hereafter prescribed by appropriate action of the council. 
Section 104. - Extension and contraction of the city limits. 
    The boundaries of the City of Crockett may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size, and may be contracted where there exists any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, in the manner herein provided: 
(a)  The city council by majority vote of its membership shall have the power by ordinance to provide for the alteration, extension and contraction, or either of them, of the boundary limits of said city; and by ordinance to provide for the annexation of territory lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of the territory annexed. Upon the introduction of any such ordinance to the city council for any one (1) or more of the foregoing purposes, such ordinance shall be published one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett. Amendments may later be incorporated into the proposed ordinance by a majority vote of the membership of the city council and by publication one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett. The proposed ordinance, or any amendment thereof, shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty (30) days after the publication thereof; and upon final passage of any such ordinance, or any amendment thereto, the boundary limits of the City of Crockett shall thereafter be as fixed thereby. The enacting clause of all such ordinances shall be "The Council of the City of Crockett hereby ordains". 
(b)  The city council may, by a majority vote of its membership, order an election, or elections, for the purpose of altering, extending and contracting, or either of them, of the boundary limits of said city, or for the purpose of annexing of territory adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of the territory annexed. The order providing for such election, or elections, shall contain all the same provisions as would be required in an ordinance. The order may provide that the residents of the City of Crockett who are qualified to vote for members of the state legislature shall be qualified to vote at such election, or elections; or the order may provide that the residents of the City of Crockett and the residents of the territory sought to be included by alteration and extension or annexation, as the case may be, who are qualified to vote for members of the state legislature shall be qualified to vote at such election or elections. Such election, or elections, shall be held as provided for any other general election required to be held by the city for any purpose. 
(c)  If for any reason the city council fails to alter, extend, or contract, or fails to annex territory lying adjacent to the city, then a petition, signed by qualified voters in number not fewer than ten (10) percent of the number of votes cast for mayor at the last general election in which a mayor was elected, may be presented to the city council asking the city council to order an election for one (1) or more of the purposes as provided in subdivision (b) hereof, and when such a petition is presented, the city council shall be required to order such an election and cause the same to be held not fewer than twenty (20) nor more than forty (40) days after such petition is presented to the city council. 
(d)  Where there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Crockett any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, such territory may be contracted from the city and discontinued as a part of said city, either by ordinance or by election as provided in subdivisions (a), (b) or (c) hereof. 
(e)  When the boundary limits of said city have been altered or extended, or any additional territory has been annexed, by any of the methods herein provided, the same shall thereafter be a part of the City of Crockett; the property situated therein shall be subject to and shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to and shall possess all the rights and privileges of the citizens of the City of Crockett and shall be under obligations as such citizens; and when any territory may be contracted from the city and discontinued as a part of said city, then such territory and all citizens thereof shall no longer be entitled to the rights and privileges of the citizens of the City of Crockett and shall not thereafter be under obligations as such citizens. 
(f)  All alterations, extensions, contractions and annexations as herein provided, shall be defined by sufficient description by field notes and metes and bounds that the same may be located with accuracy upon the ground. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of home rule cities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175. 

Section 2.01. - General. 
    The City of Crockett may use a corporate seal, may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever. The City of Crockett shall have and may exercise all the powers granted to cities by the Constitution or Laws of Texas including specifically those powers made available to cities of more than five thousand (5,000) inhabitants by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of Texas (Article XI, Section 5, and the Home Rule Enabling Act (Chapter 13, Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, 1925), as now or hereafter amended. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purposes; may cooperate with the government of Texas or any agency thereof, or with the federal government or any agency thereof, or with the government of any county, city or political subdivision, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the health, morals, safety, convenience or welfare of the city or its inhabitants; may sell, lease (including surface and mineral leases), mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require, provided the city shall not sell, convey, lease, mortgage or otherwise alienate any public utility without prior approval by the qualified voters of the city, except any real estate pertinent to any public utility may be leased for mineral exploration upon competitive bidding without prior approval by the qualified voters of the city, and may exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or the Constitution or Laws of Texas. The enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and may exercise all other powers which under the constitution and general laws of this state it would be competent for this charter to specifically enumerate. 
Section 2.02. - Liabilities, exemptions and limitations. 
(a)  No property belonging to the city shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. 
(b)  No fund belonging to the city shall be subject to garnishment, attachment or sequestration, and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
(c)  No assignment of wages or other compensation earned or to be earned, by any employee of the city shall be valid and the city shall never be required to recognize any such assignment or to answer in any proceedings thereon. 
(d)  The City of Crockett shall never be liable for personal injury or property damages of any kind unless within thirty (30) days after the occurrence thereof a notice in writing by or on behalf of the person injured or claiming damages is delivered to the city administrator stating specifically and accurately in complete detail the time, the place, and the manner of occurrence of the exact injury or damages, the full extent, thereof, the basis of the claim and the amount of damages claimed or asserted. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the city shall be liable in damages therefor, the person, or persons, claiming such damages shall after the death of the injured person give notice as above required in case of personal injury. 
(e)  The City of Crockett shall never be liable for personal injury or property damages resulting from any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public works of the city unless the specific defect causing the injury or damage shall have been known to the city administrator from personal inspection or written notice thereof for a period of at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage and proper diligence shall not have been used to rectify the defect after such inspection or notice. Such notice shall be required whether the defect arose from an act or omission of the city itself through its agents or employees or otherwise. 
(f)  No provision of this section shall ever be construed as to expand the ordinary liability of the city. 
State Law reference- Texas Tort Claims Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-19. 
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Section 3.01. - Number, selection, term and districts. 
(a)  The city council shall have six (6) members consisting of the mayor and commissioners numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 elected in the manner prescribed in article four hereof, for a term of two (2) years and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. 
(b)  There shall be five (5) single-member council districts, numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, and their boundaries shall be defined by ordinance of the city council adopted as soon as practicable after the publication of each United States decennial census. 
(c)  Commissioners numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall be elected by the council district bearing the same number and the mayor shall be elected by the city at large. 
(d)  This amendment shall be effective as to commissioners numbers 3, 4 and 5 at the city election in April of 1984, and as to the mayor and commissioners number 1 and 2 at the city election in April of 1983. In the event of any vacancies occurring in said offices after the passage of this amendment, this amendment shall become effective as to the position that has become vacant immediately upon such occurrence. 
(e)  No person shall serve as mayor for more than three (3) consecutive two-year terms. 
Amendment Note- Subsections (a) through (d) of the above section reflect an amendment approved by the people at an election held on April 3, 1982. Subsection (e) was added by virtue of an election held on April 1, 1978. 
Section 3.02. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Each member of the city council, in addition to having the other qualifications prescribed by law, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Shall be a qualified voter of the city; 
(2)  Shall have resided in the city for at least three (3) years next preceding his election; 
(3)  Shall be an owner of real estate situated in the City of Crockett; 
(4)  Shall not hold any other public office of emolument, if such is prohibited by Article 16, Section 40 of the Constitution of the State of Texas. 
(5)  Shall not be interested in the emolument of any contract with the city. 
(6)  If a member of the city council shall cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of a felony, he shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(d), 7-1-96) 
Note- Subsection (a)(4) of the above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 3.03. - Compensation. 
    The city council shall annually at its first meeting after the general election fix the compensation to be received by its members, not exceeding seventy-five and 00/100 dollars ($75.00) per month for the mayor and not exceeding fifty and 00/100 dollars ($50.00) per month for each council member. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(c), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 3.04. - Vacancies. 
    A single vacancy in the city council shall be filled until the next general election by a majority vote of the remaining members of the city council within fifteen (15) days after the vacancy occurs. If more than one (1) vacancy occurs at the same time, or before a prior vacancy has been filled, the city council shall, within ten (10) days after the last vacancy occurs, call a special election to be held within forty-five (45) days; provided however, if such vacancies occur ninety (90) days prior to a general election, no special election shall be held; but in that event the remaining members of the city council may, by a majority vote, choose a person to fill each vacancy until the next general city election when such vacancy shall be filled as in the case of an original election. 
Section 3.05. - Presiding officer. 
    At the first meeting of the city council following the annual general election, the council member with the most continuous days of service on the city council shall become the mayor pro tem. In the event there is not one (1) council member with more continuous days of service than all of the other council members a majority of the city council shall, at that meeting, elect a mayor pro tem from the council members with the most continuous days of service. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of martial law but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall have no vote except in case of a tie vote and he shall have no veto power. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(b), 7-1-96) 
Amendment Note- The first paragraph of the above section was amended by the people at elections held on April 3, 1982; and August 10, 1996. 
Section 3.06. - City secretary. 
    The city secretary shall be appointed in the same manner as other officers upon nomination by the city administrator and approval of the city council. He shall serve as secretary of the city council, give notice of its meetings, keep the journal of its proceedings, authenticate by his signature and record in full all ordinances and resolutions, and perform such other duties as this charter may provide or as the city administrator may assign to him. The city secretary and city administrator may be the same person if the city council should so determine. There may be appointed one (1) or more assistant city secretaries in the same manner as the naming of city secretary. 
Section 3.07. - Meetings. 
(a)  On the Monday immediately following the first Saturday in May, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the city council shall meet at the city hall, and the newly elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the city council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed by its rules but not less frequently than once each calendar month. All meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall unless the city council shall designate another place. 
(b)  Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon request of the mayor, or in the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, or a majority of the members of the city council. 
(c)  The city administrator shall attend all meetings of the city council and may take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the city council but shall have no vote. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(j), 7-1-96) 
Note- Subsection (a) of the above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 3.08. - Quorum and voting. 
(a)  Three (3) members of the city council, not including the mayor, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and the affirmative vote of the three (3) members of the city council shall be necessary to pass or repeal any ordinance or take any official action in the name of the city except as may be otherwise provided in this charter or by the General Laws of Texas. 
(b)  A record shall be made in the minutes of the result of all motions, resolutions and ordinances; and if there is not a unanimous vote thereon, then the vote of each member present shall be recorded to indicate how each member voted, either for or against or by abstaining on each issue. 
Section 3.09. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business. Minutes of all meetings of the city council shall be taken and preserved as a permanent record open to the public for inspection. 
Section 3.10. - Ordinances. 
(a)  In addition to such acts of the city council as are required by statute or by this charter to be by ordinance, every act of the city council establishing a fine or other penalty shall be by ordinance and the city council shall legislate by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "The Council of the City of Crockett hereby ordains." 
(b)  Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and passed in compliance with section 3.08 of this article, or in compliance with another provision of this charter, authenticated by the signatures of the mayor (or mayor pro tem) and the city secretary, and systematically recorded in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall, however, be necessary to record only the caption or title of each ordinance in the minutes of the city council. 
(c)  A full text of every penal ordinance, or in lieu thereof a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof, shall be published at least twice in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett within fourteen (14) days after the passage of such ordinance, provided that any penal ordinance shall become effective in not less than twenty (20) days from the date of its passage. All other ordinances, except those specifically required by this charter to be published, are not required to be published in either the official newspaper of the City of Crockett or in any other publication, and such ordinances shall become effective upon passage or on the date specified therein. 
(d)  The city council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the City of Crockett to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the city council deems necessary and advisable, and such printed code when adopted by the city council shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in the official newspaper except the ordinance adopting the same shall be published one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett, such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
Section 3.11. - Powers of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter all powers of the City of Crockett and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the powers granted or delegated to the city by the constitution, statutes, or this charter, and cumulative thereof, the city council shall have the following power: 
(a)  Appoint and remove the city administrator, the chief of police, and the fire marshal and/or chief, as limited by this charter; 
(b)  Remove the city attorney, by majority vote; 
(c)  Appoint all officers, departmental heads, clerks and any and all other employees, after each such person is nominated by the mayor, limited however by the provisions of article nine, and except in the law and police departments, and after each such person is nominated by the chief of police in the department of police, but reserving the right and power to reject any nomination and require another nomination to be made by the mayor, except as limited by the provisions of article nine, and by the chief of police, in their respective departments, continuing this procedure until such person is found who is acceptable to the officer making the nomination to the city council; however, if the office of chief of police or other nomination officer is vacant, then the city council may appoint (as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the city government) such person or persons who will serve until such officer is appointed, at which time such officer may nominate a person, or persons, for appointment as herein provided; 
(d)  Appoint members of the planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, the park and recreation advisory board, the board of equalization, and all other boards and commissions serving the City of Crockett, except the Board of the Crockett Housing Authority whose members shall be appointed by the mayor; 
(e)  Adopt the budget of the City of Crockett; 
(f)  Fix the salary of the city administrator, chief of police, and fire marshal and/or chief, and, in cooperation with the city administrator, chief of police or fire marshal and/or chief, in their respective departments, fix other salaries; 
(g)  Authorize by ordinance the issue of bonds, assignments of revenue or warrants; 
(h)  Approve plats; 
(i)  Adopt and modify the official map of the City of Crockett; 
(j)  Adopt and modify the zoning plan which may regulate and fix the height of buildings and other structures, the size of yards and courts, the density of population and the location and use of building for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes; 
(k)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits, and prescribe the kind and character of buildings, structures, or improvements which may be erected therein, provide for the alteration of such limits, and provide for the penalty for violation thereof, and provide for the power and authority to require the removal of any building, structure or improvement which had been built, constructed, moved into or made in violation of the then existing fire limits ordinance, either with or without the permission of the city council in office at the time of such violation, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous or dilapidated buildings or structures which increase the fire hazard and for the manner of their removal or destruction; 
(l)  Adopt and modify the building code; 
(m)  Adopt, modify and carry into effect plans proposed by the planning and zoning commission; 
(n)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire, or the transportation of freight for hire, or the retail sale and delivery of merchandise or other products, or the public streets or alleys of the City of Crockett; 
(o)  Provide by ordinance for the exercise of the police powers of the City of Crockett; 
(p)  Cooperate for the purposes of establishing and maintaining a free public library with any person, firm, association or political subdivision in the manner prescribed by ordinance; 
(q)  Provide by ordinance for the exercise by the City of Crockett of any and all powers of local self government not made self enacting by this charter or by statutes; 
(r)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the City of Crockett and make investigations of municipal affairs; 
(s)  Provide for an independent audit at least once each year. 
Section 3.12. - Official bond. 
    The city council shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive or pay out any moneys of the City or Crockett. The amount of such bond shall be determined by the city council and the cost thereof shall be borne by the City of Crockett. 
Section 3.13. - Prohibited powers. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Crockett, Texas shall not have the power or the authority to pass any type of ordinance or resolution which regulates directly or indirectly the possession, sale, registration, distribution, manufacture, or ownership of any and all type of firearms. 
(b)  "Firearms" shall be defined as including, but not limited to, any type of handgun, rifle, shotgun, or black powder rifle. 
(c)  This amendment shall be effective upon the approval by the voters of Crockett, Texas in the city election on April 2, 1983. 
Amendment note- The above section was added to the charter by the people at an election held on April 2, 1983. 
Section 3.14. - City departments. 
    The city council may, by a vote of the majority of its members, from time to time continue, establish and discontinue city departments at its pleasure, including the city departments mentioned in the Home Rule Charter of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(l), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section was added to the charter by an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Elections generally, VATS, Election Code. 

Section 4.01. - Nomination and filing for office. 
(a)  Any qualified person may have his name placed on the ballot as a candidate for mayor or for commissioner one, two, three, four, or five, by filing with the city secretary not more than ninety (90) nor fewer than thirty (30) days prior to the date of election an application in substantially the following form: 
I, ____________ , do hereby declare that I am a candidate for the office of ____________ , of the City of Crockett and request that my name be printed upon the official ballot for that office in the next General City Election. I am qualified to serve as such officer with respect to the qualifications set forth in the Charter. I reside in the City of Crockett, Texas. 
_____
(Signed) 
The foregoing petition was filed with the City Secretary on the ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ . 
_____
City Secretary 
(b)  In computing the said ninety (90) days, the date of the election shall not be counted; and in computing the said thirty (30) days, the date of filing and the date of the election shall not be counted. 
Section 4.02. - Official ballot. 
    The city secretary shall make up the official ballot from the names presented to him. The order in which the names of the candidates for each place shall appear on the ballot shall be determined by lot in a drawing held under the supervision of the city secretary, at which drawing each candidate, or his designated representative, shall have a right to present. All official ballots shall be printed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of any general or special election, and absentee voting shall be governed by the General Laws of the State of Texas, except as modified by the special election required in subdivision (b) of section 4.03 of this charter. 
Section 4.03. - Municipal elections. 
(a)  The general election for the choice of members of the city council as provided in Article III shall be held each year on the first Saturday in May. The city council may by resolution order special elections, which shall be held as nearly as practicable according to the provisions of a general election and the provisions of the charter. The city council shall determine the hours and places for holding all city elections. 
(b)  The mayor and council members one, two, three, four and five shall be elected on the first Saturday in May. The mayor and the council members shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. The mayor and council members one and two shall be elected on the first Saturday in May of each odd numbered year, beginning on the first Saturday in May, 1997, and council members three, four and five shall be elected on the first Saturday in May of each even numbered year, beginning on the first Saturday in May, 1998. If no candidate for the office of mayor or for the offices of either council members one, two, three, four or five shall in any general election receive a majority vote of the total votes cast at such general election, the city council shall at a meeting after the general election order a special election to be held on the last Saturday in May of the same year, at which only the names of the two (2) candidates who received the highest number of votes shall be printed on the ballot, or if there be a tie requiring more than two (2) names, then the appropriate number shall be printed on the ballot, and such additional elections shall be ordered until a candidate for such office shall have received a majority of the total votes cast at such election. Such additional elections, if any required, shall be ordered by the city council at intervals on Saturday not exceeding two (2) weeks between such elections. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(k), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 4.04. - Regulations of elections. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all city elections shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the election code of the State of Texas, as now and hereafter amended. 
    The city council shall have the power to make such additional regulations as may be necessary. In the event there should be any failure of the general laws or of this charter to provide for some feature of the city elections, then the city council shall have the power to provide for such deficiencies, and no informalities in conducting a city election shall invalidate the same if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and with the charter and ordinances of the City of Crockett. 
Section 4.05. - Conducting elections and canvassing returns. 
(a)  The election judge and all other necessary election officials for conducting all elections, either general or special, shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the applicable provisions of the election code of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Immediately after counting the votes, the presiding election judge shall deliver the official returns of the election to the city secretary. Not more than five (5) days after such election the city council shall meet and canvass the returns and declare the results. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council. 
(d)  Immediately after the election results have been declared, the mayor shall deliver certificates of election to the successful candidates. Each person elected to the city council shall take the oath of office prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas within two (2) weeks after the date of his election; otherwise the office shall be deemed vacant. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Section 5.01. - City administrator. 
(a)  Appointment and qualification. The city administrator shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the council on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or state but during his tenure of office he shall reside in the city. 
(b)  Term and salary. The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city administrator shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal in the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city administrator the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of office during such absence or disability. The salary of the city administrator shall be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The city administrator shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the city placed under his control by ordinance or resolution by the city council, and to that end he shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Nominate all officers, department heads, clerks and any and all other employees to the city council for appointment, limited however by the provisions of article nine, and except the department heads and employees of the law and police department, but the city council shall have the right and power to reject any nomination and require another nomination to be made by the city administrator, continuing this procedure until a person is found who is acceptable to the city administrator and city council; however, the city administrator shall have the right to remove any such officer, department head, clerk and any and all other employees with or without the consent of the city council, limited however by the provisions of article nine and except department heads and employees of the law and police departments; and the city administrator may make temporary appointments only until the next meeting of the city council to fill any vacancy under his jurisdiction, as herein defined which was created from any cause whatsoever, at which meeting or subsequent meetings the city council as it may deem advisable the same procedure shall be followed as in the first instance of original appointment; 
(2)  Prepare the annual budget and submit it to the city council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption; 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city council each month a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City of Crockett for the preceding month, and present a compiled complete report thereof at the end of the fiscal year for each preceding fiscal year; 
(4)  Attend all meetings of the city council with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote; 
(5)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City of Crockett and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable; 
(6)  Serve as departmental head of any department, as city secretary, city treasurer, city tax assessor and collector, if in the opinion of the city council such duplication of duties is advisable; 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the city council not inconsistent with this charter. 
Section 5.02. - Administrative departments. 
    There are hereby created the following administrative departments: finance, fire, health, parks and recreation, police, and public utilities. Other departments may be established by ordinance. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

Section 6.01. - City treasurer. 
    Upon the nomination of the city administrator, the city council shall appoint a city treasurer, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof; however, if the city administrator and the city council deem it advisable the office of city treasurer may be held by the city administrator. 
(a)  Bond. The city treasurer shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the city council may require, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The city treasurer shall receive and have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the City of Crockett, or any office, department or agency of the city government and shall promptly deposit all funds which come into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the city council, or in the absence of such resolution, designation of such depository shall be made by the city administrator, subject to the requirements of law as to security and the payment of interest on deposit, but all such interest shall be the property of the City of Crockett and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account. The city treasurer shall render a full and correct statement of his receipts and deposits to the city administrator on or before the tenth of each month and at such other times as the city administrator or the city council may require, in such form as the city administrator may prescribe. The city treasurer shall perform other such acts or duties as the city administrator may prescribe. 
Section 6.02. - Accounting, supervision and control. 
    There shall be established a division of accounting, supervision and control. This division shall provide the following: 
(a)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all of the offices, departments and agencies of the city government; 
(b)  Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that money has been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligation becomes due and payable; 
(c)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; 
(d)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriations contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amount paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance, require reports of receipts, and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as the city administrator may deem expedient; 
(e)  Pay no claim against the City of Crockett unless it is evidenced by voucher approved by the head of the department or office for which the indebtedness was incurred; and each officer and his surety, if any, shall be liable to the City of Crockett for all loss or damage sustained by the City of Crockett by reasons of his negligent or corrupt approval of such claim; 
(f)  See that checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be signed by the city treasurer and countersigned by the city administrator, except checks in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) or less, and checks for refunds of deposits for utilities. In the event the city administrator and the city treasurer is the same person, then all checks, vouchers or warrants shall be signed by the city treasurer and countersigned by another official designated by the city council, except checks for ten dollars ($10.00) or less, and checks for refunds of deposits for utilities. Checks amounting to the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) or less and checks for refunds of deposits for utilities may be signed by the city treasurer without any additional signature. 
Section 6.03. - Purchase procedure. 
    The city council shall establish rules and regulations for the purchase of all budgeted supplies, materials and equipment required for any office, department or agency of the city government, provided; however, all contracts or purchases involving an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be let to the lowest and best bid by a responsible bidder after there has been an opportunity for competitive bidding, and providing further that the city council shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
Charter reference- Section I of Ord. No. 0-9-93, adopted Sep. 7, 1993, provided as follows: 
 "The provisions of Chapter 252 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas, as amended from time to time, shall supersede the provisions of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Crockett, Texas, covering the same subject matter." 
Section 6.04. - City tax assessor and collector. 
    Upon the nomination of the city administrator the city council shall appoint a city tax assessor and collector according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof; however, if the city council deems it advisable the office of city tax assessor and collector may be held by the city administrator. There may be appointed one (1) or more deputies as deputy city tax assessor and collector in the same manner as the naming of the city tax assessor and collector. 
(a)  Bond. The city tax assessor and collector shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the city council may require conditioned for the faithful performance of his duty, including compliance with all controlling provisions of the state laws bearing upon the functions of his office. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the city tax assessor and collector to receive all tax renditions from property owners or agents thereof; and in this connection all property, real, personal and mixed, situated within the city on the first day of January of each year shall be rendered for taxation to the city tax assessor and collector by the owners thereof, or his or their agent, as provided by the laws of the State of Texas for the rendition of property assessment by the county, insofar, as these laws are applicable; and it shall not be necessary for the city tax assessor and collector to give any public notice by advertisement to require such owner or agent to render property for taxation; 
(2)  The city tax assessor and collector shall assess all property which for any cause has not been rendered, placing such valuation thereon as he may deem just. If the owners of such property are unknown such assessment may be made in the name "Unknown"; 
(3)  If the city tax assessor and collector shall discover any real property which was subject to taxation for any year within the preceding ten (10) year period, and which from any cause has escaped taxation for that year, he shall assess such property in a supplement to his next assessment roll, at the same rate under which such property should have been assessed for such year, stating the year, and the taxes thereon shall be collected the same as other taxes; provided that such supplemental rolls may be made at any time and thereafter reported to the city council for its approval. The taxes assessed in such supplemental roll for years previous to the approval of such roll shall be due at once upon approval of such roll by the city council; such taxes may bear interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum from the date on which they would have been delinquent if they had been timely assessed; and if such taxes shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of such approval the city tax assessor and collector may proceed to collect them in the manner required by law. 
Section 6.05. - Property subject to tax. 
(a)  All property, real, personal or mixed, within the corporate limits of the City of Crockett on the first day of January and not expressly exempt by law, shall be subject to annual taxation within the limits prescribed by the Constitution for cities of over five thousand (5,000) population. 
(b)  All rights, privileges and franchises heretofore or hereafter granted to and held by any person, firm or corporation, in the streets, alleys, highways or public grounds or places in the City of Crockett shall be subject to taxation separately from and in addition to the other assets of such person, firm or corporation, and the city council may require the rendition and assessment thereof accordingly. 
Section 6.06. - Board of equalization. 
(a)  Appointment and qualification : The city council shall each year prior to the first day of June appoint a board of equalization to be composed of three (3) members who are real property tax-paying citizens of the City of Crockett, who are not in arrears in the payment of any taxes or any other liabilities due the City of Crockett, well acquainted with real estate values, one of whom shall be designated as chairman of the board. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The city secretary shall serve as ex-officio secretary to the board. Each member of the board shall be paid for each day he sits as a member thereof such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council. 
(b)  Powers and duties: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the city council, as soon as the assessment rolls are completed, to refer them to the board of equalization; 
(2)  The board of equalization shall convene each year on the first day of June or as soon thereafter as practicable and continue its labors until its work is completed, provided it shall not continue beyond the tenth day of July of the same year; 
(3)  The board of equalization shall review the assessment rolls, correct any mistakes or any inequality found therein and make any adjustments that may be necessary to equalize the assessments, to the end that all property within the city shall be assessed as fairly and as uniformly as possible. The board shall be governed in its procedure by the laws of the state relating to the equalization of state and county taxes by the commissioners court; 
(4)  The board shall have the power, when in session, to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of all books, documents, stocks, bonds and other papers pertinent to any investigation of the ownership or value of property subject to taxation by the city; 
(5)  If the board of equalization proposes to decrease or increase any assessment over the amount assessed or rendered, notice shall be issued to the owner or person who has rendered the property, mailed to the last known address, informing him that the assessment of the property is about to be decreased or increased, and giving the property owner or his agent, an opportunity to appear and show cause why the assessment should not be altered. When the owner of the property is unknown, no notice shall be required to be given to anyone whomsoever. 
(c)  Records of proceeding and approval of tax rolls: The board of equalization shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon completion of its work, the board shall certify its approval of the assessment rolls, which shall be returned to the city council and thereupon adopted by the council as the assessment rolls to be used for the collection of taxes for the current year. 
Section 6.07. - Tax payment, delinquency and penalties. 
(a)  All taxes shall be payable at the office of the city tax assessor and collector, and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed, which shall be not later than October first; 
(b)  All unpaid taxes shall become delinquent as of January thirty-first of the year following their assessment, and shall be subject to such penalties and interest as imposed by law in the case of delinquent state and county taxes, or cumulative thereof as the city council may provide by ordinance; 
(c)  The city council may, by ordinance, authorize the payment of current taxes in installments not exceeding two (2) installments, over a period not exceeding one (1) year; 
(d)  The enforcement of tax liens and the collection of delinquent taxes on real and personal property shall be governed by the law applicable in the case of delinquent state and county taxes, and cumulative thereof as the city council may provide by ordinance, and cumulative of the other provisions hereof; 
(e)  Permits to wreck or move buildings shall not be issued until all taxes due on such property have been paid; 
(f)  If any one against whom a personal tax is assessed and unpaid, whether the tax is delinquent or not, shall have removed or be about to remove his personal property out of the city limits, it shall be the duty of the city tax assessor and collector to proceed at once to collect such taxes by seizure and sale of such personal property; 
(g)  Personal property seized by the city tax assessor and collector shall be sold at auction to the highest bidder at the front door of the city hall after the city tax assessor and collector has given notice of the time and place of the sale by posting a written notice at the city hall door and inserting another notice in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett at least ten (10) days before the date of sale. A sale of personal property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an absolute title and owner shall have no right to redeem the property. 
Section 6.08. - Tax lien. 
    A lien is created on all property, real, personal and mixed situated within the limits of the City of Crockett on January first of each year, in favor of the City of Crockett, for the amount of all due and unpaid taxes levied by the City of Crockett. The lien shall exist from January first of each year until the taxes are paid. This lien shall be prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, shall ever defeat such lien. All taxes heretofore assessed by the City of Crockett are ratified and all ordinances relating to taxes now in force shall continue amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 6.09. - General powers. 
    The city council shall have the power to levy, for general purposes, an ad valorem tax on real, personal and mixed property, within the limits of the City of Crockett, not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, based upon its true value as provided by law to the extent of the constitution limit permitted by the State of Texas to cities of over five thousand (5,000) population. In addition to the powers herein conferred with reference to the assessment and collection of taxes, the City of Crockett shall have and may exercise all powers and authority now conferred or that may hereafter be conferred upon cities having a population of more than five thousand inhabitants by the General Laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall also have the power to levy occupation taxes on such occupations as consistent with the General Laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall have power to correct errors in any assessment at any time or in the tax roll. 
Section 6.10. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City of Crockett shall begin on the first day of October of each year and end on the thirtieth day of September next ensuing thereafter. The fiscal year established by this charter shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
Section 6.11. - Preparation and submission of the budget. 
    Not later than August first of each fiscal year the city administrator shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
(a)  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year; shall set forth the reasons for significant increases or decreases from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue items and shall explain any more changes in financial policy; 
(b)  A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds; 
(c)  An analysis of tax rate; 
(d)  Summary of anticipated revenues for all funds and proposed expenditures from all funds: 
(1)  In preparing the budget, the city administrator shall place in parallel columns opposite the items of revenue and expenditures the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(2)  The budget shall show detailed estimates of expenditures separately for each department or agency to support summary provided in (d) hereof; 
(e)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds; 
(f)  A revenue and expense statement for each issue of bonds; 
(g)  A contingent appropriation not to exceed three (3) per cent of the total general fund expenditure. This fund shall be under the control of the city council and shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriations after approval by a majority of the members of the city council. Expenditures from this fund shall be used only in cases of unforeseen items of expenditures or established emergencies; 
(h)  A list of capital projects which is included within the budget year; 
(i)  A table showing the tax levies and tax collections by years for the past five (5) years; 
(j)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
Section 6.12. - Public hearing on budget. 
    The city council, after giving at least fifteen (15) days notice by publication in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett, shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, at which time all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against any item thereof. After such public hearing the city council may make such changes in the budget as appear desirable and may decrease the items of the budget provided the total proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total anticipated revenues. 
Section 6.13. - Adoption of budget. 
    The budget shall be finally adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the city council on or before September first prior to the end of the fiscal year. Should the city council take no final action on that date, the budget as submitted by the city administrator shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the city council. 
Section 6.14. - Effect of the budget. 
    Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. Final adoption of the budget by the city council shall constitute the official appropriation of the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures for the budget year and shall constitute the official levy of the property tax stated therein as the amount to be assessed and collected by the City of Crockett for the tax year beginning October first of the same year. A copy of the budget as finally adopted shall be filed with the city secretary, the County Clerk of Houston County and the state comptroller of public accounts in Austin. All appropriations that have not been expended or lawfully unencumbered shall lapse at the end of the budget year. 
Section 6.15. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city administrator may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of the expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of the city administrator and within the last three (3) months of the budget year, the city council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one (1) office, department or agency to another. 
Section 6.16. - Amending the budget. 
    In case of grave public necessity, emergency expenditures to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions, which could not by diligent thought and attention have been included in the original budget, may be authorized by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the city council as an amendment to the original budget. In every case where such amendment is made, a copy of the resolution by the city council adopting the amendment shall be filed with the city secretary, the County Clerk of Houston County and the state comptroller of public accounts in Austin and attached to the budget originally adopted. 
Section 6.17. - Budget a public record. 
    The budget, budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary open to public inspection. 
Section 6.18. - Powers to issue bonds. 
(a)  The City of Crockett shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City of Crockett and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City of Crockett previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas; 
(b)  The City of Crockett shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal functions not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both, and shall never be a debt of the City of Crockett. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas; 
(c)  All bonds of the City of Crockett having been issued and sold in accordance with the terms of this section, and having been delivered to the purchasers thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable, and all bonds issued or refund and in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, after said exchange, be incontestable. 
Section 6.19. - Bond register. 
    The city treasurer shall prepare, maintain and cause to be filed in his office a complete bond register, showing all bonds, the date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, a schedule of maturity dates and a record of all bonds and all other transactions of the city council having reference to the refunding of any indebtedness of the City of Crockett. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment or cancellation shall be noted in the register. 
Section 6.20. - Misapplication of bond funds. 
    Any officer or employee of the City of Crockett who shall willfully or knowingly divert or use any funds arising from the issuance of any bond or sinking fund for any other purpose than that for which the fund is created or as herein otherwise authorized, shall be subject to prosecution as provided by the Laws of the State of Texas on the diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any of the municipalities of the State of Texas. 
Section 6.21. - Assessment for improvements. 
    All of the terms, power and applicable provisions of Chapter 9, Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, relating to assessments for streets or other improvements as therein provided, are hereby adopted as a part of this charter and hereby constitute an alternative authority and method which the City of Crockett may use in improving streets, alleys and public places in levying assessments therefor, provided, the city shall have the power in all such cases to make such improvements with its own forces if, in the opinion of the city council, the work can be done more expeditiously or economically. 
Section 6.22. - Depository or depositories. 
    All money received by any person, department or agency of the City of Crockett for or in connection with the affairs of the City of Crockett shall be deposited promptly in the city depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the city council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance. 
ARTICLE VII. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Section 7.01. - Firemen. 
    Upon the nomination of the city administrator, the city council shall appoint a fire marshal and such other firemen and employees, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof; however, if the city administrator and city council deem it advisable the office of fire marshal may be held by any other person employed by the city in any capacity. If the city council should consider it advisable and necessary to appoint a fire marshal and/or chief to serve exclusively in such position, then the city council shall appoint such officer in the same manner as is herein provided for the appointment of a city administrator and chief of police; whereupon said fire marshal and/or chief, whichever may be designated by the city council, shall make the nominations, rather than the city administrator, for the appointment of firemen and other employees in the same manner as is provided for the city administrator and chief of police to make nominations in their respective departments or department, in which event the city administrator would thereafter have no power of nomination of firemen and other employees of the fire department. 
Section 7.02. - Control. 
(a)  All matters pertaining to the operation of the fire department shall be under the control of the city council, and such matters may be controlled by ordinance, resolution or any other action deemed advisable by the city council. 
(b)  The city council will consider recommendations and advice given by the President and/or Chief of the Crockett Volunteer Fire Department. 
(c)  Whenever it is called to the attention of the city council by any one whomsoever that there is situated within the fire limits as same is defined by ordinance passed in accordance with the provisions of section 3.11, subdivision (k) hereof, a building, structure or improvement violating such fire limits ordinance which violation occurred after such ordinance was made effective, then it shall be mandatory upon the city council if such violation exists to immediately order the owner or agent of the same or occupant of the premises, to take such corrective measures as may be necessary to eliminate the violation within thirty (30) days after such order is delivered to such owner or agent or occupant, and the city council shall punish by fine all persons failing to comply with such order. In the event of the failure of such persons to comply with such order, the city council shall have the additional power to remove such building, structure or improvement violating such ordinance at the expense of the City of Crockett for the account of the owner of such property and assess the expenses thereof, including condemnation proceedings, as a special tax against the land on which the same is situated as well as on the building, structure or improvement, and the same may be collected as other special taxes provided by statute or by this charter, or by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 

Section 8.01. - Health officer and other personnel. 
(a)  Upon the nomination of the city administrator, the city council may appoint the city health officer, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof. The health officer shall be a licensed physician qualified to practice medicine in the State of Texas. The city health officer shall advise with the city council on a program of public health; shall cooperate in the preparation of a sanitary code; shall cooperate with nearby cities on problems of health and sanitation; shall cooperate with the Commissioners of Houston County Court and its agencies, and with the state health department and other departments of state government in matters pertaining to health and sanitation. 
(b)  Upon the nomination of the city administrator, the city council shall appoint such other officers and employees required for the administration of the department of health, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof. The city council shall provide for such officers and employees by any appropriate order, resolution or ordinance as it may deem advisable and necessary in the premises. 
ARTICLE IX. - LAW DEPARTMENT 

Section 9.01. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment and qualification: The mayor may appoint and remove a city attorney and such assistants as may be deemed necessary. The city attorney and each assistant who may be appointed shall be a competent attorney duly licensed to practice law by the State of Texas. The city council shall fix the compensation of such an attorney or attorneys. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The city attorney or an assistant shall represent the City of Crockett in all litigation and controversies and shall prosecute all cases brought before the corporation court [municipal court]. He shall draft, approve or file his written opinion on the legality of every proposed ordinance before it is acted upon by the city council, and shall pass upon all documents, contracts and other legal instruments in which the city may have an interest. He shall be the legal advisor of the city administrator, the city council, and of all boards, commissions, agencies, officers and employees with respect to any legal question involving their official powers or duties. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by statute, by this charter or by ordinance. 
Section 9.02. - Corporation court [municipal court]. 
(a)  There is hereby established a court which shall be known as the Corporation Court [Municipal Court] of the City of Crockett. The corporation court [municipal court] shall have jurisdiction and be conducted in the manner prescribed and authorized by law. All costs and fines imposed by the corporation court [municipal court] shall be paid into the treasury for the use and benefit of the City of Crockett. 
(b)  The city judge shall preside over the corporation court [municipal court]. The city judge shall be a person who has the qualifications required for membership on the city council. The city judge shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  There shall be one (1) regularly scheduled session of the court each month and as many other sessions as, in the discretion of the city judge, may be necessary for the timely transaction of the business of the court. 
(d)  The city judge shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the city council and shall serve for a term of two (2) years. 
(e)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent a city judge from succeeding himself if appointed and confirmed as herein provided. 
Section 9.03. - Clerk of the corporation court [municipal court]. 
    The city secretary, or his assistant, shall be ex officio clerk of the corporation court [municipal court], and shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court, and perform such other duties or acts as may be necessary in issuing process and conducting the business of the court. 
ARTICLE X. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 

Section 10.01. - Parks and recreation superintendent and employees. 
    Upon the nomination of the city administrator, the city council may appoint a superintendent and any other necessary employees required for the administration of the department of parks and recreation, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof. The city council shall provide for such superintendent and employees by any appropriate order, resolution or ordinance, as it may deem advisable and necessary in the premises. The superintendent may hold any other office in any other department of the city as the city administrator and the city council may consider appropriate. 
Section 10.02. - Parks and recreation advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment and qualification: There shall be a park and recreation board which shall consist of five (5) resident property owning tax payers of the City of Crockett. They shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years, provided three (3) members shall be appointed each odd numbered year and two (2) members each even numbered year. The board shall elect its chairman from among its members, and he shall serve for one (1) year or until his successor is elected or qualified. The board shall serve without pay and shall adopt such rules as may be necessary for the regulation of its business and affairs. 
(b)  Powers and duties: The board shall serve in an advisory capacity. The board shall meet monthly and at such other times as the board may by resolution determine. The board shall submit to the city council an annual report of its operations together with such recommendations for the improvement of the park and recreation program as it may deem appropriate. The board shall endeavor to stimulate public interest in the development and maintenance of parks and playgrounds and a well rounded community wide recreation program. It shall endeavor to interpret the work of the park and recreation department and to promote close cooperation between the city and all private citizens, institutions and agencies to the end that all park and recreational facilities and resources within or controlled by the city may make their maximum contribution to the public welfare. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND ZONING 

Section 11.01. - Planning and zoning commission. 
    All of the terms, powers and applicable provisions of Chapter Four, Title Twenty-Eight of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, relating to zoning are hereby adopted as a part of this charter and hereby constitute the method which the City of Crockett may employ in promoting the health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community, vesting in the city council the power to appoint and control such boards and commissions, appoint officers and employees as other officers and employees are authorized to be appointed by the provisions hereof, and to delegate the authority to such boards, commissions, officers and employees as the city council may deem wise. All of the foregoing may be made by an order, resolution or ordinance of the city council as it may consider for the best interest of the City of Crockett. 
Section 11.02. - Building permits. 
    The City of Crockett shall have power to prohibit the wrecking or moving and the erection or construction of any building or structure of any kind within the City of Crockett without a permit first having been issued by the city for the construction or erection of such building or structure, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the city of all building or structures during the progress of their construction and may require that all buildings shall be constructed in conformity with the building regulations which exist in said city or which shall hereafter be passed. Permits to wreck or move any building or structure shall not be issued until all taxes due on such property have been paid. 
Section 11.03. - Condemnation of structures. 
    Whenever in the opinion of the City Council of the City of Crockett any building, fence, shed, awning, case, excavation, structure, object or thing of any kind or part thereof may fall or collapse and injure persons or property, the city council may order the owner or agent of the same or occupant of the premises, to take such corrective measures as the city council may direct, and may punish by fine all persons failing to do so. Upon his failure to comply, the city council shall have the additional power to remove the same at the expense of the City of Crockett on account of the owner of the property and assess the expenses thereof, including condemnation proceedings, as a special tax against the land and improvements, and same may be collected as other special taxes provided for in this charter, or by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. The City Council of the City of Crockett shall have full power to condemn all dangerous buildings or obstructions of any kind that it may determine to be hazardous in any way, especially to health and fire, and provide regulations therefor by ordinance. 
ARTICLE XII. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE 

[Section 12.01A. - Established.] 
    There shall be established and maintained a department of police to preserve order within the City of Crockett, and to secure the residents of said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss, and who shall serve as officers of the corporation court [municipal court] under the direction of the city judge while serving in such court. 
Editor's note- The section number and catchline to the above section have been supplied by the editor inasmuch as the original publication of the Charter did not include the same. 
Section 12.01. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer in this department. He shall be appointed by the mayor for an indefinite term as provided in Article 998, Chapter 3, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, or removed by the city council. He shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of this department and for such other matters as may be placed under his control by ordinance or resolution by the city council. 
Section 12.02. - Other policemen, clerks and employees. 
    Upon nomination by the chief of police, the city council shall appoint such other additional policemen, clerks and employees in the department of police as may be considered necessary; and the chief of police shall nominate to the city council such persons as he may consider suitable for policemen, clerks and employees, but the city council shall have the right and power to reject any nomination and require another nomination to be made by the chief of police, continuing this procedure until a person is found who is acceptable to the chief of police and city council; however, the chief of police shall have the right to remove any such policemen, clerks and employees in the department of police with or without the consent of the city council; and the chief of police may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the city council, at which meeting of the city council the same procedure shall be followed as in the first instance of original appointment. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Section 13.01. - General powers. 
(a)  May regulate: The City of Crockett may license, regulate, fix the rates, control and supervise public utilities of all kinds. 
(b)  May own: In addition to such public utilities it may now own, the City of Crockett may own, acquire, construct, maintain and operate any other public utility that may be approved by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the city voting therefor at an election held for such purposes; and shall have the powers to condemn the property of any person, firm or corporation for the purpose of operating and maintaining any such utility, and for distributing such service throughout the city or any portion thereof, but in such condemnation proceeding no allowance shall be made for the value of any franchise and only the actual physical assets shall be purchased by the city. 
(c)  May fix rates: The city shall have the power, subject to limitations imposed by state law and this charter to fix and from time to time to revise such rates and charges as it may deem advisable for supplying such utility services owned by the city as the city may provide. The rates and charges for services to customers of the city utilities outside the corporate limits of the city may be greater but shall not be less than the rates and charges for similar services to customers within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Revenues and accounts: Any money remaining in the "system fund" after all necessary expenses of operation and maintenance of the utilities system, including salaries, labor and materials have been paid, upon proper approval and after all payments have been made into the several funds required and provided to be made by the ordinance or ordinances authorizing the issuance of any revenue bonds of the city, now outstanding or hereafter authorized and issued which may be payable from and secured from the net earnings of the water and sewer systems shall be deemed "excess revenue" for the purposes of this section. "System funds" as used herein shall mean the fund or funds as may be required by outstanding bond issues into which are deposited the gross incomes derived from the operation of the above named utilities systems. The city shall operate the utility system at a profit and "Excess revenues" may be transferred to any other fund of the city. 
(e)  Superintendents, managers and employees: Upon nomination of the city administrator, the city council shall appoint such superintendents, managers and employees of each utility service owned and operated by the city, according to the procedure provided in subsection (1) of subdivision (c) of section 5.01 of article five hereof; however, if the city administrator and city council deem it advisable any of such positions and offices may be held by the city administrator, or any other departmental position. 
Section 13.02. - Disposal of utility properties. 
    No sale, lease or disposal of any utility system, or any part thereof essential to continued effective utility service, shall ever be made unless such sale, lease or disposal is affirmed by a majority vote of the qualified voters in the City of Crockett voting at such election; except any part thereof which is no longer needed for the operation of such utility system, as such is found by specific finding by the city council entered in the minutes of such city council, may be sold without prior approval by the qualified voters of the city, by resolution adopted by a majority of the members of the city council; and except further, any real estate pertinent to any public utility may be leased for mineral exploration upon competitive bidding therefor without price approval by the qualified voters of the city; however, any real estate found no longer needed for any utility service, shall not be sold until the same be advertised for a period of two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Crockett, and sold to the highest bidder, with the right of the city council to reject any bids. 
Section 13.03. - Powers of the city. 
    The city shall have such powers with respect to public utilities and franchises as may now or hereafter be granted and defined under the Constitution, the General Laws of the State of Texas, and by ordinance. 
    The city shall have the power through eminent domain proceedings to acquire any public utility operating with or without a franchise and furnishing a public service to the citizens of Crockett. The city shall, by ordinance, adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable for the acquiring and operation of any such public utilities and shall further provide appropriate methods to determine the value of all such utilities' assets, including, but not limited to all of its real property, personal property, franchises and intangible assets. 
    The procedure to be used in the acquisition of such property through eminent domain proceedings shall be that as set forth in Section 21.001 et seq., Texas Property Code, as from time to time amended. 
    Prior to the acquisition of any existing franchise and/or public utility system, either according to the terms of the franchise or by eminent domain, the city council must submit the question of the acquisition to the qualified voters of the City of Crockett, and the same must be approved by a majority of those voting in the election. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(e), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 13.04. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend all franchises of public utilities of every character operating within the city and for such purposes is granted full power. The term "public utility" as used herein is construed to mean any person, firm or corporation furnishing to the public any general public service, including, but not limited to heat, light, power, telephone service, community antenna or cable television service, sewer service and the treatment thereof, water, wrecker service, the carrying of passengers for hire or for any other purpose whereby a right to, in part, appropriate or use the streets, highways, or other property of the city as necessary or proper. No ordinance granting, renewing or extending franchises shall take effect until at least thirty (30) days after its passage; and during such thirty (30) day period the full text of the ordinance shall be published at least twice in the official newspaper of the city, the expense of the publication being borne by the proponents of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(f), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. 
Section 13.05. - Right to regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, or extensions of public utilities and franchises, whether it be so provided in the franchise ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)  To require compliance with the terms of the franchise. 
(b)  To require reasonable extensions of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and prevent unjust discrimination to service or rates. 
(d)  (1)  To prescribe the form of accounts to be kept by each such utility provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, or their successors, such form of accounts shall be considered satisfactory. 
(2)  At any time require annual and other reports by each such public utility pertaining to sales and plants within the city. 
(e)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(g)  To forfeit by ordinance any franchise at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provisions of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing under the conditions hereinafter provided; however, that action may be taken hereunder only after the city has given to the grantee written notice of the particular or particulars in which it is claimed that the grantee is in default, and the grantee shall have a reasonable time after receipt of such notice (not to exceed thirty (30) days) to cure such alleged default or defaults. If after the expiration of said time period, said default or defaults are not cured, the city may by its option, and after a hearing, declare by ordinance the franchise forfeited. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(g), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. Prior to amendment, § 13.05 pertained to the franchise tax and derived unamended from the original Charter. 
Section 13.06. - Franchise records. 
    Within six (6) months after this section takes effect every owner of a public utility franchise shall file with the city secretary copies of all franchises owned or claimed. The city shall complete and maintain a public record of all public utility franchises. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(h), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the voters on August 10, 1996. Prior to amendment, § 13.06 pertained to regulation of utilities and derived unamended from the original Charter. 
Section 13.07. - Reserved. 
Note- Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(i), adopted July 1, 1996, and approved by the voters August 10, 1996, deleted § 13.07 of the Charter, which pertained to franchise records and derived unamended from the original Charter. 
Section 13.08. - Other conditions. 
(a)  Consent of property owners: The consent of abutting and adjacent owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  Extensions: All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this chapter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 13.05 of this charter. In case of an extension of public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same condition as the original grant. 
(c)  All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Crockett and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the City of Crockett to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the city council in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CITY PROPERTY 

Section 14.01. - Power of sale. 
    The city council by a majority vote of its membership may sell and lease, including surface and mineral leases any property belonging to the City of Crockett, not needed for any city purposes or functions, except as such sales and leasing powers are limited by the provisions of section 2.01 of article two hereof; and the provisions of section 2.01 of article two hereof shall be construed together. The city council by a majority vote of its membership shall have the right and power to convey any interest of the City of Crockett in any street, avenue, alley, highway or public road or any part thereof which has been abandoned, or which was dedicated and has never been opened and used as such, to adjacent property owners, but which sale shall be without warranty, either express or implied, by the City of Crockett. 
Section 14.02. - Streets. 
(a)  Control by ordinance: All of the powers and authority vested in the cities, towns and villages by the statutes of the State of Texas for the use, control, abandonment, acquisition by purchase or by the power of eminent domain, of streets, avenues, alleys, highways and public roads are expressly reserved and made a part of this charter. In addition thereto and cumulative thereof the City of Crockett shall have the power and authority to extend all of its rights and privileges over the use, control, abandonment and acquisition of such streets, avenues, alleys, highways and public roads, so long as the same is not in conflict with any provision of the Constitution or Laws of the State of Texas. 
(b)  Abandonment: The city council may by a majority vote of its membership abandon any street, avenue, alley, highway or public road, or any part thereof, which is no longer needed or required for use by the general public, or which has been created by dedication or platting or a map of a portion of the city and thereafter never opened or used as such, which abandonment shall be by ordinance passed as provided in section 3.10 of article three hereof, and no other notices shall be required. 
(c)  Ratification of previous ordinances of abandonment and disposition: All ordinances heretofore passed by the governing body of the City of Crockett abandoning any street, avenue, alley, highway or public road, or any part thereof, or any other method of abandonment thereof employed by such governing body, and the sale or other disposition thereof by the governing body, are hereby ratified, confirmed and validated. 
State Law reference- Eminent domain power, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art 1175(15). 
ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the acts amending the Charter. 
Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  4- 7-64 1.01-15.10 Char.(note)  4- 7-78 3.01(e)  4- 3-82 3.01(a)-(d)  4- 3-82 3.05  4- 2-83 3.13(c)  
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code O-9-93  9- 7-93 I 6.03(note)  
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Election 
Date Section Section 
this Code O-7-96  7- 1-96  8-10-96 I(a) 15.04 I(b) 3.05 I(c) 3.03 I(d) 3.02(a)(4) I(e)-(h) 13.04-13.06 I(i)       Rpld 13.07 I(j) 3.07 I(k) 4.03 I(l) 3.14  
Section 15.01. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the City of Crockett shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the city administrator. 
Section 15.02. - Official newspaper. 
    The city council shall annually select and designate by resolution the official newspaper of the City of Crockett in which all ordinances and official notices are required to be published shall be published. 
Section 15.03. - Personal interest. 
    No officer or employee of the City of Crockett shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the City of Crockett; or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to or by the City of Crockett of any land, except on behalf of the City of Crockett as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall forfeit his office, or position. 
    Any officer or employee of the City of Crockett who shall willfully or knowingly divert or use any funds arising from the issuance of any bonds or sinking fund for any other purpose than that for which the fund is created or as herein otherwise authorized, shall be subject to prosecution as provided by the laws of the State of Texas on the diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any of the municipalities of the State of Texas. 
Section 15.04. - Nepotism. 
    No person shall be appointed to an office or be employed by the City of Crockett who is related to any member of the city council within the second degree of affinity or the third degree of consanguinity; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the Crockett Volunteer Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. O-7-96, § I(a), 7-1-96) 
Note- The above section reflects an amendment approved by the people on August 10, 1996. 
Section 15.05. - Effect of charter. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the city government of Crockett and not in conflict with any provision of this charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the city council after this charter takes effect. 
Section 15.06. - Severable provisions. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or application of this charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this charter are declared severable. 
Section 15.07. - Amending charter. 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City of Crockett in the manner provided by Chapter 13, Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 15.08. - Interim government. 
    In the event this charter in its present or amended form is adopted, then the mayor and commissioners who are elected under general law at the election to be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1964, shall serve only until the mayor and the commissioners composing the city council as provided in subsection (b) of section 4.03 of article 4 hereof shall have been elected and qualified. 
    In the further event this charter in its present or amended form is adopted it shall become effective immediately after the vote is officially canvassed and announced by the city council. 
    The recorder, holding office at the time this charter is adopted, shall serve only until the city judge as provided herein shall have qualified. The recorder who is elected under general law at the election to be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1964, shall not take office as such if this charter is adopted at the same election. If this charter is adopted the city judge shall succeed the recorder holding office at the time this charter is adopted, and the office of recorder is abolished. If this charter is not adopted at such election then the city judge shall not take office as such but the recorder who is elected under general law at such election shall succeed the recorder holding office at the time this charter is submitted to the qualified voters. 
Section 15.09. - Submission of charter to electors. 
    The charter commission in preparing this charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of 'yes' or 'no' on the same, for the reason that the charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the charter commission directs that this charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Crockett at an election to be held for that purpose on the first Tuesday in April being the seventh day of said month. At the same time the mayor and five (5) commissioners shall be elected as provided in this charter, and the names of the candidates for such offices shall appear on the same ballot with the provisions for the submission of this charter to the qualified voters. Appropriate headings shall appear for each such office and the names of each candidate therefor shall appear under the appropriate heading. 
The ballot shall contain the following provisions: 
FOR CHARTER 
AGAINST CHARTER 
    The voter shall mark through one line and leave the other line without a mark which shows his intention. 
    The ballot for the election of the mayor and commissioners under the general law shall be a separate ballot. The same officials appointed to hold the election for the officers to be elected under the general law shall also hold the election on the submission of this charter and the election of the mayor and the five (5) commissioners. 
Section 15.10. - Effective date. 
    If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, the present city commission, after canvassing the returns, shall enter an official order upon the records of the City of Crockett declaring the same adopted and this charter shall be in full force and effect on and after the date of official adoption. 
    Approved by Charter Commission on this the 25th day of February, 1964. 
J.G. BEASLEY 
Chairman W.A. STORY C.L. EDMISTON 
Vice Chairman R.C. OVERSTREET CLIFFORD PENNINGTON ELIZA BISHOP ADRIAN A. DAVIS LAVERNE LADE J.G. WALLERS ELMUS CURTIS CLIFFORD KNOX JIMMIE JACKSON HENRY ELLIS DAVID H. GIPSON JAMES RECTOR STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF HOUSTON 
CITY OF CROCKETT  
    I, Joyce Allbright, City Secretary, do hereby certify that the above and foregoing is a true and correct copy as same appears of Records of the City of Crockett. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office this the 15th day of April, A.D. 1964. 
Joyce Allbright, 
City Secretary 
By Joyce Allbright 
(SEAL) 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crockett, Texas," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1013(3), 1176a. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Crockett, in the County of Houston and State of Texas. 
    Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Code of Ordinances, City of Crockett," as designated in section 1-1 above. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a legal holiday. If a number of months is to be computed counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of the month. 
    Council, city council. Whenever the words "council" or "city council" or "the council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean Houston County, Texas. 
    Day. A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or employee to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designates otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
    In the city. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police, regulatory and other powers. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of such officers or persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as may be officially in current use in the state. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. A public place shall mean any public street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises; or any hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, grocery, saloon, garden, workshop or other place, or part of the same, to which people usually resort, or have a right to resort for business or pleasure. 
    Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Shall, must, may. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "must" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb-lines, or the lateral lines of the roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street or highway. The term "street" or "highway," when used herein, shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(b)  The provisions of Titles 1, 2 and 3 of the Penal Code shall apply in the interpretation of all penal provisions of this Code to the extent that the Penal Code mandates that they shall apply. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 10, 23, § 429b-2. 
Sec. 1-3. - Certain ordinances not affected by code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(4)  Making any appropriation; 
(5)  Levying or imposing taxes; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(11)  Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones and specific stop or yield intersections; 
(12)  Concerning taxation which is not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Approving rates established for outside utility companies; 
(14)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(15)  Any ordinance adopted after May 21, 1984; 
(16)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crockett," shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances of a general and permanent nature hereinafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, this Code. Amendments to this Code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the Code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter and section. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code-Generally. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Charter reference- Ordinances generally, § 3.10. 
Sec. 1-10. - Same-Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for inserting in this Code, not be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine. No fine shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire, safety, zoning and public health and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations, nor exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all other violations. No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 1-6) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011,1195. 
Sec. 1-11.1. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "fund") pursuant to Article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The municipal court of the City of Crockett, Texas (the "municipal court") is hereby authorized and required to assess as a cost of court a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  A person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the City of Crockett, Texas. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the City of Crockett, Texas shall be segregated in the fund. 
(e)  The fund shall be used only to finance items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the City of Crockett, Texas. "Security services" shall include any and all items described in Article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(f)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-09B-03, § 1A, 9-2-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09B-03, § 1A, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 1-11.1 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 1-11.2. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter called "the fund," pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account of the city. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed as a cost of Court and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the date upon which this section is effective. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city manager of the City of Crockett, Texas, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of and to maintain technological enhancements for the municipal court of the City of Crockett, Texas. "Technological enhancements" shall include any computer systems, computer networks, computer hardware, computer software, imaging systems, electronic kiosks, electronic ticket writers, and docket management systems and all items described in Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-09C-03, §§ 1-3, 9-2-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09C-03, §§ 1-3, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 1-11.2 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 1-12. - Burden of proof of exceptions. 
    In any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this Code, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to negate or for the state to prove any exception contained in this Code concerning any prohibited act; provided, that any such exception made therein may be urged as a defense by the person charged by such complaint. 
State Law reference- Proof of exceptions, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 2.02. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of Code. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(b)  If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative services, § 5.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Seal adopted. 
    The following seal is hereby adopted as the corporate seal of the city: 

Corporate Seal 
Charter reference- Authority to use corporate seal, § 2.01. 
Sec. 2-2. - Boundary lines for single member districts. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the city's home rule charter, the boundary lines for the five (5) single member council districts shall be as is outlined on the map of the city on file in the office of the city secretary, which map is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full in this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-1-83, § 1, 1-3-83; Ord. No. O-01C-02, 1-7-02) 
Charter reference- Number, selection and term of council members, § 3.01. 
Sec. 2-3. - Power of council to conduct investigations; subpoenas, etc. 
(a)  The city council may investigate the affairs and financial transactions of any office or department of the city government, and the acts and conduct of any official or employee. In conducting an investigation, the city council may control the attendance of witnesses, the production of books and papers, and other evidence and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or attachments which shall have the mayor's signature and which may be served and executed by any officer authorized by law to serve subpoenas or other process. 
(b)  If any witness shall refuse to appear or to testify to any facts within his knowledge or to procure any papers or books in his possession or under his control, relating to the matter under investigation before the city council, the city council shall have the power to cause the witness to be punished as for contempt. 
(c)  No witness shall be excused for testifying, touching his knowledge of the matter under investigation in any such inquiry but such testimony shall not be used against him in any criminal prosecution except for perjury committed upon such inquiry. 
(Code 1960, § 1-5-28) 
Sec. 2-4. - Place of elections; election precincts and polling places. 
(a)  The absentee voting for city elections shall continue to be held at City Hall, 200 North Fifth Street. 
(b)  The city shall be divided into five (5) election precincts, in the manner shown on the attached map, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  For all regular city elections and run-off elections, the polling places shall be as follows: 
Election Precinct One (1)-All Saints Episcopal Church Annex, 1301 E. Houston Avenue; 
Election Precinct Two (2)-Crockett Fire Station, 200 North Sixth Street; 
Election Precinct Three (3)-Crockett High School, South Loop 304; 
Election Precinct Four (4)-Crockett Jr. High School, South Loop 304; and 
Election Precinct Five (5)-Senior Citizens Center, 716 South Wells Street. 
(Ord. No. O-9-83, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-83; Ord. No. O-1-01, §§ 1-3, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-2-08, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Charter reference- Nominations and elections, § 4.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5. - Purchasing and contracting. 
(a)  General requirements. Before the city may enter into a contract for supplies, materials or equipment which requires an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1.000.00), the city must comply with the procedure prescribed hereinafter for competitive bidding. Notice of the time and place at which the contract for supplies, materials or equipment will be let and notice of any request for sealed proposals for supplies, materials and equipment, as required by the applicable statutes of the State of Texas, must be published at least once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the city. The date of the first publication must be before the fourteenth day before the date set to let the contract. If no newspaper is published in the city, the notice must be posted at the City Hall for fourteen (14) days before the date set to let the contract. If the contract is for the purchase of machinery for the construction or maintenance of roads or streets, the notice for bids and the order for purchase must include a full specification of the machinery desired. The city shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(b)  Exemptions. Subsection (a) above does not apply to an expenditure for: 
(1)  A procurement made because of a public calamity that requires the immediate appropriation of money to relieve the necessity of the city's residents or to preserve the property of the city; 
(2)  A procurement necessary to preserve the public health or safety of the city's residents; 
(3)  A procurement necessary because of unforeseen damage to public machinery, equipment or other property; 
(4)  A procurement of items that are available from one (1) source, including captive replacement parts or components for equipment. 
(c)  Procedure for exempt purchases. The appropriate city officer or employee making a purchase involving an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), subject to the exemptions in subsection (b) above, shall give personal or telephone notice of an opportunity for competitive bidding to responsible bidders prior to making the purchase. All such emergency purchases shall be reported in writing to the city council at its next regular meeting. The report shall include the nature of the emergency and a description of the action taken. The officer or employee shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(Ord. No. O-3A-89, §§ 1-3, 3-6-89) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. O-3A-89, §§ 1-3, adopted Mar. 6, 1989, has been codified herein by the editor as § 2-5. 
Secs. 2-6-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- The city council, § 3.01 et seq.; city administrator, § 5.01 et seq.; city treasurer, § 6.01 et seq.; tax assessor and collector, § 6.04; fire department, § 7.01 et seq.; health officer, § 8.01 et seq.; city attorney, § 9.01 et seq.; clerk of the municipal court, § 9.03; parks and recreation superintendent, § 10.01; chief of police, § 12.01. 
Cross reference- Building official, § 5-36; electrical inspector, § 5-156; plumbing inspector, § 5-286; director of emergency management, § 6-1 et seq.; fire marshal, § 7-31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Treasurer, duties, etc. 
    The city treasurer shall give bond in favor of the city in such amount, and in such form as the city council may require, with sufficient security to be approved by the city council, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties. He shall receive and securely keep all moneys belonging to the city, and make all payments for the same upon the order of the mayor, attested by the secretary under the seal of the corporation. No order shall be paid unless the said order shall show upon its face that the city council has directed its issuance, and for what purpose. He shall render a full and correct statement of his receipts and payments to the city council, at their first regular meeting in every quarter and whensoever, at other times, he may be required by them so to do. He shall do and perform such other acts and duties as the city council may require. He shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1001. 
Secs. 2-17-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY SECRETARY 

Sec. 2-31. - General duties. 
(a)  The city secretary shall attend every meeting of the city council, and keep accurate minutes of the proceedings thereof in a book to be provided for that purpose, and engross and enroll all laws, resolutions and ordinances of the city council, keep the corporate seal, take charge of and preserve and keep in order all the books, records, papers, documents and files of said council, countersign all commissions issued to city officers, and licenses issued by the mayor, and keep a record or register thereof, and make out all notices required under any regulation or ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The city secretary shall notify the Texas Judicial Council of the name of any person elected or appointed as a mayor, municipal court judge, or clerk of a municipal court of the city not later than the thirtieth day after the date of that person's election or appointment. 
(c)  The city secretary shall draw all the warrants on the treasurer and countersign the same and keep an accurate account thereof in a book provided for that purpose. He shall be the general accountant of the city, and shall keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements for the city, and separately, under proper heads, each cause of receipt and disbursement, and also accounts with each person including officers who have money transactions with the city, crediting accounts allowed by proper authority and specifying the particular transaction to which such entries apply. He shall keep a register of bonds and bills issued by the city, and all evidence of debt due and payable to it, noting the particulars thereof, and all facts connected therewith, as they occur. 
(d)  The city secretary shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city council; and he shall perform all such other duties as may be required of him by law, ordinance, resolution or order of the city council. He shall receive for his services an annual salary payable at stated periods, and such additional fees as the city council may allow. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1000. 
Sec. 2-32. - Service of citations, summonses and other notices by the code enforcement officer. 
    All citations, summonses and other notices required or permitted to be issued in connection with any matter governed by the Crockett Code or relating to or connected with the enforcement of any provision of the Crockett Code may be served by the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. O-09C-15, § I, 9-21-15) 
Secs. 2-33-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B, § 61.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-46. - Election to participate. 
(a)  The city council, on behalf of the city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created, except those employees of the fire department who are eligible to be included in membership in firemen's relief and retirement fund, of the city, to participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)  The city administrator is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of the state statutes, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five (5) percent of the full earnings of each employee of such departments, 
(e)  Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed "prior service credit," as defined in the TMRS Act, at the rate of one hundred (100) percent of the "base prior service credit" of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in said act. 
(f)  For each month of current service rendered to the city by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is one hundred (100) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current service accumulation fund. 
(g)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city, under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-81, §§ 1-7, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 2-47. - Supplemental disability benefits fund. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental disability benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 110B, § 62.003), and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  The city administrator is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above-mentioned departments participate in the supplemental disability benefits fund of such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in such fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental disability benefits fund of such system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental disability benefits funds of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of said city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to such fund shall not exceed one-half of one (1) percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under such fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(e)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental disability bene fits fund shall be effective October 1, 1981. 
(Ord. No. O-9B-81, §§ 1-5, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 2-48. - Supplemental death benefits. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in the TMRS Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 62.004) for each of the city's employees who are members of such system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in said act for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city. 
(b)  The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this section and of the participation of the city in the fund. 
(c)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund shall be effective on October 1, 1981. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-81, §§ 1-3, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 2-49. - Updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS ACT"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred percent (100) of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section [January 1, 2001] on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-82, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-82; Ord. No. O-9B-84, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-84; Ord. No. O-10A-88, §§ 1, 3, 10-3-88; Ord. No. O-9B-89, §§ 1, 3, 9-18-89; Ord. No. O-9-91, §§ 1, 4, 9-16-91; Ord. of 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-50. - Additional contributions. 
    Effective the first day of January, 1985, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of the city employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(Ord. No. O-11-82, 11-15-82; Ord. No. O-9B-84, 9-4-84) 
Sec. 2-51. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section [January 1, 2001]. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. O-10A-88, §§ 2, 3, 10-3-88; Ord. No. O-9B-89, §§ 2, 3, 9-18-89; Ord, No. O-9-91, §§ 2, 4, 9-16-91; Ord. of 7-17-00) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 0-10A-88, adopted Oct. 3, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 2, 3 as § 2-51 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-51.1. - Dates of allowances and increases. 
    The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder [in sections 2-49 and 2-51] shall be effective on January 1, 2001, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. O-9-91, §§ 3, 4, 9-16-91; Ord. of 7-17-00) 
Editor's note- Sections 3 and 4 of Ord. No. O-9-91, adopted Sep. 16, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 3 and 4 of said ordinance as § 2-51.1 (a) and, in part, (b), respectively, was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-52. - Special credit for military service. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 63.502, Subchapter F, of Chapter 63, Title 11013, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the Armed Forces or Armed Forces Reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Section 63.502(b) and 63,503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 63.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees' saving fund) an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-89, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-89) 
Editor's note- Sections 1 and 2 of nonamendatory Ord. No. O-9C-89, adopted Sept. 18, 1989, have been codified herein by the editor as § 2-52. 
Sec. 2-53. - Additional authorized rights, credits, benefits. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406 and 64.410 of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the TMRS Act, the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the system ). 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  If a vested member, as that term is defined in Section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as the beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said Section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability annuity under Section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under Section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees that: 
a.  The member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
b.  The disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  The member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Section 64.409 of the TMRS Act. The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. O-9D-89, § 1, 9-18-89; TMRS-20, § 1(a), 10-7-13) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of nonamendatory Ord. No. O-9D-89, adopted Sept. 18, 1989, has been codified herein by the editor as § 2-53. 
Sec. 2-54. - Restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that: (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the System for that service; and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. O-7-97, § 1, 7-7-97) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of nonamendatory Ord. No. O-7-97, adopted July 7, 1997, has been codified herein as § 2-54 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 2-55-2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning board of adjustment, § 3-61 et seq.; electrical board, § 5-171 et seq.; plumbing board, § 5-316 et seq.; joint airport zoning board, § 3-19 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-66-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission generally, § 11.01; power of city council to appoint members, § 3.11(d). 
Cross reference- Joint airport zoning board, § 3-19 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1011(f). 

Sec. 2-81. - Created; composition, residency. 
    There is hereby created a city planning and zoning commission, The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of five (5) members, all of whom must be residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 101, 6-2-80; Ord. No. O-10-83, § 2, 10-3-83; Ord. No. O-10-87, § 1, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointments; term; compensation. 
    Members of the planning and zoning commission shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Each appointed member of the planning and zoning commission shall hold office for a period of three (3) years or until his successor takes office; however, during the initial creation of the commission, three (3) members will be appointed for three (3) years; two (2) members for two (2) years; and two (2) members for one (1) year. The members of the planning and zoning commission must be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and must serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 101, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-83. - Removals; vacancies. 
    Members of the planning and zoning commission may be removed by the city council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of terms will be filled only for the unexpired term by the mayor with confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 101, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-84. - Election of chairperson and other offices. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairperson and an associate chairperson and may create and fill other offices as may be deemed necessary. The chairperson shall have the authority to vote. The term of the chairperson and associate chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 102, 6-2-80; Ord. No. O-10-87, § 2, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 2-85. - Meetings. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 103, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-86. - Rules of operation and record keeping. 
    The planning and zoning commission must adopt rules of operation and must keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 104, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-87. - Quorum. 
    Three (3) members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. O-6A 80, § 105, 6-2-80; Ord. No. O-10-87, § 3, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 2-88. - Council approval of commission action; exception. 
    No action by the planning and zoning commission on zoning amendments shall become final until approved by the city council, except that the review and approval of conditional use permits and site plans shall not require review and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 106, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-89. - General powers. 
    In general, the planning and zoning commission shall have the powers necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning and carry out the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-8G, § 201, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-90. - Advisory duties. 
    The planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city council action and policies pertaining to public facilities and social programs as well as the financial requirements associated with them. It will be part of the planning and zoning commission's duty to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens on the creation, revision and implementation of plans for the physical, social and economic development of the city. All municipal employees must, upon request, furnish the commission with available information that it deems reasonable and necessary to proceed with its work. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 202, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-91. - Personnel and finances. 
    The planning and zoning commission may recommend the employment of persons deemed necessary for the successful performance of its work. The commission may recommend to the city council the employment of urban planners, engineers, architects, landscape architects and other respective individuals and consultants. The city council may provide funds for the salaries of employees and for the expenses of the planning and zoning commission as for other functions of municipal government. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 203, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-92. - Commission responsible for comprehensive plan. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the authority and responsibility to prepare and recommend the adoption of a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 301, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-93. - Purpose of the comprehensive plan. 
    The comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to this division shall be made for the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing the coordinated and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the city. The plan must address itself to such concerns as the promotion of safety, adequate provision of light and air, the promotion of a healthful and convenient distribution of the population, the encouragement of good urban design and the wise and efficient expenditure of public funds. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 302, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-94. - Contents of comprehensive plan. 
    The Crockett Comprehensive Plan, with its accompanying maps and descriptive matter, shall state the city's adopted policies as they pertain to the following: 
(1)  Present and future land use. 
(2)  Housing. 
(3)  Circulation and transportation. 
(4)  Public facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 303, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-95. - Procedure for adoption of comprehensive plan. 
    The city council may adopt the comprehensive plan as a whole by a single ordinance or may, by successive ordinances, adopt parts of the plan. Before the planning and zoning commission recommends to the city council the adoption of the plan or an amendment to it, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of involving the citizens of the city in the planning process. The officially adopted comprehensive plan must be signed by both the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission and the mayor. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 304, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-96. - Amendments to comprehensive plan. 
    The planning and zoning commission may, from time to time, recommend amendments to the comprehensive plan to the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 305, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-97. - Studies in preparation of the plan. 
    In preparing the comprehensive plan or in considering an amendment to the plan, the planning and zoning commission must make surveys and studies of present and future conditions of the city, with due regard to its relationship to surrounding territory. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 306, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-98. - Approval of improvements. 
    No street, park, open space, public facility or similar activity may be authorized and constructed by the city unless it has been reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and has been certified by the planning and zoning commission as being in compliance with the municipal policies found in the comprehensive plan. In case of disapproval, the planning and zoning commission must transmit its reasons to the city council which has the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of a majority of its membership. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 307, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-99. - Status of plan to be included in the annual report. 
    As a part of its annual report, the planning and zoning commission shall include a report on the status of the city's progress in attaining the goals and objectives stated in the comprehensive plan. Any need for amendments to the plan must be cited in the report. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 308, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-100. - Planning commission to act as zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall serve as the city's official agency responsible for the review and processing of all matters pertaining to zoning regulations. The planning and zoning commission will have the power to prepare and recommend to the city council the adoption of a zoning system directed to achieving the goals and objectives stated in the comprehensive plan. In the performance of this function, the planning and zoning commission shall abide by state law as it pertains to zoning. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 401, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 2-101. - Exclusive jurisdiction and powers. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall be exclusively responsible for the creation and implementation of regulations governing the subdivision of land within the boundaries of the city. All plats and replats of land involving the division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its review and approval. No plat or replat of land located within the municipal boundaries of the city may be filed with the county clerk unless it bears a signed statement of approval from the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-80, § 501, 6-2-80) 
Secs. 2-102-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-94, §§ 1-13, adopted Oct. 17, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as Art. IV, §§ 2-201-2-213, of this chapter was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-201. - Definition of city records. 
    All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound and video recordings, files, or other documents, regardless of physical form or characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed, or recorded by any city office or department or its lawful successor, or officials thereof in pursuance of law or ordinance or in the conduct, transaction, or performance of any business, duty, or function of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use, are hereby declared to be records of the City of Crockett, and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. Library materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit, or display and stocks of publications shall not constitute records for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-202. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records as defined in section 2-201 are hereby declared to be property of the City of Crockett. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 2, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-203. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Crockett to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 3, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-204. - Records management department established. 
    There is hereby established a records management department. The city manager is responsible for directing the department and coordinating records management operation among the city offices and departments. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 4, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-205. - Duties of records manager. 
    The records manager shall have the following duties, and others as assigned by the city manger. Duties assigned shall be records management activities. 
(1)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures. 
(2)  Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all city offices and departments, define and identify vital and permanent records, and establish retention periods for all records. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the originating office, but shall be as long as deemed necessary by either the records manager, the city attorney, or the city finance officer. 
(3)  Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed. 
(4)  Coordinate the citywide files management and records disposition programs and report annually to the city manager on program effectiveness in each city department. 
(5)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city offices and departments, by preparation of manuals of procedures and policies and by on-site consultation. 
(6)  Develop, disseminate, and coordinate files maintenance and records disposition procedures, including but not limited to those prescribed by this article, to meet the current and long-term information needs of the city. 
(7)  Train departmental records officers and other personnel in the fundamentals of records management and their duties in the records management program. 
(8)  Carry out at the proper time actions such as destruction, and transfers that are required by records schedules. 
(9)  Design and manage the operations of a records center for the low cost storage of inactive records. 
(10)  Establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment and supplies in all city offices and departments, and report to the city manager failure of any officer or department to comply with standards. Keep careful records of savings in equipment, supplies, and staff costs realized by each department of the city through implementation of the records management program. Report annually such cost savings to the city manager; the report shall include the amount of storage space and equipment released for other uses. 
(11)  Develop a citywide forms design and control system. 
(12)  Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city office and department to insure maximum availability of records for re-establishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense. 
(13)  Develop procedures to insure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. 
(14)  Protect privacy and assure availability of public information from records stored in records center; bring to attention of city manger any office not in compliance with laws or ordinances regarding public access to information or protection of privacy. 
(15)  Prepare and submit annually to the city manager the budget requirements of the records management department to enable it to fulfill the records management goals of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 5, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-206. - Responsibilities of city department heads. 
    All city office and department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective files operations, records transfers and dispositions, and other activities in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance within their areas of responsibility. They shall designate records officers within their offices and provide the records manager the names of such designees and of all file stations and files custodians under their supervision. Persons designated as records [officers shall report directly to the head of their department on matters] relating to the records management program and should have full access to all files in their department. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 6, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-207. - Responsibilities of records officers. 
    The records officer in each office and department is responsible for providing coordination between the records manager and personnel in his or her office to ensure that provisions of this article are complied with. This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records schedules within the office or department. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 7, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-208. - City offices to use records schedules. 
    All city offices and departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer, or otherwise dispose of records only according to such schedules. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 8, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-209. - Development of records retention and disposition schedules. 
    Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be submitted by the records manager to the city finance office and city attorney, who shall notify the records manager within ten (10) working days of his approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten-day period, if no objection has been submitted, the records schedule shall be adopted and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or other action. If objection is made, the records manager shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the office or department concerned, to the finance officer, and to the city attorney. 
    When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted, it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to destroy, transfer, or take other actions, and the city council hereby directs that such action be taken by the records manager, or under his supervision. The records manager shall notify the state librarian of intended destruction, as required by law, but no further notice to the city council or other city office shall be required. Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review to the city attorney and city finance officer in the same manner as the original retention periods. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 9, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-210. - One-time destruction of obsolete records. 
    Prior to adoption of records schedules for an office, one-time destruction of accumulated obsolete records of that office may be made by or under the supervision of the records manager. Prior to such destruction the records manager shall submit lists of records to be destroyed to the city finance officer and the city attorney, who shall give notice within ten (10) working days of any records they believe should not be destroyed, and such records shall be retained for a period suggested by either. The records manager shall also submit notice as required by law to the state librarian. Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no longer needed for administrative, legal, fiscal, or other research purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 10, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-211. - Records center. 
    The records center operation shall utilize one (1) or more buildings to store inactive records; to insure the security of such records from deterioration, theft, or damage during the period of storage; to permit fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records; and to provide facilities for a centralized program. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 11, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-212. - Preservation of permanent records. 
    The records manager shall develop procedures to insure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. The records manager shall provide housing under archival conditions for such records in the records center or in another municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use is restricted by law or regulation, are open to the public for research purposes. If city owned facilities are not available, the records manager shall arrange for the transfer of the records to the Texas State Library for perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby regional historical resource depositories, or shall make other arrangements for their permanent preservation not contrary to law or regulation. In no circumstances shall the permanent records of the city be transferred to private individuals, to private historical societies or museums, or to private colleges or universities. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 12, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 2-213. - Non-current records not to be maintained in office files. 
    Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any office of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records center or archives or the state library, or be destroyed, at such time such action is designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in current office files or equipment. 
(Ord. No. O-10-94, § 13, 10-17-94) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 20, 2012, repealed the former ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-69, and enacted a new ch. 4 as set out herein. The former ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1960 §§ 6-1-1-6-2-4; Ord. No. O-6-79, §§ 1-10, adopted June 4, 1979; Ord. No. O-8A-81, § 2, adopted Aug. 3, 1981; Ord. No. O-3-85, §§ 1.1-14.1, adopted Mar. 18, 1985; Ord. No. O-2A-86, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1986; Ord. No. O-9D-88, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 19, 1988; and Ord. No. O-11-96, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 4, 1996. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate animals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(14)-(17). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Animal control authority means the animal control officer or the police department. 
    Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
    Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Domestic animal shall include the following species: Dog, cat, horse, cow, pig, sheep, and goat. It does not include hybrid individuals resulting from crossing wild with domestic species. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for a period of three (3) days or more. 
    Owner means a person who has a right of property in an animal or who harbors any animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises for a period of three (3) days or more. 
    Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of the animal. 
    Pet animal shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, reptiles, and any other species of animal which are sold or retained as a household pets but shall not include any species of wild, exotic, or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
    Police department and animal control officer shall mean the reporting agents for the purposes of this article, whose duties consist of the following: 
(1)  Receiving all reports of animal bites and scratches to humans. 
(2)  Receiving all reports of suspected rabid animals. 
(3)  Investigation of all reported animal bites and scratches and suspected rabid animals. 
(4)  Ordering quarantine, if appropriate, of any animal which has exposed an individual or which may be rabid. 
(5)  Other duties as entailed by the text of this chapter. 
    Rabies vaccination shall mean the vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an antirabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas. 
    Running at large means an animal off the premises of the owner and not under the physical control of the owner or his authorized representative. An animal intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner shall be termed "running at large." An animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall not be deemed "running at large." 
    Secure means to take steps that a reasonable person would take to ensure a dog remains on the owner's property, including confining the dog in an enclosure that is capable of preventing the escape or release of the dog. 
    Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and 
(5)  In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the animal control authority. 
    Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization, without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
    Stray animal means any animal for which there is not an identifiable owner or harborer. 
    Wild animal refers to any mammal native to North America except the domestic species (dog, cat, horse, cow, pig, sheep and goat). 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-2. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Cruelty to animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or cause to be committed any act of cruelty, harassment, or torture to an animal, to cruelly beat an animal, to deprive an animal of necessary food, water, care or to otherwise treat any animal to a cruel or inhumane manner, or intentionally cause an animal to be mutilated or inhumanely killed. Ownership or the commission of such acts of cruelty on private property shall not be a justifiable defense for violation of this section. 
(b)  Poisoning. It shall be unlawful for any person to poison any domestic animal or place any toxic substance on public or private property in any manner whatsoever with the intent of poisoning any domestic animal. 
(c)  Abandoning animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any animal. 
(d)  Display or sale of immature animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, sell, barter, or give away any dyed or artificially colored baby chick, duckling, fowl, rabbit or other animal as pets, playthings, novelties or gifts. This section shall not be construed to prohibit their display by hatcheries, stores, dealers, or persons engaged in the business of selling such immature animals to be raised for food; but no such hatcheries, stores, dealers or persons shall sell or give away any dyed or artificially colored baby chick, duckling, fowl, rabbit or other animal as pets, playthings, novelties or gifts. 
(e)  Fighting animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate or encourage any dog or any other animal to fight with another of its own species or with another of a different species. It shall be unlawful for any person to train or keep any dog or other animal for the purpose of fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a place where any dog or other animal is permitted to fight for exhibition or for wager or for sport. 
(f)  The terms necessary food, water, care, or shelter means food, water, care or shelter required to maintain the animal in a state of good health. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-3. - Livestock running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any horse, mule, goat, cattle, sheep, swine, geese, chicken or fowl to run at large within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-4. - Keeping of swine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or business establishment or in any enclosure, pen or lot smaller than an acre of land, any swine. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have in his custody, possession or control within the city more than two (2) swine. 
(2)  The prohibition set forth in this section against keeping swine in an enclosure of less than one (1) acre shall not apply to operators of slaughter houses, packing plants, livestock sale or auction businesses or places of business holding swine for the purposes of sale or slaughter; however, it shall be unlawful for any such operator to have in his custody, control or possession any swine for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-5. - Distance from dwellings of facilities used for keeping livestock and fowl. 
    No enclosure, pen, stall or other facility used for keeping livestock or fowl shall be so located as to allow the livestock or fowl confined therein to come within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any dwelling. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-6. - Horses. 
(a)  No horse shall be kept in an enclosure, pen or lot smaller than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
(b)  No horse will be staked out at any time. 
(c)  When a horse is being ridden upon the city streets of Crockett, it is the rider's responsibility to immediately pick up the horse's dropped manure. 
(d)  No horse will be ridden down the middle of the street unless the horse is participating in a parade. Horses must be ridden on the paved shoulder. If a shoulder is not provided, the horse must be ridden on the edge of the roadway. 
(e)  No horse will be ridden upon the property of a business where food is sold. 
(f)  No horse will be kept on private real property of an individual unless the horse owner obtains permission from the property owner. 
(g)  All horses inside the City of Crockett, must have the proper and current vaccination for rabies, West Nile Virus and Coggins. 
(h)  All persons, when riding a horse, must have in their possession a copy of the horse's recent vaccinations for rabies, West Nile Virus and Coggins testing. 
(i)  No horse will be ridden between the hours thirty (30) minutes after sunset and sunrise inside the City of Crockett, unless the horse is being ridden in the Porth Ag-Arena during time of an event licensed by the city. 
(j)  No horse will be ridden in the downtown business district unless participating in a parade. 
(k)  While riding a horse, children under thirteen (13) years of age must be supervised and in the company of an adult. 
(l)  No horse will be allowed on any part of the Davy Crockett Memorial Park or I. T. Williams Park. 
(m)  All horses kept or ridden in the city shall be registered with the animal control officer with the location and marking of the horse. A telephone number shall also be registered. Any horse whose owner cannot be located will be impounded. The horse owner will be responsible to the city for the expense of the livestock handler and boarding. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-7. - Cattle. 
    No head of cattle shall be kept in an enclosure, pen or lot smaller than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. The shed for protection against the elements may be located on this plot. Each individual head of cattle that is kept on the same lot must be given an additional one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. The lot will be enclosed with suitable fencing, as may be determined by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-8. - Goats and sheep. 
    No goat or sheep shall be kept in an enclosure, pen or lot smaller than three hundred seventy-five (375) square feet. Each individual goat or sheep kept at the same lot must be given an additional three hundred seventy-five (375) square feet. The shed used for protection against the elements may be located on this plot. The lot will be enclosed with suitable fencing, as may be determined by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-9. - Fowl. 
    No fowl shall be kept in an enclosure, pen or lot smaller than five (5) square feet. Each additional fowl kept at the same lot must be given an additional five (5) square feet. The fowl house will be allowed to be a part of this area. Chicken wire shall be used as the fence material for fowl. The fowl house must be of such construction as will allow for ease in cleaning and airing. The fowl pen must also have a chicken wire roof over it to prevent fowl from escaping. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-10. - Diseased animal and fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or keep any animal or fowl infected with a disease which may contaminate other animals or fowl or which may constitute a health hazard. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-11. - Confinement of animal by owner of private premises; notice to animal control department. 
    If any animal is found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal temporarily until he can notify the animal control officer. When notified, it shall be the duty of the officer at once to cause such animal to be impounded as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-12. - Maintenance of pens and enclosures. 
(a)  All pens and enclosures wherein livestock, chickens, turkeys, geese, guineas, dogs, cats or other animals are kept shall be maintained in such a manner as not to become unsanitary or offensive to persons residing in the vicinity thereof and so as not to breed flies or in any manner cause any injury to the health of any person residing in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure. 
(b)  The determination that such a pen or enclosure is unsanitary or offensive to any person, that such pen or enclosure is being maintained or kept so as to breed flies; or that such a pen or enclosure is maintained in any manner as to cause any injury to the health of the public residing in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure, shall be made by the animal control officer. Such determination shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-13. - Cats and dogs; restrictions on keeping. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
(1)  "At large" shall mean any cat or dog which is off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, chain, cord or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness. 
(2)  "Cat" shall mean both male and female of the cat (feline) species over six (6) months of age. 
(3)  "Dog" shall mean both male and female of the dog (canine) species over six (6) months of age. 
(4)  "Owner" shall mean any person who owns, keeps or harbors a cat or a dog. 
(b)  Limit on cats. No person shall harbor on his or her premises more than five (5) cats at any one (1) time. 
(c)  Limit on dogs. No person shall harbor on his or her premises more than three (3) dogs at any one (1) time. 
(d)  No person shall permit a cat or dog to run at large within the city. Any cat or dog found running at large in violation of this subsection shall be taken up and impounded. 
(e)  Impoundment fees. Impoundment fees shall be the same as those specified in section 4-48. 
(f)  Fines for cats and dogs running at large. The following is the schedule of fines for violation of the provisions of this section. The fines shall be mandatory for each offense, and each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense: 
(1)  Dog, cat or any animal at large, first offense ..... $150.00 
(2)  Dog, cat or any animal at large, second offense ..... $175.00 
(3)  Dog, cat or any animal at large, third offense ..... $200.00 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-14. - Leaving animal unattended in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health or safety. Any police officer or animal control officer is authorized to use reasonable force, including the breaking of a window, to remove an animal from the vehicle whenever the officer reasonably believes that the animal's health or safety is, or soon will be, endangered, and said animal shall be impounded. An officer who removes an animal in accordance with this subsection is not liable for any resulting property damage. Outside air temperatures above seventy-five (75) degrees Fahrenheit shall serve as prima facie evidence for such endangerment. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-15. - Staking and grazing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stake any livestock at any time for the purpose of grazing. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-16. - Interference with police department or animal control officer, and right of entry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder, or prevent the police or animal control officer or their authorized representatives, in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed, or to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any officer or designated agent of the city charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter is hereby authorized to enter upon any lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animals or fowl found therein in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-17. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof such person shall be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day of such violation shall be a separate and complete offense. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROL OF ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-18. - Animal running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owned, kept, or harbored to run at large, as is defined in section 4-1 of this chapter. The police or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto privately owned property in pursuit of an animal at large. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-19. - Nuisance declared. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to harbor any dog, cat, or other pet animal which by any sound or cry or other activity shall disturb the peace, comfort, or property of the inhabitants of the neighborhood, and such disturbance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-20. - Confinement during estrus. 
    Any unspayed female dog or cat in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure, and said area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat running at large may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer shall be in violation of this section, and the dog or cat will then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
DIVISION 2. - DOGS THAT ATTACK PERSONS OR ARE A DANGER TO PERSONS 

Sec. 4-21. - Application to certain real property. 
    A person's real property includes property the person is entitled to possess or occupy under a lease or other agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-22. - Seizure of a dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(a)  The municipal court shall order the animal control authority to seize a dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
(1)  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the city attorney or a peace officer, that the dog has caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
(2)  On a showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to the person as stated in the complaint. 
(b)  The animal control authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-23. - Hearing. 
(a)  The court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling the person. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The court shall divest all ownership and property rights in the dog from the owner, vest title in the City of Crockett, Texas and order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(e)  The court may divest all ownership and property rights in the dog from the owner, vest title in the City of Crockett, Texas and order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(f)  The court may not divest ownership and property rights in the dog from the owner, vest title in the City of Crockett, Texas or order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling the person and: 
(1)  The dog was being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and: 
a.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided notice of the presence of a dog; and 
b.  The injured person was at least eight (8) years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite or mauling occurred. 
(2)  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight (8) years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite or mauling occurred; 
(3)  The attack, bite or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog was defending a person from an assault or a person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight (8) years of age, the attack, bite or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight (8) years of age from entering. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § I, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 4-24. - Destruction of dog. 
    The destruction of a dog under this chapter must be performed by: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian; 
(2)  Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or 
(3)  Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
DIVISION 3. - DOGS AND COYOTES THAT ARE A DANGER TO ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-25. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter: 
(1)  " Dog or coyote " includes a crossbreed between a dog and a coyote. 
(2)  "Livestock" includes exotic livestock as defined by V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, § 161.001. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-26. - Dogs or coyotes that attack animals. 
(a)  A dog or coyote that is attacking, is about to attack, or has recently attacked livestock, domestic animals, or fowl may be killed by: 
(1)  Any person witnessing the attack; or 
(2)  The attacked animal's owner or a person acting on behalf of the owner if the owner or person has knowledge of the attack. 
(b)  A person who kills a dog or coyote as provided by this section is not liable for damages to the owner, keeper, or person in control of the dog or coyote. 
(c)  A person who discovers on the person's property a dog or coyote known or suspected of having killed livestock, domestic animals, or fowl may detain or impound the dog or coyote and return it to its owner or deliver the dog or coyote to the local animal control authority. The owner of the dog or coyote is liable for all costs incurred in the capture and care of the dog or coyote and all damage done by the dog or coyote. 
(d)  The owner, keeper or person in control of a dog or coyote that is known to have attacked livestock, domestic animals, or fowl shall control the dog or coyote in a manner approved by the animal control authority. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-27. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-28. - Requirements for owner of dangerous dog. 
(a)  Not later than the thirtieth day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure; and 
(3)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control authority. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the thirtieth day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(c)  If, on application of any person, the municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by section 4-31, that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with subsection (a) of this section or section 4-32, the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions. 
(d)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog, as set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  The court shall divest all ownership and property rights in the dog from the owner, vest title in the City of Crockett, Texas and order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with subsection (a) or section 4-32 before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority. The court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (a) and section 4-32 before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority. 
(f)  The court may divest all ownership and property rights in the dog from the owner, vest title in the City of Crockett, Texas and order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located, with the exercise of due diligence, before the fifteenth day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack described in section 4-1; 
(2)  The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog; or 
(3)  The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the court may not order the destruction of a dog during the pendency of appeal under V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 822.0424. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-12E-15 , § I, 12-7-15; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § II, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 4-29. - Determination that dog is dangerous. 
(a)  If a person reports an incident described by section 4-1, the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner in writing of the determination. 
(b)  An owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the municipal court. 
(c)  To file an appeal to the municipal court, the owner must: 
(1)  File a notice of appeal of the animal control authority's dangerous dog determination with the court; 
(2)  Attach a copy of the determination from the animal control authority; and 
(3)  Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal control authority by mailing the notice through the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-12E-15 , § II, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 4-30. - Reporting of incident. 
(a)  The city elects to be governed by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 822.0422. 
(b)  A person may report an incident described by section 4-1 to the municipal court. The owner of a dog shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the fifth day after the date on which the owner receives notice that the report has been filed. The authority may provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(c)  If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by subsection (b), the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. The owner shall pay the cost incurred in seizing the dog, as set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  The court shall determine, after notice and hearing as provided in section 4-31, whether the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(e)  The court, after determining that the dog is a dangerous dog, may order the animal control authority to continue to impound the dangerous dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders disposition of the dog under section 4-31 and the dog is returned to the owner or destroyed. 
(f)  The owner shall pay all costs and fees assessed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-31. - Hearing on appeal. 
(a)  The court, on receiving a report of an incident under section 4-1 or on application under section 4-29, shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the owner of the dog has complied with section 4-28. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner described by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 822.0424. 
(e)  The court shall determine the estimated costs to house and care for the impounded animal during the appeal process and shall set the amount of bond for an appeal adequate to cover those estimated costs. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-12E-15 , § III, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 4-32. - Registration. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner: 
(1)  Presents proof of: 
a.  Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 4-28; 
b.  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and 
c.  The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and 
(2)  Pays an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. 
(c)  If the owner of a registered dangerous dog sells the dog or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the fourteenth day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the animal control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. 
(d)  An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-33. - Attack by dangerous dog. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(b)  An offense under this section is punishable by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-34. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with section 4-28 or section 4-32. 
(b)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-35. - Defense. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, ch. 17.02. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-36. - Animals prohibited. 
(a)  Wild, exotic animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep, maintain, harbor or permit in the city any monkey, other nonhuman primate, skunk, raccoon, jaguar, leopard, lynx, tiger, lion, ocelot, bobcat, cheetah, mountain lion, wildcat, panther, bear, wolf, coyote, fox, other carnivorous animal or poisonous reptile. 
(b)  Endangered species. It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep, maintain, harbor, or permit in the city an endangered species of animal as defined by the United States Government. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park. 
(2)  A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research. 
(3)  A circus duly authorized to do business in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-37. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 4-38. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  Vaccinations required. Ever owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. Every horse owner shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. Annual revaccination shall be required thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this provision within ten (10) days after having moved into the city. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of the section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-39. - Rabies control authority. 
    In the City of Crockett, the rabies control authority shall be the Crockett Police Department or the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-40. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof, a certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Owner's name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  Animal identification; species, age, sex, size (in lbs.), predominant breed, and colors. 
(3)  Vaccine used, producer, expiration date and serial number. 
(4)  Date vaccinated. 
(5)  Rabies tag number. 
(6)  Veterinarian's signature and license number. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-41. - Rabies tags. 
(a)  Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 4-40, the owner of the dog shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance and the name of the issuing veterinarian and his address. 
(b)  In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in subsection (a), the owner of the dog shall obtain a duplicate tag. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-42. - Proof of vaccination. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-43. - Harboring unvaccinated animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided herein, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-44. - Animals exposed to rabies. 
    Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge to the police department or animal control officer, giving any information which may be required by it. For any animal known to have been, or suspected of being exposed to rabies, the following rules apply: 
(1)  Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues must be humanely killed. 
(2)  Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal or its fresh tissues must be given a booster rabies vaccination and placed in strict isolation for three (3) months. 
(3)  These provisions apply only to animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is available. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-45. - Reporting bites from animals susceptible to rabies; related procedures. 
(a)  Duty to report. Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the police department or animal control officer. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for such bites shall, within twelve (12) hours, report such treatment to the local health authority or his agent, giving name, age, sex, and precise location of the bitten person or persons and such other information as the police or animal control officer may require. 
(b)  Exclusions. Human bites from birds and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirement of this section. 
(c)  Suspected rabies. Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the police department or animal control officer stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known or suspect rabid animal bites or attacks a domestic animal, such incident shall also be reported as required above. 
(d)  Confinement of dogs and cats. Any dog or cat which has bitten a person shall be observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the police department. Confinement shall be by impoundment in any Crockett veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs or cats whose owners cannot be located shall be confined to a local veterinary hospital. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall, on demand, produce said dog or cat for impoundment, prescribed in this section. Refusal to produce a dog or cat for impoundment constitutes a violation of this section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation. 
(e)  Removal of dogs and cats from confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized, without consent of the police or animal control officer. 
(f)  Procedures for other animal bites. Procedures concerning bites from other animals shall be discussed with the animal control officer, or the Texas Department of Health for proper disposition. Any wild animal which has bitten a person must be caught and killed and the brain immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination. An exception to this rule may be allowed for large, exotic, or valuable zoo species, which by reason of their close confinement would be unlikely rabies vectors. Birds and reptiles are not transmitters of the rabies and should not be submitted for laboratory examination for rabies. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
DIVISION 6. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-46. - [Animal owned or harbored in violation.] 
    Any animal owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other city ordinance or law of the State of Texas shall be taken into custody by a policeman or the animal control officer and impounded. Stray animals shall be similarly impounded. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-47. - [Impoundment, violation.] 
    Any peace officer or animal control officer may, and shall, take up and impound any animal found within the city limits in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-48. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  The following shall be the fees charged: 
(1)  For taking up and impounding per head ..... $30.00 
(2)  For taking care of animals per head per day, exclusive of the day of impoundment ..... $10.00 
(3)  The amount of charges made by any veterinarian, where required. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the fee in subsection (a)(2) above, the date shall begin at 12:01 a.m. after the date of impoundment. The full fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for all or any portion of that day and any day thereafter. 
(c)  No animal shall be released to the owner until all of the above impoundment fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-49. - Sale of impounded animal; notice of sale; disposition of proceeds. 
    The animal control officer shall sell any animal impounded under chapter 4, Animals and Fowl, of the Crockett Code or under any other legal authority at public auction for cash after having held the animal for at least five (5) days and after having published public notice of the item, terms and place of sale in a weekly or semi-weekly newspaper published in the city, which notice shall appear one (1) time at least five (5) full days prior to the date of sale and shall describe the animal impounded and state that the animal will be sold to defray costs if it is not reclaimed and the costs paid before the date of sale. If not reclaimed by such day, the owner is divested of all ownership and property rights in the animal, title to the animal is vested in the City of Crockett, Texas, and the animal control officer shall sell the animal at public auction between the hours at 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on such day to the highest bidder; and after deducting all expenses of the sale and of taking up and keeping of such animal shall return the balance of the proceeds, if any, to the owner of the animal. If the owner is unknown, the balance shall be paid into the city treasury. Any time within six (6) months after the sale, the owner may apply to the city administrator, and upon satisfactory proof of his ownership, he shall be entitled to receive the amount paid into the treasury on account of such sale. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § III, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 4-50. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
    If any animal impounded under the provisions of chapter 4, Animals and Fowl, of the Crockett Code or under any other legal authority is found to be infected with rabies, or if the animal is seriously injured, or if the animal control officer has determined it is not saleable, or if it cannot be sold as provided in the preceding section, it shall forthwith be destroyed in a humane manner. On such determination by the animal control officer, all ownership and property rights to the animal are divested from the owner, and title is vested in the City of Crockett, Texas. All decisions as to the condition or saleability of animals shall be made by the animal control officer, after seeking competent advice if same be necessary, except that no horse, cattle, mule, sheep, or goat shall be destroyed under this section without approval of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § IV, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 4-51. - Removal of animals from animal shelter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from an animal shelter without the consent of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-52. - Keeping of records. 
    It shall be the duty of the Police Department and Animal Control Officer of the City of Crockett to maintain such records as deemed necessary to the enforcement of all provisions of this chapter and have those records available for display to the city council, or to the public at any time during regular business hours of the police department. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-53. - Record of impoundment and sale. 
    The animal control authority shall keep a record for at least three (3) years, giving the description of all animals impounded, the date of sale, and the amount realized for such animal, and the name and address of the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-54. - Injured animals. 
    Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If the injured animal is treated or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses of the treatment and impoundment; however, disposition may be made according to section 4-50. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12) 
Sec. 4-55. - Disposition of diseased animal. 
    Any animal taken into custody by the animal control authority, except animals which have inflicted human bites during the preceding ten (10) days, that are visibly affected with any sign of communicable disease other than rabies which are being held at the impounding facility, may instead of being impounded, be humanely destroyed, provided that any animal exhibiting symptoms of rabies must be handled in a manner prescribed by this chapter. The owner is divested of all ownership and property rights in the animal and title is vested in the City of Crockett, Texas in the animal to be humanely destroyed under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § V, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 4-56. - Adoptions. 
(a)  An individual may adopt a dog or a cat in the possession of the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  The animal has been classified as adoptable by the animal control officer; 
(2)  The prospective adopter has proper facilities to care for the animal; 
(3)  The prospective adopter obtains the necessary vaccinations; 
(4)  The prospective adopter pays the applicable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a dog and ten dollars ($10.00) for a cat; and 
(5)  The prospective adopter agrees to have the animal neutered if a male, or spayed if a female, within thirty (30) days after adoption. The animal control officer shall allow additional time in the case of dogs or cats less than six (6) months of age. 
(b)  The animal control officer may refuse to allow a person to adopt a cat or dog when he has reason to believe the person adopting: 
(1)  Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal as required by this Code; or 
(2)  Wants the dog or cat for the purpose of resale or for other than pet ownership; or 
(3)  That the cat or dog would be a hazard to humans or other animals. 
(c)  Adoption under the terms of this section results in the immediate termination of all ownership and property rights of the owner to the animal and vesting of title to the animal in the adopter. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. O-08-16 , § VI, 8-1-16) 
Secs. 4-57-4-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, § 7-1 et seq.; flood hazard prevention, § 8-1 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 16-1 et seq.; construction and maintenance of driveways, § 16-26 et seq.; subdivisions, § 17-1 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Mechanical code adopted. 
    The International Mechanical Code, as now written and hereinafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the International Mechanical Code are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Mechanical Code is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the International Mechanical Code and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-11D-79, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5-97, § I, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-02-13, § II, 2-4-13) 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes: building, § 5-16; housing, § 5-76; electrical, § 5-131; plumbing, § 5-271; gas, § 5-356; fire prevention, § 7-16. 
Secs. 5-2-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Building permits, § 11.02. 
Cross reference- Application of building code to substandard buildings, § 5-426. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-16. - Building code adopted; penalty for violation thereof. 
(a)  The International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as now written and hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas for commercial buildings, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. A copy of the current version of the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council is now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council is, from time to time, amended, a copy of the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the building code adopted by subsection (a). Any such violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  The International Building Code does not apply to the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring and related components. 
(d)  Commercial means a building for the use or occupation of people for: (1) a public purpose or economic gain; or (2) a residence, if the building is a multi-family residence that is not defined as residential by this section. 
(e)  Residential means having the character of a detached one-family or two-family dwelling or a multiple single-family dwelling that is not more than three stories high with separate means of egress, including the accessory structures of the dwelling and that does not have the character of a facility used for the accommodation of transient guests or a structure in which medical, rehabilitative or assistive living services are provided in connection with the occupancy of the structure. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5-97, § II, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-09D-05, § I, 9-6-05) 
Charter reference- Authority of city council to adopt building code, § 3.11(l). 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes: mechanical, § 5-1; housing, § 5-76; electrical, § 5-131; plumbing, § 5-271; gas, § 5-356; fire prevention, § 7-16. 
Sec. 5-16.1 - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted; penalty for violation thereof. 
(a)  The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings Promulgated by the International Code Council, as now written and hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings Promulgated by the International Code Council are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings Promulgated by the International Code Council is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings Promulgated by the International Code Council and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the building code adopted by subsection (a). Any such violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-01-02, § I, 1-7-02) 
Sec. 5-17. - Liability of offices, employees, etc. 
    Any officer, employee, or member of the board of adjustment, charged with the enforcement of this article and the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of this article or the building codes adopted by section 5-16 and 5-16.1 shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 5, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-01-02, § II, 1-7-02) 
Sec. 5-18. - Terms in building code defined. 
    Whenever the following words and phrases are used in the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1, they shall have the following meanings: 
    Corporate counsel shall mean the city attorney. 
    Municipality shall mean the City of Crockett. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 7, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-01-02, § III, 1-7-02) 
Sec. 5-19. - Permit fees. 
    The fees for permits required by the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1 shall be in accordance with said codes. 
(Ord. No. O-01-02, § IV, 1-7-02) 
Cross reference- Permit required for installation of electrical sign, § 5-137. 
Sec. 5-20. - Determination of cost of construction and value of building. 
    The estimated cost of the construction of a building in order to determine building permit fees shall be based on the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1, and the value of the building will be determined in the following two (2) steps: 
(1)  The building official will first determine the type of construction based on architectural plans, the specifications for the building and information acquired from the owner or contractor. 
(2)  Using current data, the building official shall determine the cost per square foot by using a building valuation which is based on the type of construction and occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O-6D-82, § 2, 6-7-82; Ord. No. O-01-02, § V, 1-7-02) 
Sec. 5-21. - Fire limits established. 
    For the purposes of this article, the fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows: 
Beginning at the county courthouse and extending for a radius of three-fourths of a mile in all directions from the courthouse and at such other places within the city as the fire marshal designates. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 8, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-22. - Construction within fire limits. 
    All buildings and structures erected within the fire limits shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1. 
(Ord. No. O-01-02, § VI, 1-7-02) 
Charter reference- Power of city council to establish fire limits and regulate kind and character of buildings therein, § 3.11(k). 
Sec. 5-23. - Proof of asbestos survey. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for the demolition or renovation of any public building in the City of Crockett, Texas, the city must be furnished a current asbestos survey which complies with all applicable regulations of the Texas Department of Health and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term public building shall be held to mean all buildings which are subject to public occupancy or to which the general public has access, other than private residences and apartment buildings with no more than four (4) dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. O-1B-97, § 1, 1-27-97) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-1B-97, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 1997, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 5-21 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 5-24-5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 5-36. - Office established; scope of duties. 
    The office of building official is hereby created and the building official shall be the executive official in charge of the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-37. - Appointment, term, removal. 
    The building official shall be appointed by the mayor. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after a full opportunity has been given him to be heard on the specific charges. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-38. - Absence, disability. 
    During temporary absence or disability of the building official the mayor shall designate an acting building official. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-39. - Qualifications. 
    The building official shall be in good health, physically capable of making the examination and inspections required of his office. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-40. - General duties. 
    The general duties of the building official shall be: 
(1)  To receive the applications, issue the permits and furnish the certificates required by the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1. 
(2)  To examine the premises for which permits have been issued and make the necessary inspection to see that the provisions of this Code and state law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safety. 
(3)  To enforce all provisions of the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1. 
(4)  When requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, to make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building codes and render written reports on the same. 
(5)  To enforce compliance with this Code and state law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, and to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures. 
(6)  To issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 4, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-09D-05, § II, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 5-41. - Duties regarding inspections. 
    Inspections required under the provisions of the building codes adopted by sections 5-16 and 5-16.1 shall be made by the building official or his duly appointed assistant. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the building codes shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 4, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-09D-05, § III, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 5-42. - Duties regarding records and reports. 
(a)  The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, permits issued, certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. 
(b)  All records coming within the terms of this article shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons during normal office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his written consent. 
(c)  The building official shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-43. - Right of entry. 
    The building official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. O-11A-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-44-5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-61-5-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 5-76. - Housing code adopted; penalty for violation thereof. 
    The Standard Housing Code, as now written and hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the Standard Housing Code are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the Standard Housing Code is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the Standard Housing Code and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the housing code adopted by subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 2, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5-97, § III, 5-19-97) 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes: mechanical, § 5-1; building, § 5-16; electrical, § 5-131; plumbing, § 5-271; gas, § 5-356; fire prevention, § 7-16. 
Sec. 5-77. - Establishment of the office of housing official; general authority. 
(a)  The office of housing official is hereby created. 
(b)  The housing official shall be responsible for the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-78. - Appointment of housing official; term; removal. 
    The housing official shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation of the city council. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given to him to be heard on specific charges. 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-79. - Duties of the housing official. 
    It shall be the duty of the housing official to enforce all the provisions of the housing code adopted by section 5-76. 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-80. - Right of entry of housing official. 
    The housing official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-81. - Board of housing appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of housing appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation of the city council. One (1) member shall be appointed to serve one (1) year, two (2) members to serve two (2) years, and two (2) members to serve three (3) years. Thereafter, each member shall serve four (4) years. 
(b)  The board of housing appeals shall act by majority vote of the members present. 
(c)  The board of housing appeals shall have the power and be required to hold public hearings in deciding appeals where it is alleged there is an error in law or fact in any order or decision of the housing official in the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-11C-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-82-5-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAIR HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Sections 5-96-5-108 have been deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. O-6-96, adopted June 17, 1996. Formerly said sections pertained to fair housing and derived from §§ 1-13 of Ord. No. O-12-90, adopted Dec. 17, 1990. Sections 1-14 of Ord. No. O-6-96 have been included herein as §§ 5-96-5-109 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 5-96. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
    Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 5-98, 5-99 or 5-100 of this division. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single individual or group of individuals living together under one (1) common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
    Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
    Physical or mental disability means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities. 
    Physical or mental impairment shall include: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or conditions, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one (1) or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
    Senior adult means a person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 1, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-97. - Interpretation and effect. 
    This division shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them by Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this division, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 2, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-98. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 5-101, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(3)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(6)  For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 3, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-99. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of: 
(1)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of the present or prospective owner, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such a loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 4, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-100. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 5, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-101. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 5-98 hereof all transactions involving: 
(1)  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such units as his residence. 
(2)  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one (1) family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four (4) such rooms are offered. 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this division (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title); and 
c.  The owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at the time of the sale; and 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time. 
e.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental or physical disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all such persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(e)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(f)  Nothing in this division shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one (1) or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as a parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 6, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-102. - Fair housing administrator. 
    The mayor shall appoint and the council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as "administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this division. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 7, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-103. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI Office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(c)  The administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local, state, or federal court. 
(d)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. 
(f)  All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(g)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 8, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-104. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  If the administrator determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaints, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this division. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violations be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 9, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-105. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This division is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 10, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-106. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this division, because he or they have exercised his or their rights under this division, or enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because he or they have made a charge, testified or assisted in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 11, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-107. - Cooperation with the secretary of housing and urban development. 
    The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 12, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-108. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this division, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Ord. No. O-6-96, § 13, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 5-109. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of seventy-five (75) days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this division may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Ord. No. O-6-95, § 14, 6-17-96) 
Secs. 5-110-5-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, § 7-1 et seq.; registration of retail electric providers, § 13-100 et seq.; tax on sale of electricity, § 18-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved or approval shall mean inspected and accepted by the electrical inspector as having met the requirements of this article. 
    Board shall mean the five-member electrical board created by this article. 
    Commercial building shall mean any building, structure, or premises that advertises as or conducts a business or occupation dealing with merchandise or services, including, but not limited to, offices and stores. 
    Dwelling shall mean the abiding place of one (1) or more persons in which the use and management of sleeping quarters, appliances for cooking, ventilating, heating and lighting are under the control of such person or persons. 
    Electrical inspector shall mean the chief electrical inspector and his authorized assistants. 
    Electrical work shall mean any act in connection with the installing, altering, repairing, and/or maintaining of electric wires, conduits, apparatus or other electrical installations designed or capable of carrying electrical energy, which act ordinarily requires the use of tools. 
    Journeyman electrician shall mean any person licensed as a journeyman electrician in compliance with the requirements of this article who works for and under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician and who does not hold himself out to the public as being qualified to contract for the doing of electrical work. 
    Master electrician shall mean any person licensed as a master electrician in compliance with the requirements of this article who holds himself out to the public as being qualified to do the kind of electrical work or to contract for the doing of electrical work, by himself or by the employment of journeyman electricians which his license authorizes him to do. 
    Technical words. Words used in the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 shall have the meanings assigned to them by this section. Words relating to buildings and building use, when not otherwise separately defined, shall have the meanings which conform to the meanings set out in the provisions of this chapter or other building ordinances of the city, and in the absence of such definition they shall have their usual meaning. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-117-5-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRIC CODE 

Sec. 5-131. - Electric code adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association, as now written and hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5-97, § IV, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-01-02, § VII, 1-7-02) 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes; mechanical, § 5-1; building, § 5-16; housing, § 5-76; plumbing, § 5-271; gas, § 5-356; fire prevention, § 7-16; application of electrical code to substandard buildings, § 5-426. 
Sec. 5-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-5-97, § V, adopted May 19, 1997, repealed former § 5-132 of the Code, which pertained to amendments to the electrical code and derived unamended from the original Code. 
Sec. 5-133. - Minimum standards; interpretation. 
    All electrical construction, materials, appliances, motors, heating devices, and apparatus used in connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the city shall conform to the rules and requirements of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131; however, necessity, good service and improved results often require larger sizes of wire, more branch circuits, and better types of equipment than the minimum which is specified in the electrical code. Therefore, the electrical inspector shall have the responsibility and authority for making interpretations of the rules, for deciding upon the approval of equipment, materials, construction and for granting the special permission contemplated in a number of the rules and where necessary, he shall follow the electrical code procedure for securing official interpretations of the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 8, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-02-15, § I, adopted Feb. 2, 2015, repealed § 5-134 entitled "Additional wiring standards", which derived from Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 13, adopted Nov. 19, 1979. 
Sec. 5-135. - Meter loop equipment. 
(a)  No meter loop shall be placed in a washroom, toilet room, storage closet, or carport, garage or any similar location, nor over plumbing fixtures, machinery or other obstructions. 
(b)  All buildings shall have meter loops and disconnects grouped at an outside location accessible to meter readers and testers at all times. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 12, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-136. - Rewiring when structure is converted to commercial use. 
    At any time a change of occupancy from residential to commercial occurs, the structure shall be completely rewired in conduit to meet the standards of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 14, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-137. - Signs. 
    No signs or neon tubing shall be installed until a permit has been issued. A building permit is required for the sign and an electrical permit is required for the wiring. A licensed electrician must connect the sign to the power supply. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 15, 11-19-79) 
Cross reference- Electrical permits generally, § 5-196 et seq. 
Sec. 5-138. - Compliance required. 
    No electrical work shall be approved unless the electrical work is in strict conformity with the electrical code adopted by section 5-131, and unless such electrical work is in conformity with the approved methods of construction for the safety of life and property. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-139. - Discontinuance of service upon noncompliance. 
    Upon any person failing to comply with this article, the electrical inspector shall have the authority, after due notice, to discontinue electric current in the locality concerned. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 17, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-140. - Determination of prevailing provisions. 
    When approved methods are not specifically covered by this article, the provisions of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 shall be prima facia evidence of such approved methods. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 in the event of conflicting provisions. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-141. - Violations. 
    Any person who, as owner, agent, servant, lessee or otherwise, violates, disobeys, or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the execution of, or violates any provisions of this article or the electrical code adopted by section 5-131, or who occupies or maintains any building or structure in which the wiring and appliances are in violation thereof, shall be in violation of this Code. Any electrical installations erected or altered in violation of this article or the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 shall be condemned and removed at the expense of the person erecting or altering the same. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-142-5-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR 

Sec. 5-156. - Office created; appointment; qualifications; compensation; assistants. 
    There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector who shall be appointed by the city administrator, subject to the confirmation of the city council. The electrical inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be versed in the approved methods of electrical construction for safety of life and property and the National Electrical Code. He shall receive such compensation as the city council may decide. The electrical inspector may appoint assistants when authorized to do so by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-157. - General duties. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the duty and is hereby authorized, empowered and directed as follows: 
(1)  To enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To issue permits and collect fees. 
(3)  To enter any house or premises to examine any electric wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment therein, during all reasonable hours. 
(4)  To order the electric service disconnected where improper or defective wiring exists or where electrical construction or equipment has been installed without a permit as required by this article. 
(5)  To order compliance with the provisions of this article where a change of occupancy occurs in a building which requires changes or alterations to existing wiring. 
(6)  To disconnect electrical services in case of emergency. 
(7)  To attach to electrical equipment or meters any official notice to prevent the use of electricity. 
(8)  To order all persons to cease and desist doing any work being done without a permit or where such work is in violation of this article. 
(9)  To order special rulings to govern electrical work or construction for a particular occupancy, building, or installation not covered by this article or the electrical code adopted by section 5-131. 
(10)  To require, when deemed necessary, plans, specifications, and a complete feeder layout of large or special electrical installations. 
(11)  To exercise all other powers reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-158. - Periodic inspection of suspected unsafe wiring; correction of condition. 
    The electrical inspector shall make a thorough inspection of all electrical work, from time to time, where such electrical work appears to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition or appears to interfere with the work of the fire department. The electrical inspector shall notify the person owning, using or operating such electrical work to place it in a safe, secure and noninterfering condition. Any person failing, neglecting or refusing, within a reasonable time to make the necessary repairs or changes and have the necessary work completed within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code and every day which shall elapse after the expiration of such reasonable time until such wires and apparatus are repaired, removed or changed as required by the electrical inspector, shall be considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-159. - Interference with electrical inspector. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector in the discharge of his duties or to prevent or in any manner attempt to prevent him from carrying out his duties. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-160-5-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL BOARD 

Sec. 5-171. - Established; appointment. 
    There is hereby established a board to be referred to as the electrical board of adjustments and appeals, which board shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-172. - Composition. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall consist of five (5) members. The membership shall be composed of two (2) electricians, one (1) builder, one (1) electric company employee and one (1) member at large from the local community. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-173. - Terms of members. 
    Of the members first appointed to the electrical board of adjustments and appeals, two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, and thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-174. - Vacancies; absence from meetings. 
    Vacancies on the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the city council render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-175. - Quorum; voting. 
    Three (3) members of the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this article or in modifying an order of the electrical inspector, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three (3) affirmative votes shall be required. A board member shall not act in any case in which he has a personal interest. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-176. - Secretary of board; duties. 
    The electrical inspector shall act as secretary of the electrical board of adjustments and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-177. - Rules of procedure; meetings. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 or this article. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-178. - Right of appeal to board. 
    Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 or by any decision or ruling of the electrical inspector under this article shall have the right to make an appeal to the electrical board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-179. - Advisory responsibility of the board. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall submit to the city council such recommendations for the improvement and revision of this article as it may from time to time deem necessary and proper in light of the development of new materials, methods or techniques which would result in better and more economical installations. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-180. - Use of new materials or methods. 
    All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in this article or the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 shall be fully supported by factual evidence, or prior approval, from a recognized testing agency or an impartial qualified authority acceptable to the electrical board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-181. - Establishing licensing requirements. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall establish and prepare in writing, and the electrical inspector shall keep a copy of requirements which must be met by each applicant desiring to obtain an electricians license. The written requirements shall include a procedure for administering examinations and shall set forth each instance, if any, where the taking and passing of an examination is not required. The board shall also establish rules for license renewals. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-182. - Power to suspend licenses. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power to suspend licenses required by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-183. - Preparation of list of fees. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall establish and prepare a written list of fees for examinations, licenses, permits, inspections, and for such other purposes as the board deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-184-5-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 5-196. - Required. 
    No installation, alteration, or removal shall be made in or of the wiring of any building or structure for light, heat or power or to increase the load of energy carried by wires or equipment, nor shall any building or structure be wired for electric lights, apparatus, motors, appliances, or heating devices nor alterations made thereto without a written permit therefor being first obtained from the electrical inspector by the person having direct charge of the installation. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Cross reference- Permit required for installation of electrical signs, § 5-136. 
Sec. 5-197. - Applications. 
    Applications for permits shall be made in writing and must be presented in person during normal inspection department hours and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The date. 
(2)  The property owner. 
(3)  The name of the applicant. 
(4)  The address where the work is to be done. 
(5)  A description of the work to be done. 
(6)  Other information deemed necessary by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-198. - Eligibility for permits. 
    The following persons shall be eligible for issuance of electrical permits: 
(1)  A licensed and bonded master electrician or two (2) appointed employees to act as his agent. This provision is intended only as a convenience to master electricians in handling ordinary electrical work and shall not be construed as making delivery of the permit to any such agent mandatory upon the electrical inspector. 
(2)  A homestead owner performing electrical work with his own hands in a dwelling owned by him and registered in the tax rolls as his homestead; however, before performing such work, he shall obtain from the electrical inspector a permit and pay the necessary fees. Any person who obtains a homeowner's permit and allows any person other than a licensed master electrician to perform or supervise any electrical work under such permit shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-199. - Fees. 
    The fees for electrical permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for any one (1) item which requires a one (1) trip inspection. 
(2)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a temporary pole. 
(3)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection for remodeling or additions to existing structures. 
(4)  Seventy dollars ($70.00) per inspection for a new residential or new other building installation. 
(5)  Seventy dollars ($70.00) per inspection for a new commercial installation. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-82, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No. O-10-02, § I, 10-7-02; Ord. No. O-03-14, § I, 3-17-14) 
Secs. 5-200-5-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 5-211. - Notification of readiness for inspection; duty to inspect. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring, installation or alteration in any building or structure of light, heat, power, appliance or apparatus, it shall be the duty of the person having direct charge of the same to notify the electrical inspector who shall as early as possible, inspect the wiring, installation, appliance, and apparatus. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 7, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-212. - Certificate of inspection. 
    If the inspection required by section 5-211 results in a finding that the installation was installed, altered and constructed in compliance with the permit and in accordance with the requirements of this article, the electrical inspector shall execute a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of the inspection and the result of his examination, but no such certificate shall be issued unless the electric wiring, motors, heating devices, appliances, and apparatus are in strict compliance with the letter and spirit of this article, nor shall current be turned on to such installation, equipment, appliance, motors, heating device, and apparatus until the certificate is issued. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 7, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-213. - Defective or incomplete installations. 
(a)  When a permit holder is given notice that defects exist in his electrical work, he shall make the corrections promptly. Failure to make such within ten (10) days shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(b)  When any electrical work is found incomplete or unsatisfactory after an inspection has been requested a new inspection fee shall be charged for each additional reinspection required. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 7, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-214. - Concealing work; energizing installations. 
    No electrical installation shall be concealed in any manner until the installation has been inspected and approved, and no installation shall be energized until the work is complete and all outlets have been supplied with approved fixtures, devices or covers. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 7, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-215-5-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 5-226. - License required. 
    Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical construction or installation of wiring and apparatus for electrical lights, appliances, heating or power in the city shall first obtain a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-227. - Bond required. 
    Every person doing electrical work in the city shall execute and deliver to the city a bond with a surety bonding company in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), to indemnify the city or any citizen for any damage caused by the failure of such person doing the electrical work to comply strictly with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 11, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-228. - Application for license. 
    Application for a license required by this division shall be made to the electrical board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-229. - Prerequisites to issuance of license; issuance. 
    Before issuing a license required by this article, the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall examine each applicant as to their qualifications. The board, when satisfied as to the applicant's qualifications, may issue either a master's license or a journeyman's license. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-230. - Payment of examination and license fees. 
    The applicant for a license required by this division shall pay an examination fee prior to the examination required by this division and shall pay a license fee before a license may be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-231. - Term of license; renewal; lapse. 
    An original license issued by the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall be effective for one (1) year from and after the date of issuance and shall be extended annually for one (1) additional year upon payment each year of an annual license renewal fee. If the annual license renewal fee is not received prior to the expiration of the original one-year term or any extended one-year term, the license shall lapse and the board shall examine the applicant in the same manner specified for original licenses and the applicant shall pay a fee equal to that for an original license. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-232. - Discretion of board to require examination upon renewal. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals may require an examination of any applicant for a license required by this division prior to issuing a renewed license. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-233. - Suspension of licenses. 
    The electrical board of adjustments and appeals upon recommendation of the city electrician, may suspend the license of any electrician for a period of not more than one (1) year for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The electrician has performed work in violation of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131. 
(2)  The electrician has committed an offense in another area. 
(3)  The electrician has allowed a person not licensed to work as an electrician. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-234. - Exemption for homeowners. 
    Regardless of any provision in this article to the contrary, any individual desiring to perform his own electrical work personally shall not be required to execute the bond required by this article or obtain the required license, but shall be required to obtain the regular permit for the job as required by section 5-196. The work done pursuant to this article must be done by the individual permittee and shall not be used as a means of performing a service to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-235. - Exemption for utility companies. 
    Utility companies and their employees are exempted from the license and bond requirements of this article for all work done in connection with the ordinary business of the utility company. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 10, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-236. - Defective work. 
    Any person who shall fail to correct any defect or defects in his work or the standards required by this article after having been given notice of the unfit condition by the electrical inspector, within a reasonable time, shall be refused any other permit until such defect or defects have been corrected and shall be subject to revocation of his license for continual defective work or upon conviction for violation of the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 16, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-237-5-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - APPEALS 

Sec. 5-251. - Grounds. 
    Whenever the electrical inspector shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of an installation proposed to be followed, or the materials to be used in a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 or this article do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable material or method or installation can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the code adopted by section 5-131 or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the electrical inspector to the electrical board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-252. - Notice of appeal; fee. 
    A notice of appeal filed pursuant to this article shall be in writing and shall be filed within ninety (90) days after the decision appealed from is rendered by the electrical inspector. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall accompany the notice of appeal. Appeals shall be on forms provided by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-253. - When time for appeal may be shortened. 
    If a building or structure due to the condition of its electrical wiring and apparatus is unsafe or dangerous, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, he may, in his order, limit the time in which the appeal is to be taken to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-254. - Hearing by board of adjustment and appeal; rendition of decision. 
    Within a period of ten (10) days from the filing of an appeal the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall hear the appeal, together with the testimony of all parties concerned, and render a decision thereon within three (3) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-255. - Scope of decision on appeal. 
(a)  The electrical board of adjustments and appeals when appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the code or the public interest, or when in its opinion the interpretation of the electrical inspector should be modified or reversed. 
(b)  A decision of the electrical board of adjustments and appeals to vary the application of any provision of the electrical code adopted by section 5-131 or to modify an order of the electrical inspector shall specify in what manner the variation or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor. 
(c)  If a decision of the electrical board of adjustments and appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the electrical inspector, or varies the application of any provisions of the code adopted by section 5-131, the electrical inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with the decision. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-256. - Appeal of decision of board to city council. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the electrical board of adjustments and appeals shall have the right of appeal to the city council within ten (10) days from the rendition of the decision by the board. The appeal shall be perfected by written notice addressed to the mayor and city council asking for a hearing by the city council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final, except that due process shall not be denied and further appeal may be made to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-11F-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-257-5-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Water, § 19-21 et seq.; sewers, § 19-56 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-271. - Plumbing code adopted; penalty for violation thereof; designated officials. 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code, as now written and hereinafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the International Plumbing Code are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Plumbing Code is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the International Plumbing Code and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the plumbing code adopted by subsection (a). 
(c)  Within the code, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provision of the code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5B-88, §§ 1, 4, 5-19-88; Ord. No. O-5-97, § VI, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-02-13, § III, 2-4-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. O-5B-88, adopted May 19, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code, hence its inclusion as § 5-271(c) was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes: mechanical, § 5-1; building, § 5-16; housing, § 5-76; electrical, § 5-131; gas, § 5-356; fire prevention, § 7-16; application of plumbing code to substandard buildings, § 5-426. 
Sec. 5-271.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-5-97, § VII, adopted May 19, 1997, repealed former § 5-271.1 of the Code, which pertained to amendments to the plumbing code and derived from Ord. No. O-5B-88, §§ 2, 3, adopted May 19, 1988. 
Sec. 5-272. - Street openings. 
(a)  All openings made in the public streets or alleys to install plumbing must be made as carefully as possible and all materials excavated from the trenches shall be removed or placed where the least inconvenience to the public will be caused. 
(b)  All openings must be replaced in precisely the same condition as before the excavation started and all rubbish and materials must be removed at once, leaving the street or sidewalks clean and in perfect repair. 
(c)  All openings shall be marked with sufficient barriers. Flares or red lamps shall be maintained around the opening at night and all other precautions shall be taken by the plumber or excavator to protect the public from damage to person or property. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 9, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-273-5-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING INSPECTOR 

Sec. 5-286. - Office created; appointment; qualifications; compensation; assistants. 
    There is hereby created the office of plumbing inspector who shall be appointed by the city administrator, subject to approval of the city council. The plumbing inspector shall be of good moral character, versed in the approved methods of plumbing installations and shall not be directly or indirectly engaged in the business of plumbing or plumbing supplies. He shall receive such compensation as the city council may decide. He may appoint assistants when authorized to do so by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-287. - General duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall prepare or cause to be prepared suitable forms for applications, permits, inspection reports and such other requirements of his office which require forms. 
(c)  The plumbing inspector shall issue permits and collect fees. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to inspect and test all plumbing work for compliance with this article and the plumbing code adopted by section 5-271, and to enforce the changing of installations that do not meet the requirements thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-288. - Right of entry. 
    The plumbing inspector is granted the authority to enter all buildings within or without the corporate limits of the city, when such buildings are connected, or are to be connected to the municipal water or sewage system. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-289. - Duties and authority regarding impure and unpotable water. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector and the city water department are authorized and directed to determine all potential hazards to the purity or potability of the city water supply. Upon determining said potential hazards it shall be their duty to immediately cause notice to be sent to the owner or such other person responsible for the premises, specifying the hazards, and notifying the person that in the event that the hazard is not corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, all water services shall be discontinued until the requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector or the city water department are authorized to discontinue or cause to be discontinued all water service or services to any and all premises, lands, buildings or structures where it is found that an immediate hazard exists to the purity or potability of the city water supply. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 3, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-290-5-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 5-301. - Required. 
    No plumbing installation or alteration shall be made within the city or outside the city if connection to the city water or sewage system is to be made without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the plumbing inspector or other designated official. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-302. - Persons entitled to permit. 
    Only those persons authorized by the plumbing appeals and advisory board may apply for the permits required by this division; however, a permit may be issued to a homeowner to install or alter plumbing in a single-family residence, provided the homeowner does the work himself and that the building is owned and occupied or to be occupied by the owner as his home. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-303. - Application. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be made in writing and must be presented in person during normal inspection department hours and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The date; 
(2)  The name of the property owner; 
(3)  The name of the applicant; 
(4)  The address or location where the work is to be done; 
(5)  A description of the work to be done; and 
(6)  Any other information deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-6B-82, § 4, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 5-304. - Fee. 
    The charge for the issuance of plumbing permits shall be as follows: 
Type of permit      Fee 
(1)  Field lines (moving and hookup) ..... $50.00 
(2)  Remodeling and additions (per inspection) ..... $50.00 
(3)  Complete house or new building (per inspection) ..... $50.00 
(4)  Commercial (per inspection) ..... $70.00 
(5)  Sprinkler system for a building for fire protection ..... $50.00 
(6)  Lawn sprinkler system ..... $50.00 
(Ord. No. O-6B-82, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No. O-10-02, § II, 10-7-02; Ord. No. O-03-14, § II, 3-17-14) 
Secs. 5-305-5-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLUMBING BOARD 

Sec. 5-316. - Created; membership. 
    There is hereby created a six-member plumbing appeals and advisory board consisting of: 
(1)  A licensed master plumber. 
(2)  A licensed journeyman plumber. 
(3)  A building contractor. 
(4)  The city engineer. 
(5)  The city health officer. 
(6)  A licensed architect, registered engineer or alternate selection. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-317. - Alternate member. 
    If a licensed architect or registered engineer is not available for membership to the plumbing appeals and advisory board, the mayor may appoint a lay person he deems qualified to serve as a representative of the general public. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-318. - Eligibility of city engineer and health officer. 
    The city engineer and the city health officer shall be eligible to serve on the plumbing appeals and advisory board only as long as they hold office. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-319. - Ex officio member. 
    The plumbing inspector shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the plumbing appeals and advisory board. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-320. - Appointment and terms of office. 
    Members of the plumbing appeals and advisory board and their successors, except for the city engineers and the city health officer, shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and shall hold office for terms of four (4) years, or until their successors are appointed and have qualified; however, of the initial members of the board, two (2) members shall serve terms of two (2) years and two (2) for four (4) years as determined by the mayor in making the appointments. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-321. - Compensation. 
    All members of the plumbing appeals and advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-322. - Election of officers and adoption of rules. 
    The members of the plumbing appeals and advisory board shall meet as soon after their appointment as practicable for the purpose of organization. The board shall formally elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary from its members and may adopt such rules as it deems necessary for the orderly conduct of its affairs. A full and complete record of the proceedings of the board shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 5, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-323. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the plumbing appeals and advisory board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-324. - Right of appeal to board. 
    Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of this article or by any decision or ruling by the plumbing inspector under this article shall have the right to make an appeal to the plumbing appeals and advisory board. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-325. - Hearing on appeal. 
    Within ten (10) days from the filing of an appeal the plumbing appeals and advisory board shall hear the appeal, together with the testimony of all parties concerned, and render a decision within three (3) days of the hearing. In hearing such an appeal, the board shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of this article, but shall have the power to interpret its provisions and in case of alternate types of installation or material, shall determine whether or not such alternate type of installation or material is, in fact, equal to the standards of this article, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety to the public health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-326. - Appeals from board. 
    Any person who may be aggrieved by a decision of the plumbing appeals and advisory board shall have a right of appeal to the city council within ten (10) days from the rendition of such decision. The appeal shall be perfected by written notice addressed to the mayor and city council asking for a hearing by the city council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final, except that due process shall not be denied and further appeal may be made to the nearest court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-327. - New methods and materials passed on by board. 
    All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in this article or the plumbing code adopted by section 5-271 shall be fully supported by factual evidence, or prior approval, from a recognized testing agency or such impartial qualified authority acceptable to the plumbing appeals and advisory board. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-328. - Advisory responsibility of the board. 
    The plumbing advisory and appeals board shall submit to the city council such recommendations for the improvement and revision of this article and the plumbing code adopted by section 5-271 as it may from time to time deem necessary and proper in light of the development of new materials, methods or techniques which would result in a better and more economical installation. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-329. - Establishment of rules by board. 
    The plumbing advisory and appeals board shall establish and prepare in writing, and the plumbing inspector shall keep a copy of, requirements which must be met by each applicant desiring to obtain a plumber's license. The written requirements shall include a procedure for administering examinations and shall set forth each instance, if any, where the taking and passing of an examination is not required. The board shall be satisfied as to the qualification of each applicant prior to authorizing the issuance of a license to the applicant. The board shall be satisfied as to the qualification of each applicant prior to authorizing the issuance of a license to the applicant. The board shall also establish rules for license renewals. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-330. - Duty to prepare fee schedules. 
    The plumbing advisory and appeals board shall establish and prepare a written list of fees including fees for examinations, licenses, permits, inspections and for such other purposes deemed necessary by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 6, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-331-5-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LICENSES 

Sec. 5-341. - Required; general prerequisites. 
    Every person desiring to work as a plumber within the city shall obtain a license to do so from the plumbing inspector. The license shall be of the type and upon the terms authorized by the plumbing appeals and advisory board. The plumbing inspector shall not issue a license to any applicant until authorized to do so by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 7, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-342. - Bond required. 
    Every master plumber doing business in the city shall execute and deliver to the city a bond with a surety bonding company in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to indemnify the city or any citizen for any damage caused by the failure of such master plumber to comply strictly with the provisions of this article. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any master plumber unless this bond has been delivered to the city and is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. O-11E-79, § 8, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-343-5-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GAS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Tax on sale of gas, § 18-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-356. - Gas code adopted; penalty for violation thereof. 
(a)  The International Gas Code, as now written and hereinafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the International Gas Code are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Gas Code is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the International Gas Code and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the gas code adopted by subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-5-97, § VIII, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-02-13, § IV, 2-4-13) 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes; mechanical, § 5-1; building, § 5-16; housing, § 5-76; electrical, § 5-131; plumbing, § 5-271; fire prevention, § 7-16. 
Secs. 5-357-5-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 5-371. - Created; appointments. 
    There is hereby appointed a board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-372. - Absence from meetings. 
    Continued absence of any member of the board of adjustments and appeals from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the city council, render such member liable to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-373. - Terms; vacancies. 
    Of the members first appointed to the board of adjustments and appeals, two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, and thereafter they shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner of which original appointments are required to be made. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-374. - Quorum; voting. 
    Three (3) members of the board of adjustments and appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this article or the gas code adopted by section 5-271, or in modifying an order of the gas inspector, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three (3) affirmative votes shall be required. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal interest. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-375. - Secretary to board; records. 
    The gas inspector shall act as secretary of the board of adjustments and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-376. - Adoption of rules; meetings. 
    The board of adjustments and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the gas code adopted by section 5-356 or this article. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-377-5-387. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 

Sec. 5-388. - Right to appeal. 
    Whenever the gas inspector shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of installation proposed to be followed, or materials to be used in a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code adopted by section 5-356 or this article do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable material or method of installation can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the gas code adopted by section 5-356 or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the gas inspector to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-389. - Notice of appeal; fee. 
    A notice of appeal filed pursuant to this division shall be in writing and filed within ninety (90) days after the decision is rendered by the gas inspector. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall accompany the notice of appeal. Appeals hereunder shall be on forms provided by the gas inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-390. - When time for appeal may be limited. 
    If a building or structure, due to the condition of the gas piping, appliances and other apparatus is unsafe or dangerous, in the opinion of the gas inspector, he may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-391. - Decisions of board generally. 
(a)  Every decision of the board of adjustments and appeals shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. The decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. The decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the gas inspector and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the gas inspector for two (2) weeks after the filing. 
(b)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(c)  If a decision of the board of adjustments and appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the gas inspector or varies the application of any provision of the gas code adopted by section 5-356, the gas inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-392. - Ruling on variances in application of gas code. 
(a)  The board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the gas code adopted by section 5-356 to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the code or the public interest, or when, in its opinion the interpretation of the gas inspector should be modified or reversed. 
(b)  A decision of the board of adjustments and appeals to vary the application of any provision of the gas code adopted by section 5-356 or to modify an order of the gas inspector shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is to be made and the conditions upon which it is to be made and the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 2, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-393. - Permit fees. 
    The fees for permits required by the gas code adopted by section 5-356 shall be as follows: 
Type of permit      Fee 
(1)  Field lines (moving and hookup) ..... $50.00 
(2)  New building ..... $50.00 
(3)  Commercial ..... $70.00 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 3, 11-19-79; Ord. No. O-10-02, § III, 10-7-02; Ord. No. O-03-14, § III, 3-17-14) 
Secs. 5-394-4-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GAS FITTERS 

Sec. 5-406. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of the installation, extension or alteration of consumer's gas piping or gas appliances without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-407. - Bond. 
    No license shall be issued pursuant to this division until the applicant shall have executed and delivered a good and sufficient bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with a corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all work entered upon or contracted for, in strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of this article and the gas code adopted by section 5-356. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-408. - License fee. 
    The fee for a license required by this article shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year, which shall be paid into the city treasury before the license shall become effective. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Sec. 5-409. - Exemption for homeowners. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer's piping on his own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work on his own premises; however, all such work shall be done in conformity with all other provisions of the gas code adopted by section 5-356. 
(Ord. No. O-11B-79, § 4, 11-19-79) 
Secs. 5-410-5-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PREMISES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-9C-85, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 16, 1985, repealed Art. VII, §§ 5-426-5-435, and enacted a new Art. VII to read as herein set forth. Prior to repeal, Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. O-7-79, §§ 1, 3-9, 12, adopted July 2, 1974, and Ord. No. O-7-85, § 1, adopted July 1, 1985. 
Charter reference- Condemnation of structures, § 11.08. 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, § 11-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of city regarding dilapidated structures, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015n. 

Sec. 5-426. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Substandard buildings or premises shall mean buildings, structures or premises which are a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and shall include all buildings, structures or premises conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease-carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease and shall include: 
(1)  All buildings or structures which do not have the number of commodes, water closets, urinals and lavatories required by the plumbing code adopted by section 5-271, or which have pit privies where the same are not permitted by law, or which are not connected to the city sewer when required by law, or where inadequate and insanitary pit privies or septic tanks are maintained. 
(2)  All buildings or structures that have become deteriorated through natural causes or by damage through exposure to the elements, especially wind, hail or rain or damage through fire to the extent that the roof, windows and doors, or portions of the house, building or structure which protect it from the weather, will no longer reasonably protect it from the weather. 
(3)  All buildings or structures which constitute, or in which are maintained, fire hazards, as that term is defined through the fire prevention code adopted by section 7-16. 
(4)  All buildings or structures which are so structurally deteriorated that they are in danger of collapse, or which cannot be expected to withstand reasonably anticipated storms or tornadoes. 
(5)  All buildings or structures not wired in conformity with the electrical code adopted by section 5-131. 
(6)  All buildings or structures not constructed in conformity with the building code adopted by section 5-16. 
(7)  All buildings and structures and premises surrounding buildings and structures, including vacant lots, whereon there exist accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents. 
(b)  Premises shall mean all areas surrounding buildings and structures as well as vacant lots. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85; Ord. No. O-7-91, § I, 7-22-91) 
Sec. 5-427. - Building and standards commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created a building and standards commission to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of ordinances of the City of Crockett. 
(b)  The building and standards commission shall consist of one (1), five-member panel, all of whom must be residents of the city and are to be appointed for terms of two (2) years each. Members of the building and standards commission shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council may remove a commission member for cause on a written charge. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the city council must hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the commission member subject to the removal action. 
(d)  A vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(e)  Eight (8) alternate members of the commission may be appointed, who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city administrator. The alternate members serve for the same period and are subject to removal in the same manner as the regular members. A vacancy in the alternate members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members. 
(f)  Four (4) members of the building and standards commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and the concurring vote of four (4) members of the building and standards commission is necessary to take any action. All cases before the building and standards commission shall be presented by the code enforcement officer. 
(g)  Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman of the commission and at such other times as determined by a quorum of the commission. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(h)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the commission as public records. 
(i)  A majority of the commission shall adopt rules for the entire commission, in accordance with the provisions of the Crockett Code. The rules shall establish procedures for use in hearings, providing ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges brought by the city or its code enforcement officer relating to alleged violations of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85; Ord. No. O-10-01, § I, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 5-427.1. - Notice of proceedings before the building and standards commission. 
    Notice of all proceedings before the building and standards commission must be given: 
(1)  By personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested and first class mail, to the record owners of the affected property and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by deed records and assumed name records of the County Clerk of Houston County, Texas, the records of the Houston County Appraisal District, the records of the Texas Secretary of State and the city tax and utility records. Notice must be given to a lienholder only if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk. The notice must contain the information set forth in subsection 5-427.1(5). 
(2)  To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(3)  The notice shall be mailed and posted on or before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the commission and must state the date, time and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality on one (1) occasion on or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(4)  The notice must contain the street address and legal description of the affected property, a statement that the structure is substandard, a brief and concise description of the substandard conditions, a brief description of the public hearing and the action recommended. 
(5)  The commission may file notice of a proceeding before the commission in the Official Public Records of Real Property in Houston County, Texas. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search under subsection 5-427.1(1), a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the proceeding. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, mortgagees or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(6)  A copy of the final decision of the commission panel is to be personally delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested and first class mail to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent under this section. The commission shall mail that copy promptly after the decision becomes final. In addition, an abbreviated copy of the order shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy. The order shall state the street address and legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the order, and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. A copy shall be filed in the office of the city secretary within ten (10) days of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § II, 10-1-01; Ord. No. O-09E-12, § I, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 5-428. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards may be followed in substance by the building and standards commission in ordering repair, vacation or demolition: 
(1)  If the building, structure or premises can reasonably be repaired so that it will not longer be in a condition which is in violation of the terms of this article it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the building, structure or premises is in such condition that it cannot be reasonably repaired or conformed to the codes referred to in section 5-426, then it shall be demolished. In any case, where a substandard building, structure or premises is fifty (50) percent damaged or decayed, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that its existence will no longer be in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85) 
Sec. 5-429. - Substandard buildings. 
(a)  Order to show cause. Where an emergency does not exist and it shall come to the notice of the building and standards commission that a building, structure or premise is substandard, the commission may order the owner of the building, structure or premises, or the owner's authorized agent or representative, to appear and show cause why it should not be declared to be a substandard building, structure or premises and why the owner should not be ordered to vacate, repair, clean up, or destroy the building, structure or premises or relocate the occupants of the structure. The measures necessary to eliminate the building, structure or premises' substandard qualities shall be stated in the order. The date of the public hearing on the order shall not be less than ten (10) days after the order shall have been served. 
(b)  Hearing; order. On the date set in the notice of hearing, the hearing shall commence. On the basis of the hearing, the building and standards commission shall determine whether or not the building, structure or premise is a substandard building, structure or premises. If it is determined that a substandard building, structure or premises exists, the building and standards commission shall issue an order to the owner to take measures which are reasonably necessary to eliminate the building, structure or premises' substandard qualities. The commission may: 
(1)  Order the repair, demolition and removal, within a fixed period, of buildings found to be in violation of any ordinance; 
(2)  Declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted by this article; 
(3)  Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of any ordinance, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building found to exist; 
(4)  Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the commission panel; 
(5)  Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the municipality may recover as provided by section 5-435 of the Crockett Code; 
(6)  Order that the structure be secured by the owner or lienholder from unauthorized entry within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  The order to repair or demolish and remove a substandard structure must require that the repair or removal and demolition be completed within thirty (30) days, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably performed within thirty (30) days. In such event, the order shall provide specific time schedules for commencement and completion of the work. The order may not allow more than ninety (90) days to complete the work unless the owner or lienholder submits a detailed plan and time schedule for completion of the work, establishes that the scope and complexity of the work requires more than ninety (90) days, and submits regular progress reports to the code enforcement officer demonstrating compliance with the order. 
    The order shall specify a reasonable time to comply with the orders of the commission and shall provide specific time schedules for commencement and completion. 
(d)  The lien granted by this chapter is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches. 
(e)  To enforce any civil penalty, the city secretary must file with the District Clerk of Houston County, Texas a certified copy of the order of the commission panel establishing the amount and duration of the penalty. No other proof is required for a district court to enter final judgment on the penalty. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85; Ord. No. O-7-91, § II, 7-22-91; Ord. No. O-10-01, § III, 10-1-01; Ord. No. O-09E-12, § II, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 5-429.1. - Additional authority regarding substandard buildings. 
(a)  In addition to the authority granted to the city by section 5-429, after the expiration of the time allotted under subsections (b) or (c) of section 5-429, for the repair, removal or demolition of a building, the city may: 
(1)  Demolish and remove the building at the expense of the city and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or to which it is attached; and 
(2)  Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove or demolish the building. 
(b)  The city may repair a building under subsection (a) only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum housing standards. 
(c)  The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal, or demolition expenses or the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city must file for record, in recordable form in the office of the County Clerk of Houston County, Texas, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must contain a legal description of the land. 
(d)  Except as provided by section 5-429, the city's lien to secure the payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repairs, removal, or demolition is inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the County Clerk of Houston County, Texas before the date the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal, or demolition is begun by the city. The city's lien is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens. 
(e)  Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of ten (10) percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. 
(f)  The city's right to the assessment lien may not be transferred to third parties. 
(g)  In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of municipal rights under this section, the prevailing party is entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees from the nonprevailing party. 
(h)  A lien acquired under this section by the city for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. O-7-91, § III, 7-22-91; Ord. No. O-09E-12, § III, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 5-430. - Emergency procedure. 
(a)  Substandard buildings or structures may be ordered to be, and shall be vacated, repaired or demolished when it shall appear that the building, structure or premise or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life or property. The condition described in this section shall be deemed a condition justifying the use of emergency measures, and the building and standards commission may order any of the following emergency measures to be taken: 
(1)  The immediate vacation of the buildings, structure or adjoining structures. 
(2)  The vacation of the danger area around the building or structures. 
(3)  Such emergency shoring up and bracing of walls, roofs and supports as are required to render the buildings or structures safe. 
(4)  The destruction of such walls, roofs and supports or the entire structure or so much thereof as cannot be braced or made safely secure. 
(5)  The cleaning up of the premises and the removal of weeds, growth, trash, deteriorated equipment and personal property of no reasonable value. 
(b)  Posting. When any of the orders described in subsection (a) are given, notices shall be posted on or near the building or structure, notifying the public of the order and ordering all persons to keep out of the building or structure and the areas of danger surrounding it. 
(c)  Notice to property owner. When any of the orders described in subsection (a) are given, notice of the order shall be given as follows: 
(1)  The order shall be directed to the owner of the substandard building, structure or premises, or the owner's authorized representative, if known. 
(2)  Where notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service on the owner of the building, structure or premises, or the owner's representative. In the event that such notification would create a delay which would materially increase danger to life or property, a reasonable effort to notify the owner shall be deemed sufficient. 
(d)  Execution of order. If the notification set forth in subsection (c) notice is given and the owner or the owner's representative refuses or fails to carry out the orders of the building and standards commission or fails to carry out the order satisfactorily, the building and standards commission may proceed to carry out the order either by private contract or through an agency of the city. The cost incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the property. The lien shall be extinguished if the property owner reimburses the city for the costs incurred. The lien may be enforced in the manner provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85; Ord. No. O-7-91, § IV, 7-22-91) 
Sec. 5-431. - Owner's voluntary consent to demolition or cleanup. 
    The owner of a substandard building, structure or premises may enter into and execute an agreement to demolish, remedy or abate the same. In the event of a voluntary agreement, the necessity for notice and hearing shall not be required. The agreement may provide for the demolition, cleanup or other action to be at the owner's expense or the building and standards commission may, with the approval of the city council, authorize the expenditure of public funds to pay for all or an agreed portion of the costs of the demolition, cleanup or other work, subject to the availability and appropriation of funds for such purpose by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85) 
Sec. 5-432. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    Neither the city, nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85) 
Sec. 5-433. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section V of Ord. No. O-7-91, adopted July 22, 1991, repealed § 5-433 in its entirety. Formerly, § 5-433 pertained to lien and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. O-9C-85, adopted Sep. 16, 1985. 
Sec. 5-434. - Waiver of demolition permit fee. 
    The normal fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall be waived when the demolition is performed under orders of the building and standards commission or city council or under an agreement between the property owner and the city as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-85, § 2, 9-16-85) 
Sec. 5-435. - Civil penalties, injunctive relief, actions for removal of buildings and foreclosure of liens. 
(a)  Upon violation of any portion of article VII of chapter 5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crockett, Texas, entitled "Substandard Buildings and Premises," or of any order or regulation of the building and standards commission or city promulgated thereunder, the city may recover from the owner or the owner's representative with control over the premises a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of violation, beginning on the day after the date the defendant received notice of the provisions of article VII, if the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the article and of the requirements needed to comply with the order or regulation. The amount of the civil penalty shall be set by the building and standards commission at the hearing provided for in section 5-429. 
(b)  In addition, or as an alternative thereto, the city may, in the event of such violation, obtain injunctive relief, as provided by state law. 
(c)  In addition, or as an alternative to the preceding portions of this section, the city may, in the event of such violation, bring an action to compel the repair or demolition of a building or structure or to obtain approval to remove the structure and recover removal costs. 
(d)  The civil penalty may be collected in a civil action in the appropriate court with jurisdiction in Houston County, Texas. 
(e)  All liens and assessments imposed under this article may be foreclosed in an action in the appropriate court with jurisdiction in Houston County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-7-91, § VI, 7-22-91; Ord. No. O-09E-12, § IV, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 5-436. - Appeal to the district court. 
(a)  Any owner or lienholder may appeal any order of the building and standards commission to the District Court of Houston County, Texas within thirty (30) days after a copy of the order of the building and standards commission is mailed or personally delivered, by filing a verified petition stating that the decision is illegal in whole or in part. Review by the district court is de novo, and the district court may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the building and standards commission. 
(b)  The order of the building and standards commission is abated during the pendency of the appeal to the district court. 
(Ord. No. O-09E-12, § V, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 5-437. - Administrative search warrant. 
    The code enforcement officer, fire marshal or city health officer may apply to a District Judge of Houston County, Texas for an administrative search warrant to be issued to discover violations of this article. The search warrant may be issued only upon an affidavit stating probable cause. 
(Ord. No. O-09E-12, § VI, 9-4-12) 
Secs. 5-438-5-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOUSE MOVING FEE 

Sec. 5-501. - Fee. 
    The fee for moving a house or other building within the City of Crockett shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § IV, 3-17-14) 
Secs. 5-502-5-525. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6889-7. 

Sec. 6-1. - Office of director of emergency management. 
    There exists the office of director of emergency management of the city which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 1, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-2. - Duties and responsibilities of director. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaisons with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the city emergency management plan. 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. The rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 4, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-3. - Appointment of coordinator. 
    An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 1, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-4. - Conduct of comprehensive emergency management program. 
    The director of emergency management shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 6-2. The director may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the emergency management coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 1, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-5. - General authority of director regarding hazard mitigation. 
    The powers and duties of the director of emergency management shall include the implementation of an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city, and the implementation of an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of the emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 2, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-6. - Formation of county-wide emergency management council. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 3, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-7. - City operational emergency management organization. 
(a)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. 
(b)  The functions and duties of the operational emergency management organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and federal government. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 5, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-8. - Unauthorized use of sirens. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 6, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-9. - Emergency orders, rules, etc., to prevail over conflicting provisions. 
    At all times when the emergency orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing provisions of this Code and other ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations which may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 7, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-10. - Conflict with provisions of state, federal, military rules, etc. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 8, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-11. - Nonliability of persons acting within scope of chapter provisions. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, its agents and representatives or any other person who, in good faith, is carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack, together with his successors in interest, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 9, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-12. - Use of public funds, binding city prohibited. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 10, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-13. - Obstructing, hindering members of organization. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 11, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-14. - Unlawful use of emblems, insignias, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 11, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-15. - Oath. 
    Any person who is assigned a function or responsibility pursuant to this chapter shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, state laws and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-6E-82, § 12, 6-21-82) 
Sec. 6-16. - Hazard mitigation action plan. 
(a)  The City of Crockett has developed a hazard mitigation action plan to serve as a guiding document for local officials. 
(b)  The hazard mitigation action plan will be utilized by elected officials, city staff, and community members to ensure continuity of future mitigation programs and policies. 
(c)  The hazard mitigation action plan is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04, 9-20-04; Ord. No. O-10-08, 10-6-08; Ord. No. O-11-09, 11-2-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-04, adopted Sept. 20, 2004, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 6-16 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department, §§ 5.02, 7.01. 
Cross reference- Construction of buildings and structures within fire limits, § 5-20; electricity generally, § 5-116 et seq.; firearms, § 15-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention powers of city, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1175(25), (34), 1011. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Arson reward. 
    The city hereby offers a reward of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-23-64; Ord. No. O-10B-88, § 1, 10-17-88) 
Sec. 7-2. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Storage, sale, disposal, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, offer for sale, sell or otherwise dispose of or distribute, any fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic displays, within the city limits. 
(b)  Discharge, use, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, or use fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display. Public display of fireworks by properly qualified individuals under the direct supervision of experts in handling of fireworks may be permitted. Such displays shall be of such a character and so located, discharged, and fired as, in the opinion of the city fire marshal or the chief of the fire department, shall not be hazardous to surrounding property or endanger any person. 
(c)  "Fireworks" defined. As used in this section, the term "fireworks" shall mean and include any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs, pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances, using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate of potash mixture, or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display and shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether herein specifically designated and defined or not. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. If any person shall violate this section the violator will be prosecuted and charged a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. O-4-88, §§ 1-4, 4-4-88) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-4-88, adopted April 4, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1-4 as § 7-2 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 7-3-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Application of fire prevention code to substandard buildings, § 5-426. 

Sec. 7-16. - Fire code adopted. 
    The International Fire Code, as now written and hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the International Fire Code are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the International Fire Code is, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the International Fire Code and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 174-E, § 1, 6-17-74; Ord. No. O-8-91, § I, 8-19-91; Ord. No. O-5-97, § IX, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-02-13, § I, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 7-17. - Term in code defined. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the city. 
Cross reference- Adoption of other technical codes: mechanical, § 5-1; building, § 5-16; housing, § 5-76; electrical, § 5-131; plumbing, § 5-271; gas, § 5-356. 
Sec. 7-18. - Enforcement of code. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 174-E, § 2, 6-17-74) 
Secs. 7-19-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 7-31. - Office created. 
    The office of fire marshal is hereby created. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-1) 
Sec. 7-32. - Independence of office. 
    The office of fire marshal shall be independent of other city departments, with the fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-1) 
Sec. 7-33. - Appointment. 
    The office of fire marshal shall be filled by appointment pursuant to the provisions of section 7.01 of the Charter. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-1) 
Sec. 7-34. - Qualifications. 
    The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office in accordance with recognized standards. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-1) 
Sec. 7-35. - Removal. 
    The fire marshal shall be removed from office only for cause. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-1) 
Sec. 7-36. - Duty to investigate fires. 
    The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of the fire. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-2) 
Sec. 7-37. - Taking of testimony generally. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-38. - Summoning witnesses; obtaining evidence. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-39. - Privacy of investigations; separating witnesses. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-40. - Duty when evidence indicates arson. 
    If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with a fire, he shall cause the person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-41. - Misconduct of witnesses. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-42. - Right of entry. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-43. - Inspection of premises. 
    The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city and to make a thorough examination thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3; Ord. No. O-8-91, § II, 8-19-91) 
Sec. 7-44. - Correction of dangerous conditions. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidation condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, or combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises; however, if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked, the order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3) 
Sec. 7-45. - Records. 
    The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-2) 
Sec. 7-46. - Monthly report. 
    At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1960, § 1-13-3; Ord. No. O-8-91, § III, 8-19-91) 
Secs. 7-47-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTROLLED FIRES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Burning of garbage prohibited, § 10-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-61. - Outdoor burning prohibited; exceptions. 
    No outdoor burning of trash, brush, grass, leaves, paper, trees, lumber or any other character of debris or material shall be permitted within the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor burning authorized by a written grant of authority from the Texas Air Control Board or its executive director, who before granting such authority, must determine that there is no practical alternative to outdoor burning and that the burning will not cause or contribute to a violation of any federal primary or secondary ambient air standard. 
(2)  Outdoor burning for the purpose of training fire fighting personnel when requested from and approved by the Texas Air Control Board pursuant to the regulations of the board. 
(3)  Outdoor burning of domestic waste and debris at and from a property designed for and used exclusively as a private residence, housing not more than three (3) families where collection of the waste or debris is not provided by the city. 
(4)  Outdoor burning consisting of fires used solely for ceremonial purposes. 
(5)  Outdoor burning of diseased animals when burning is the most effective means of controlling the spread of disease. 
(6)  Outdoor burning permitted pursuant to regulations now existing or hereafter adopted by the Texas Air Control board. 
(7)  Outdoor burning utilized for noncommercial preparation of food or for the purpose of supplying warmth during cold weather. 
(8)  Outdoor burning of vegetation in accordance with sections 7-91 through 7-95. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-62. - Incinerator burning. 
    Incinerator burning of waste and debris within the city shall comply with the then current requirements of the Texas Air Control Board. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 2, 10-15-79) 
Secs. 7-63-7-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREES AND BRUSH[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Vegetation generally, § 20-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7-76. - When permitted. 
(a)  Outdoor burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter is permitted at the site of growth and only in accordance with the following: 
(1)  When no practical alternative to burning exists for right-of-way maintenance and land clearing operations. 
(2)  When it is necessary to eliminate a naturally occurring fire hazard. 
Sec. 7-77. - General requirements. 
    Outdoor burning pursuant to this division shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Burning shall be commenced only when the wind direction is such as to carry the smoke and other pollutants away from any city, residential, recreational, commercial or industrial area, or any navigable water, public road or landing strip which may be affected by the smoke. Burning shall not be conducted when a significant shift in wind direction is predicted which could produce adverse effects on persons, animals, or property during the burning period. If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person initiating the burning to post flagmen on affected roads in accordance with the requirements of the state department of public safety. 
(2)  The burning must be at least three hundred (300) feet from any residential, recreational, commercial or industrial area except those located on the property where the burning is to take place, except when it is necessary to eliminate a naturally occurring fire hazard. 
(3)  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber or any materials other than dry plant growth which may produce unreasonable amounts of smoke must not be burned. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-78. - Hours of burning. 
    The hours for burning pursuant to this division shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The initiation of burning for land clearing and right-of-way maintenance purposes shall commence after 9:00 a.m. Material which will not be completely consumed before 5:00 p.m. shall not be added to the fire. 
(2)  The initiation of burning for crop and range management purposes shall commence after 9:00 a.m. The acreage to be burned should be adjusted to provide that the burning is completed by 5:00 p.m. on the same day or as soon as is reasonably practical. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-79. - Wind velocity. 
    Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be less than six (6) miles per hour or greater than twenty-three (23) miles per hour during the burn period. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Secs. 7-80-7-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 7-91. - Required. 
    No burning authorized by this article, except burning pursuant to section 7-61(7), shall commence prior to the issuance of a permit by the fire marshal and the fire chief after a finding that no practical alternative exists to the burning and that the danger to adjoining property is minimal or can be controlled. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 3, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-92. - Contents of permit. 
    A permit issued pursuant to this division shall state the following: 
(1)  The name of the permittee. 
(2)  The type of material to be burned. 
(3)  The location of the burning. 
(4)  The date and time of the burning. 
(5)  A statement that the permittee is to assume all liability and responsibility for the fire and damage or destruction occurring therefrom. 
(6)  A statement that the fire must be supervised and guarded at any time while it is burning and that a water supply and hose will be available to control the fire at all times. 
(7)  Any special requirements which in the opinion of the fire marshal are required to conduct a safe burning. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 3, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-93. - Fees and costs. 
    No fee shall be charged for the issuance of a permit required by this division; however, in the event special requirements of the fire chief or fire marshal will result in additional costs to the city, said costs shall be paid by the permittee upon the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 5, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-94. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
    In the event that the fire marshal and fire chief shall refuse to issue a burning permit, the applicant may appeal to the city council within ten (10) days of the refusal by giving written notice of appeal to the city administrator. The council shall consider the application for a permit de novo. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 4, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 7-95. - Permittee liable for damages; compliance with other regulations. 
    The authority to conduct outdoor burning under this article does not exempt or excuse the permittee from the consequences, damages, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt or excuse any person from complying with all other applicable laws or ordinances, regulations and orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10C-79, § 3, 10-15-79) 
Secs. 7-96-7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 7-100. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section. 
    Apartment house shall mean any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
    Assembly building shall mean a building or portion of a building used for the gathering together of fifty (50) or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, education, instruction, worship, entertainment, amusement or waiting transportation, or of one hundred (100) or more persons in drinking or dining establishments. 
    Fire lane shall mean an area appurtenant to entrances or exits of an assembly building, shopping center, hospital, apartment house or school or the entrances or exits to stores, groups of stores or buildings, which are deemed necessary by the fire marshal to remain free and clear of parked vehicles and other obstructions in order to provide access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by the fire marshal. Such lane shall be of a width of not less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to such exits and entrances and shall extend for the minimum length necessary to provide access for fire vehicles. 
    Such lanes may, at the discretion of the fire marshal, include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near the entrances or exits to such buildings; provided, however, that fifteen (15) feet on either side of a fire protection device is designated as a fire lane without the necessity of a designation by the fire marshal. It is further provided that the fire marshal shall not designate a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet perpendicular to exits and entrances of buildings if the designation of a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet would necessitate structural changes to existing buildings. 
    Fire protection device shall mean a device such as sprinkler connections, stand pipe connections, public and private fire hydrants. 
    Hospital shall mean any public or private hospital, convalescent home or nursing home. 
    Proper officer shall include the fire marshal, fire chief, chief of police, deputy fire marshals, and officers of the police department. 
    School shall mean a building, public or private, used for educational purposes, and having an attendance of fifty (50) or more persons. 
    Shopping center shall mean a group of commercial business establishments, planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in location, size and types of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. 
(Ord. No. O-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Sec. 7-101. - Designation. 
    The fire marshal of the City of Crockett is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on the property of shopping centers, hospitals, apartment houses, assembly buildings, and schools as defined herein, appurtenant to buildings or the entrances or exits to stores, groups of stores or buildings, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free of parked vehicles, and other obstructions to provide ready access in case of fire or other emergency. 
(Ord. No. O-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Sec. 7-102. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Every owner of premises subject to this section shall, within thirty (30) days after designation of fire lanes, erect signs and paint the fire lanes in compliance with this section. Failure to erect signs and/or paint the fire lanes is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in this article. The designation by the fire marshal of such fire lanes shall never be held to make the City of Crockett responsible for the maintenance of such fire lanes on private property, but the owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. 
(b)  Every designation, determination, or location of a fire lane by the fire marshal pursuant to the authority granted in this article, shall be described in writing and filed with the city secretary. Such writing shall constitute a public record, and all persons shall be charged with notice of the contents of the same. Unless otherwise designated therein by the fire marshal, such designation, determination or location of a fire lane shall be deemed permanent. In the event of a change of location, cancellation, or temporary suspension of a fire lane by the fire marshal, such change, cancellation or temporary suspension shall be described in writing and filed with the city secretary as aforesaid. 
(c)  Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this section, the fire marshal shall give notice of such designation to the owners of such shopping centers, hospitals, apartment houses, assembly buildings, schools, stores, groups of stores or buildings, directing the owners to cause signs to be posted at the expense of the owner. Posting shall be at the extremities of such fire lane, and shall be lettered, "FIRE LANES-NO PARKING AT ANY TIME." Such signs shall be of a standard size, color, lettering, and mounting so as to conform to samples and instructions for the same to be obtained. 
    Fire lanes designated as set out above shall also be conspicuously marked with a RED painted line at least four (4) inches wide around the perimeter thereof with the word "FIRE LANE" in letters at least ten (10) inches high painted on the surface or, in the event areas are designated as fire lanes the surface of which is not amenable to paint, then the area will be conspicuously designated by signs not less than four (4) feet tall. 
(Ord. No. O-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Sec. 7-103. - Parking in fire lane prohibited; removal of obstructions. 
(a)  Vehicles or other obstructions found in, or interfering with fire lanes shall be in violation of this article. Such vehicles or obstructions are subject to citation and being removed from said fire lanes. 
(1)  Proper officers are hereby authorized to provide for the removal of vehicles in violation of this article when in the opinion of such officers, the vehicles could constitute a hazard in regard to fire prevention and protection. 
(2)  Citations for violation of this article may be issued by a proper officer. Such citation shall specify the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation. Any citation for violation shall be issued on the official form theretofore prescribed by the City of Crockett. Such citation shall require the appearance of the violator before the municipal court and all fines paid by the violator shall be paid to the municipal court clerk. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging a vehicle violation of this article, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in the prescribed area. 
(c)  It is hereby declared unlawful to park any vehicle other than authorized emergency vehicles of the City of Crockett, or any other authorized emergency vehicle rendering mutual aid in any fire lane. Where the signs provided for herein are not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, it shall be a defense to any alleged violation thereof. 
(d)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any sign designated a fire lane which has been erected under the terms of this section. 
(e)  No owner, manager or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without the permission of the fire marshal; and such person shall keep the fire lanes clear of parked vehicles and/or objects that would impede escape from or access to said premises. 
(f)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Sec. 7-104. - Penalty. 
    Anyone guilty of violating this article shall be fined not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. O-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Secs. 7-105-7-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUT OF JURISDICTION FIRE DEPARTMENT RATES AND RATES FOR NONRESIDENTS 

Sec. 7-200. - Rates for services. 
(a)  Services provided by the Crockett Fire Department to properties located outside the jurisdiction of the City of Crockett will be charged to the owner of such property as follows: 
Charge Description Charge Dispatch Fee $75.00 False Alarm Fee $150.00 Unauthorized Burn Fee $200.00 Engine 2 Response $125.00 per 15 minutes Engine 2 Standby $62.50 per 15 minutes Engine 3 Response $125.00 per 15 minutes Engine 3 Standby $62.50 per 15 minutes Engine 4 Response $125.00 per 15 minutes Engine 4 Standby $62.50 per 15 minutes Engine 6 Response $125.00 per 15 minutes Engine 6 Standby $62.50 per 15 minutes Ladder Truck 1 Response $150.00 per 15 minutes Ladder Truck 1 Standby $75.00 per 15 minutes Rescue 1 Response $100.00 per 15 minutes Rescue 1 Standby $50.00 per 15 minutes Tanker 5 Response $125.00 per 15 minutes Tanker 5 Standby $62.50 per 15 minutes Grass 7 Response $87.50 per 15 minutes Grass 7 Standby $43.75 per 15 minutes Command 1 Response $50.00 per 15 minutes Command 1 Standby $25.00 per 15 minutes Afff Foam Per Gallon $45.00 Class A Foam Per Gallon $25.00 Micro-Blaze Per Quart $8.00 Micro-Blaze Per 5 Gallon $125.00  
(b)  Services provided by the Crockett Fire Department for nonresidents of the City of Crockett in connection with motor vehicle collisions and hazardous material spills shall be charged at the rates specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  All charges must be paid to the City of Crockett by the owner of the property no later than thirty (30) days after the date the services were performed. 
(d)  The rates set by this section shall not apply to services provided to property located in the jurisdiction of governmental entities with which the Crockett Fire Department has an automatic or mutual aid agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-12-13, § I, 12-9-13) 
Secs. 7-201-7-225. - Reserved. 
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, adopted Mar. 21, 2011, amended arts. I-III in their entirety and creating new arts. IV and V, therefor renumbering existing art. IV to art. VI to read as set out herein. Former arts. I-III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. D-2, Arts. I-IV, adopted Jan. 23, 1978; and Ord. No. 0-9-80, Arts. I, III, IV, adopted Sept. 30, 1980; and Ord. No. 0-3A-87, adopted March 2, 1987. 
Cross reference- Water generally, § 19-21 et seq.; sewers generally, § 19-56 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to enact flood-insurance ordinance, V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 16.315. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 8-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Crockett, Texas does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Crockett are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Secs. 8-5-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS. 

Sec. 8-16. - Defined terms. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one (1) percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30 or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year; also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) see Flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodway see Regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area see Area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Secs. 8-17-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-21. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Crockett. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-22. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Houston County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated April 4, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated April 4, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-23. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-24. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-25. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-26. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-27. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Secs. 8-28-8-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-36. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city administrator is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-37. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8-22, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-38. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 8-47(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 8-37(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-39. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 8-38(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 8-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) of this section are met; and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Secs. 8-40-8-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-46. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-47. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: (i) section 8-22; (ii) subsection 8-37(8); or (iii) subsection 8-48(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 8-38(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 8-38(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-48. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 8-2, 8-3 and 8-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 8-23; section 8-38; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8-22 or subsection 8-37(8) of this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-49. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-22, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8-38, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-50. - Floodways. 
    Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-22, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-51. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 8-52. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Secs. 8-53-8-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORM DRAINAGE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03-11, adopted Mar. 21, 2011 added new arts. I-V, therefor renumbering existing art. IV as art. VI, as set out herein. 

Sec. 8-60. - General provisions. 
    Each developer shall design and construct drainage facilities in accordance with this article. The following design criteria are the city's minimum methods and standards. Other hydrologic and hydraulic design methods may be used to satisfy drainage requirements with prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § II, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-61. - Stormwater detention. 
    All new development with proposed impervious surfaces exceeding fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet shall provide for on-site stormwater detention in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Twenty-five-year storm runoff exceeding existing amounts shall be detained on-site. Credit shall be given for runoff storage volumes equivalent to that generated by fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet of impervious surface. 
(2)  SCS TR-55 methodology shall be used for detention facility design. 
(3)  Outfall shall be to the nearest approved public drainage facility. 
(4)  Minimum discharge pipe size shall be four (4) inches. 
(5)  Discharge pipe materials: PVC-SDR 26 or 
Sch 40 
RCP- 
Class III 
CMP-14 Ga. Min., Aluminized 
HDPE-H2O per ASTM D 3350 
(6)  Overflow spillways shall be reinforced concrete unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(7)  All earthen areas shall have approved erosion protection. 
(8)  Freeboard appropriate to the volume of detention shall be provided. 
(9)  3:1 maximum side slopes. 
(10)  Property owner shall be responsible for detention facility maintenance. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § III, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-62. - Plans. 
    A drainage plan shall be provided for all proposed development. For projects requiring runoff detention or drainage facility construction, the plan shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the state and shall be supported by a detailed drainage study. The drainage study shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations and other design support documentation. This drainage plan shall be a complete construction document from which the proposed improvements can be constructed. 
    Drainage information on-site plans required for issuance of building permits or land use must include all information required by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § IV, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-63. - Upstream conditions. 
    Each developer shall design all drainage facilities based on potential and fully developed upstream conditions in accordance with current land zoning. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § V, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-64. - Discharge points. 
    Each developer shall terminate all drainage improvements at a discharge point approved by the city. Drainage flow patterns from developed property shall follow historic, predevelopment patterns where such flow crosses property lines. Flow at the discharge point shall not exceed the capacity of downstream receiving facilities. The developer shall design and construct such discharge point, or outlet, to prevent damage to or overflowing into adjacent property. The city may require creek improvements, channel lining, energy dissipaters or other improvements for such outlet to prevent erosion or increase the downstream flow capacity. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § VI, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-65. - Public streets as drainage facilities. 
(a)  Construction of new streets shall require installation of storm drain facilities. 
(b)  Maximum depth of water to be allowed in local streets at ten-year design flow shall be at the top of crown, or top of curb, whichever is least. 
(c)  Maximum spread of water in collector streets at ten-year design flow shall allow for one (1) clear lane of traffic (twelve (12) feet wide). 
(d)  Maximum spread of water in arterial streets at ten-year design flow shall allow for two (2) clear lanes of traffic (twenty-four (24) feet wide). 
(e)  Street classification (local, collector, arterial) shall be as defined in the city's comprehensive plan or otherwise determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § VII, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-66. - Drainage channels and structures. 
(a)  The developer shall install an underground storm drain on curb and gutter streets beginning at the point where the calculated stormwater runoff is of such a quantity that it exceeds the height specified above (see also Table 2). The developer shall construct the storm drain system from this point to an approved outlet. 
(b)  If the developer proposes to construct a channel, the city shall approve the right-of-way width and channel configuration. The developer shall design and construct all channels to terminate at an approved outlet. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § VIII, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-67. - Habitable structures. 
    The developer shall provide adequate means for stormwater runoff in excess of the street and drainage system capacity to flow around habitable structures. See Figures 1 and 2. 
(a)  If adjacent topography rises away from the street, the developer shall provide a grading/drainage plan which shows that all building sites can provide a finished floor elevation at least one (1) foot above the top of the curb using the highest point along the portion of such curb directly fronting the building site. 
(b)  If adjacent topography falls away from the street, the developer shall provide a grading/drainage plan that shows that all building sites can provide a finished floor elevation at least one (1) foot above the ground elevation along all sides of the building site. 
(c)  The developer shall design and construct all streets to minimize any fill required to bring building pads into compliance with these criteria. 
(d)  The city upon submittal of detailed engineering plans may consider alternate methods of building protection to those above. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § IX, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-68. - Improvements. 
(a)  Inlet and outlet structures. Headwalls, wingwalls, splash pads and riprap shall be provided at the inlet and outlet of all pipe systems. Design shall be appropriate for the individual situation and subject to approval of the city. 
(b)  Pipe vs. channel. If an underground drainage system is required, and a sixty-inch or smaller pipe will handle the design flow, pipe shall be used. If a sixty-inch pipe is not adequate, the developer has the option to use concrete pipe or natural and/or a lined open drainage channel. Lining materials, if used, shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  Line of flow. The developer shall allow water courses to follow their natural lines of flow; provided however, that rechanneling or re-routing of water courses may be allowed where approved by the city and where the point at which the water course enters the tract and the point at which it leaves the tract are not changed. Upstream and downstream water surface elevations shall not be increased unless a study prepared by a registered professional engineer demonstrates that no potential damage due to flooding will be created. 
(d)  Bridges and box culverts. The developer shall design and construct bridges or box culverts at all street crossings over all drainage ways and floodways in accordance with Table 2. 
(e)  Valley gutters. The developer shall provide concrete valley gutters if the gutter flow must be carried across intersections of curbed streets. Maximum valley depth shall be one (1) inch and minimum width shall be six (6) feet. 
(f)  Public easements required. All public drainage facilities shall be placed in public easements subject to approval by the city. Minimum easement width is twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § X, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-69. - Design. 
(a)  Basis for storm discharge. The following methods of stormwater runoff calculation shall be used for the design of drainage improvements: 
(1)  For watershed areas of two hundred (200) acres or less, use the Rational Formula as shown below. Figure 1 and Table 1 show average velocities to be used in calculating the time of concentration. 
(2)  For watershed areas of greater than two hundred (200) acres the Regional Regression Equations as described in the Texas Department of Highways Hydraulic Manual shall be used. 
Figure 1: 
THE RATIONAL FORMULA 
THE RATIONAL FORMUL> 
Q = CIA 
where: 
Q = Is the maximum storm flow rate at a given point (in cubic feet per second): 
C = A runoff coefficient which varies with the topography, land use and moisture content of the soil at the time. The runoff coefficient shall be based on the ultimate use of the land. The runoff coefficient can be selected from the major use classification shown below or other coefficients may be used when supported in an approved drainage study. 
Paved Areas 0.95 Shopping Centers 0.90 Business Centers 0.80 Industrial Areas 0.85 Residential Areas: Less than 2 lots/acre 0.40 Greater than 2 lots/acre, 0.50 but less than 4 lots/acre Greater than 4 lots/acre, 0.60 but less than 8 lots/acre Greater than 8 lots/acre 0.75 Apartments 0.75 Park and Open Space 0.30  
I = The average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period equal to the time of concentration of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the point under consideration. 
I=   b 
(t+d) e 
The Texas Department of Highways Hydraulic Manual shows that in Houston County: 
d= 8.3 and 
5 year 10 year 25 year 50 year b= 73 78 86 93 e= .780 .757 .748 .740 t= Time of concentration in minutes.  
Figure 2: 
TIME OF CONCENTRATION 
t=   D 
Vx60 
where: 
t= Time of concentration in minutes. The minimum time of concentration shall be ten (10) minutes. 
D= Distance in feet from point of concentration to the hydraulically most distant part of the drainage basin under construction. 
V= Velocity in feet per second from Figure 3 or Table 1 or velocity calculated by an engineer for streets and/or storm sewers. 
A= The drainage area, in acres, tributary to the point under design calculated from the drainage map of the area. The drainage map shall be submitted with any drainage plans submitted for consideration by the City. 
Table 1 
AVERAGE VELOCITIES OF RUNOFF 
% SLOPE OF 
GUTTER ASSUMED VELOCITY 
(FT/SEC) 0.5% 1.5 1.0% 2.2 2.0% 3.1 3.0% 3.8 4.0% 4.3 5.0% 4.9 6.0% 5.3 8.0% 6.1 10.0% 6.9  
(b)  Storm frequency. Design storm frequencies for storm drainage improvements are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2 
DESIGN STORM FREQUENCY 
TYPE OF FACILITY DESCRIPTION OF AREA 
TO BE DETAINED MINIMUM DESIGN 
FREQUENCY (YRS) Streets and Storm Residential, Local 10 Sewers or Side Commercial and Collector 10 Ditches Combined* Industrial, Arterial 10 Culverts, Bridges, Any type of area 25 Channels and Creeks less than 200 acres Culverts, Bridges, Any type of area 100 Channels and Creeks greater than 200 acres  
* If in a storm drain system, an inlet is located at a low point so that flow in excess of the storm drain capacity would be directed onto private property, and such overflow could cause damage or serious inconvenience in the opinion of the city, the design frequency shall be twenty-five (25) years. 
(c)  Underground drainage facility design. The engineer shall calculate underground drainage facility (storm drain) capacity by Manning's Formula as follows: 
Q_ 1.486 ARs Y 2 
n 
where: 
Q= The discharge in cubic feet per second. 
A= The cross - sectional area of flow in square feet. 
R= The hydraulic radius in feet = area/wetted perimeter. 
S= The slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot. 
n= The coefficient of roughness. 
The elevation of the hydraulic gradient of the storm sewer shall be a minimum of 1.5 feet below the elevation of the adjacent street gutter. The developer shall use storm drain pipe sized so that the average velocity in the pipe will not exceed fifteen (15) feet per second and the outlet velocity will not exceed velocities shown in Table 4 for the discharge conditions. 
(d)  Open channel design. The engineer shall design and construct open channel facilities based on frequencies shown in Table 2 and calculated by Manning's Formula with roughness coefficients and velocities as shown in Table 3. Side slopes of channels shall be no steeper than 3:1 in earth and 1:1 when lined with concrete. 
Table 3 
COEFFICIENT OF ROUGHNESS 
OPEN CHANNELS MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE 
VELOCITY (FT/SEC) COEFFICIENT "n" Paved   Concrete 15 0.011 to 0.020   Asphalt 15 0.013 to 0.017   Rubble or Riprap 15 0.017 to 0.030 Earth   Bare, sandy silt, 
weathered 2.0 0.020   Silt Clay or soft shale 3.5 0.020   Clay 6.0 0.020   Soft sandstone 6.0 0.020   Clean gravelly soil 6.0 0.030 to 0.150 1 Turf   Shallow Flow 6.0 0.06 to 0.06   Depth of flow over 1 foot 6.0 0.04 to 0.06  
1 Will vary with the straightness of alignment, smoothness of bed and side slopes and whether channel has light vegetation or is choked with weeds and brush. 
(e)  Culvert design. The developer shall install enclosed culverts with end treatments if a creek or ditch crosses proposed roadway improvements. The size of the culvert required shall be the larger size, checking both inlet and outlet flow control. 
    Design of culverts shall include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as well as downstream velocities and flooding conditions. The developer shall not design or install culverts with discharge velocities that exceed those provided in Table 4. 
Table 4 
CULVERT DISCHARGE-VELOCITY LIMITATIONS 
CULVERT DISCHARGING 
ONTO MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE 
VELOCITY (FT/SEC) Earth 6 Sod Earth 8 Paved or riprap apron 15 Shale 10 Rock 15  
CULVERT DISCHARGE-VELOCITY LIMITATION> 
(f)  Minimum design standards. The design requirements set forth in this policy are minimum design standards. The city reserves the right to require additional precautions or treatments consistent with sound engineering practice and the protection of public health and safety, to provide for conditions not specifically covered in this policy. Drainage requirements for developments adjacent to or draining into state highway right-of-way shall be subject to all requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § XI, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 8-71. - Appeals. 
    The owner of a property affected by the provisions of this article may appeal a decision of the city to the board of adjustment whenever one of the following conditions are alleged: 
(1)  The provisions of this article do not apply to a specific case. 
(2)  An equally good or more desirable design or installation can be employed in a specific case. 
(3)  The true intent and meaning of this article has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. No. O-01B-07, § XI, 1-16-07) 
Chapter 9 - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, § 10-1 et seq.; health generally, § 11-1 et seq.; nuisances, § 11-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Food and drugs generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4465 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" adopted. 
    The "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" promulgated by the Texas Department of Health, as now written and hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by the City of Crockett, Texas, and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth therein. At least three (3) copies of the current version of the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" promulgated by the Texas Department of Health, are now filed in the office of the city secretary, and as the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" promulgated by the Texas Department of Health, are, from time to time, amended, at least three (3) copies of the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" promulgated by the Texas Department of Health, and amendments shall be and remain filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-5-97, § X, 5-19-97) 
Sec. 9-2. - Adoption of state regulations governing meat and poultry. 
    All meat and poultry products processed or sold within the city shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of the unabridged form of "Regulations Governing the Inspection of Meat and Poultry," as amended, which are promulgated by the state department of health and approved by the state, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 9-3. - Adulterated, misbranded or ungraded milk or milk products. 
    No person shall, within the city or its police jurisdiction, produce, sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in possession with intent to sell, any milk or milk product which is adulterated, misbranded or ungraded within the meaning of and under the penalty of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 165-3. Violations of this section shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of permits for the sale of milk or milk products. 
Secs. 9-4-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD HANDLERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitary employees where food or drink is handled, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4476-10; authority of city to regulate food handlers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4476-10, § 6. 

Sec. 9-16. - Health permit and certificate required. 
    A food handlers permit and health certificate shall be required for any person handling food and shall conform to state law and be issued by the health officer after all of the requirements of this article have been met. 
Sec. 9-17. - Evidence of examination of physician. 
    A food handler or employee of a food service establishment must present evidence to the health office that he has been examined by any licensed physician in the county and found free of all communicable disease. 
Sec. 9-18. - Proof of laboratory test. 
    A food handler or employee of a food service establishment shall file with the city secretary a laboratory report from a laboratory approved by the health officer, attesting to the fact that a standard blood test is negative regarding the presence of communicable disease; or, if positive, he shall file a statement from a legally licensed physician of the county attesting that the food handler or employee has received sufficient treatment to prevent infection of others. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-19. - Examination; reexamination by health officer; oral or written examination authorized. 
    Prior to issuing a food handlers permit, the health officer may examine, or reexamine the applicant for the permit. The health officer may examine an applicant for a food handlers permit, or certificate by means of a written and/or oral examination and establish as a requirement the necessary passing grade. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-20. - Annual tuberculosis test. 
    A food handler or employee coming within the terms of this article shall be required to file with the health officer, at least once a year, a certificate from a licensed physician of the county, showing the employee to be free from tuberculosis. This certificate shall show that the applicant has had a negative tuberculin test or a negative x-ray examination of the chest within seven (7) days prior to the date of issuance of the certificate. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-21. - When health officer may conduct examinations and tests. 
    Tests or x-ray examinations required under this article may be made by the laboratory service of the health officer only upon certification by a local physician that the employee is unable to defray the cost of the test and examinations. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-22. - Recording of physician's statements and laboratory report. 
    All original physician's statements, laboratory reports and other reports made pursuant to this article shall be recorded in the office of the health officer. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-23. - Renewal of permits. 
    Food handlers permits shall be renewed every six (6) months. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-24. - Owners, managers to display lists of employees. 
    Owners, mangers or representatives of eating and drinking establishments shall display to the health officer or his authorized representative, upon request, an accurate list of employees of the eating and drinking establishment. 
(Code 1960, § 8-1-2) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Junked vehicles, § 14-266 et seq. 
State Law reference- Texas Litter Abatement Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Prohibited dumping. 
(a)  No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage or other rubbish of any kind at any location in the city, except the city solid waste transfer point or at places and in such containers as may be authorized by the city for regular garbage pickup. 
(b)  No person shall dump or dispose of trash, garbage or other rubbish in containers owned or leased by the city or others, except the owner or lessee of the container or the tenants of the lessee. 
(c)  No person shall dump, dispose of or place for collection any kitchen garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse on real property not then owned, leased or rented by that person. 
(Code 1960, § 8-6-4; Ord. No. D-7, § 1, 7-17-78; Ord. No. O-2-93, § I, 2-1-93; Ord. No. O-3-00, § 1, 3-6-00) 
Sec. 10-2. - Placing garbage, trash, etc., in streets prohibited. 
    The placing of kitchen garbage, trash or rubbish or any article, thing or material, in any street or alley within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-8) 
Sec. 10-3. - Prohibited accumulations. 
    It shall be unlawful to accumulate or permit the accumulation of trash, garbage or other rubbish, which in the determination of the health officer endangers or threatens the health or safety of the city. 
(Ord. No. D-7, § 1, 7-17-78) 
Sec. 10-4. - Keeping junk, etc., restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or junk, adjacent to or in close proximity to any school, church, public park, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing buildings meeting the requirements of this Code for the storage of the same. 
(Code 1960, § 6-1-6) 
Sec. 10-5. - Burning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage, offal or rubbish within the city. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-17) 
Cross reference- Outside burning generally, § 7-61 et seq. 
Sec. 10-6. - Meddling with garbage and trash. 
    The meddling with garbage, refuse, trash or rubbish receptacles or the pilfering or scattering of the contents thereof in any alley or street within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-10) 
Sec. 10-7. - Issuance of citations by the refuse control officer. 
    The refuse control officer may issue a citation to appear in municipal court to any person he believes has violated any provision of chapter 10, Garbage and Trash, of the Crockett Code. 
(Ord. No. O-3-1, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. O-03-05, § I, 3-7-05) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of nonamendatory Ord. No. O-3-01, adopted March 19, 2001, has been codified herein as § 10-7 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 10-8-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 10-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apartment shall mean a room or suite of rooms, arranged, designed or occupied by a family, and shall include, but not be limited to a subordinate dwelling occupied as a garage apartment or as servant quarters. 
    Apartment house shall mean a building or portion thereof, or buildings arranged, designed or occupied by three (3) or more families. 
    Boarding house shall mean a building or portion thereof, other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for five (5) or more persons are served for compensation. 
    Business shall mean any establishment which receives a commercial water bill from the city. 
    Container shall mean a large metal container commonly known as a "dumpster" handled by special trucks. 
    Family shall mean one (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Hotel shall mean a building designed for occupancy as a temporary place of lodging for individuals, with or without meals, in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping units and the units are usually rented to different persons, and provision is not usually made for cooking in any individual unit. 
    Kitchen garbage shall mean dry refuse and all meat, vegetable and fruit refuse from any premises within the city. 
    One-family residence shall mean a detached building having accommodations for and occupied by one (1) family. 
    Premises shall mean business houses, boarding houses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, apartments, sanitariums, rooming houses, schools, private residences, vacant lots and all other places within the city, where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates in ordinary quantities. 
    Rooming house shall mean a building, or portion thereof, other than a hotel, where five (5) or more persons are lodged for compensation. 
    Tourist court shall mean the areas, including a building or portion thereof, or buildings, where families, transients or tourists are accommodated, and shall include, but not exclusively, a trailer camp. 
    Trash shall mean paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, feathers, weeds, grass, small tree limbs and shrub trimmings from any premises within the city. 
    Two-family residence shall mean a detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied as a dwelling by two (2) families. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-1; Ord. of 6-21-71, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. O-5D-81, § 2, 5-18-81) 
Sec. 10-21. - Ninety-five-gallon carts required. 
    All residential solid waste must be placed for collection in 95-gallon carts provided by the private contractor collecting solid waste for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-09D-15, § II, 9-21-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § II, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 10-21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-21 was entitled "Bags required; specifications; placement of kitchen garbage and refuse", and derived from: Code 1960, § 11-3-2; Ord. of June 21, 1971, § 4; Ord. No. O-2-93, § II, adopted Feb. 1, 1993; and Ord. No. O-09F-05, § I, adopted Sept. 6, 2005. 
Sec. 10-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 10-22 entitled "Placement of trash and rubbish in bags", which derived from: Code 1960, § 11-3-2; Ord. of June 21, 1971, § 4; and Ord. of July 10, 1972, § 1. 
Sec. 10-22.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 10-22.1 entitled "Separation of recyclables", which derived from: Ord. No. O-2-93, § III, adopted Feb. 1, 1993. 
Sec. 10-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 10-23 entitled "Placement of bags and trimmings at curb", which derived from: Code 1960, § 11-3-2; Ord. of Dec. 11, 1961; and Ord. of June 21, 1971, § 4. 
Sec. 10-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 10-24 entitled "Failure to properly place garbage and refuse for collection", which derived from Code 1960, § 11-3-7. 
Sec. 10-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed § 10-25 entitled "City not responsible for certain large accumulations", which derived from: Code 1960, §§ 11-3-3, 11-3-6; and Ord. of June 21, 1971, § 6. 
Sec. 10-26. - Number of pickups. 
(a)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall collect garbage and trash from businesses at the frequency and for the rates specified in section 10-29 of the Crockett Code. 
(b)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall collect garbage and trash from residences, apartments and boarding houses once per week on days established by the city. 
(c)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall accept construction debris and bulky waste originating in the city at the private contractor's facility in Houston County, Texas. Bulky waste is defined as furniture, appliances and other household items too large for a refuse container. 
(d)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall provide, at no charge, special collection services as requested by the city administrator, not to exceed two (2) times per year. The special collection services for events shall be for a limited duration of one (1) week or less and shall be in the form of five (5), eight (8) yard dumpsters per event. 
(e)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall collect solid waste at municipal locations at no charge to the city. 
(f)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall participate in the spring and fall large item collection weeks (two (2) weeks total) per year and provide six (6) roll-off containers per week at no charge to handle the refuse collected. The roll-off containers will be forty (40) cubic yard containers. The contractor may provide fully staffed compactor trucks in lieu of the roll-offs upon written approval of the city administrator. 
(g)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city will provide to the city monthly reports of complaints, tonnage of refuse collected, tonnage of recyclables collected and gross revenues on recyclable collections. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-15; Ord. No. O-2-93, § IV, 2-1-93; Ord. No. O-09D-15, § III, 9-21-15) 
Sec. 10-27. - Manner of billing; collection of bills. 
    The city shall bill and collect garbage fees either through the water department as a separate item on each water bill or by any other practicable means of collection. 
(Ord. of 6-21-71, § 7) 
Sec. 10-28. - Billing date; payment; late charge; disconnection; reconnection charge. 
    Garbage service bills shall be due within ten (10) days of the billing date and bills remaining unpaid within fourteen (14) days of the billing date shall incur an additional charge of fifteen (15) percent. All bills remaining unpaid by the due date of the following month shall be subject to discontinuation of water service. Upon disconnection of water service, no customer shall be reconnected to city water services until payment is received for all past due bills plus the applicable reconnection charge. 
    The additional charge of fifteen (15) percent for late payment of garbage service bills shall not apply to persons sixty-five (65) years of age or over. In order to claim this exemption, a person shall make application at the city water office and furnish proof of age. 
(Ord. No. O-4-83, 4-18-83; Ord. No. O-11-86, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § II, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 10-29. - Rates. 
    The rates charged for collecting solid waste in the city shall be as follows: 
RESIDENTIAL TRASH RATES 
Collection of trash with 95-gallon cart. 
One time per week, at $18.70 per home (unit) per month. 
Each additional cart for one time per week collection, at $5.00 per home (unit) per month. 
COMMERCIAL FEES 
Commercial hand collection two times per week with a 95-gallon cart, at $30.25 monthly. 
Bin Size Frequency Per Week Cubic 
Yard Monthly Rates Yard 1 2 3 4 5 2 $ 62.25 $107.20 $153.99 $203.29 $242.76 4 $104.05 $190.80 $277.49 $366.70 $450.90 6 $151.90 $265.70 $388.65 $513.94 $634.60  
ROLL-OFF SERVICE 
Size Delivery Haul and 
Disposal Rent 
Per Day Total 20 Cu Yd $125.00 $407.50 $3.00 $535.50 30 Cu Yd $125.00 $578.00 $3.00 $706.00  
COMMERCIAL CARDBOARD 
$35.00 per month per business. Commercial cardboard will be picked up by the private contractor once per week and delivered by it to the city waste drop-off site. 
COMPACTORS 
Size Haul and Disposal 40 Cu Yd $750.50  
(Ord. No. O-10-82, § 3, 10-4-82; Ord. No. O-8-84, § 3, 8-23-84; Ord. No. O-11-86, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. O-9C-87, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. O-7-88, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. O-4-90, § I, 4-11-90; Ord. No. O-9B-90, § I, 9-24-90; Ord. No. O-9B-91, § I, 9-16-91; Ord. No. O-2-93, § V, 2-1-93; Ord. No. O-11A-96, § I, 11-4-96; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § III, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09B-07, § I, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09B-08, § I, 9-2-08; Ord. No. O-10-10, § I, 10-4-10; Ord. No. O-09C-12, § I, 9-4-12; Ord. No. O-09D-15, § IV, 9-21-15) 
Sec. 10-30. - Yard waste. 
(a)  Residents may drop off yard waste originating in the city at the city waste drop-off site. Residents must show a copy of a current water bill in the resident's name to gain entrance to the city waste drop-off site. Residents will not be charged to use the city waste drop-off site for drop off of yard waste originating in the city. 
(b)  Commercial operators may drop off yard waste originating in the city at the city solid waste drop-off site. They will be charged based on the size and amount of yard waste debris. The rates are as follows: 
Pickup truck ..... $10.00 
Trucks, 1-1/2 to 2 tons ..... $20.00 
Single axle trailer ..... $16.00 
Double-axle trailer up to 16' in length ..... $24.00 
Double-axle trailer over 16' ..... $24.00 
plus $2.00 per foot of trailer over 16' 
(Ord. No. O-5D-81, § 2, 5-18-81; Ord. No. O-9C-87, § 2, 9-8-87; Ord. No. O-4-90, § I, 4-11-90; Ord. No. O-9B-90, § I, 9-24-90; Ord. No. O-9B-91, § I, 9-16-91; Ord. No. O-11A-96, § I, 11-4-96; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § IV, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09B-07, § II, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09B-08, § II, 9-2-08; Ord. No. O-10-10, § II, 10-4-10; Ord. No. O-09C-12, § II, 9-4-12; Ord. No. O-09D-15, § V, 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-12C-15 , § I, 12-7-15) 
Editor's note- Formerly entitled "Rates for commercial containers", which was amended by Ord. No. O-09D-15. 
Sec. 10-31. - Rates outside city. 
    The rates to be charged for the collection of garbage outside the city limits shall be two hundred (200) percent of the rates charged to customers within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-8-84, § 4, 8-23-84) 
Sec. 10-32. - Private collecting prohibited. 
    The collection of garbage, trash, rubbish or junk within the city is prohibited except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. Garbage and refuse collection by private commercial companies within the city limits is prohibited unless approved by the city council. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-13; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § V, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 10-33. - Waste motor oil. 
    Residents may drop off waste motor oil originating in the city at the city waste drop-off site. Residents must show a copy of a current water bill in the resident's name to gain entrance to the city waste drop-off site. Residents will not be charged to use the city waste drop-off site for drop off of waste motor oil originating in the city. Businesses may not drop off waste motor oil at the city waste drop-off site. 
(Ord. No. O-09D-15, § VI, 9-21-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § VI, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 10-33 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-33 was entitled "Rates for open top roll-off container rental", and derived from: Ord. No. O-01-07, § I, adopted Jan. 16, 2007; and Ord. No. O-10-10, § III, adopted Oct. 4, 2010. 
Sec. 10-34. - Collection of recyclables. 
    The private contractor collecting trash and garbage for the city shall accept from city residents all recyclables, except glass, which were accepted by the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. The private contractor will provide within the city limits a collection point for recyclable material. The collection point shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. one (1) day each month. The date shall be designated by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-09D-15, § VII, 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-12C-15 , § II, 12-7-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09D-15, § VII, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 10-34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-34 was entitled "Rates for disposal of residential construction and demolition material delivered by residential customers", and derived from Ord. No. O-01-07, § II, adopted Jan. 16, 2007. 
Sec. 10-35. - Disposal of used vehicle tires. 
(a)  Residents may deliver used vehicle tires to the city waste drop-off site for a charge of five dollars ($5.00) per tire for car or truck tires twenty-two (22) inches in diameter and below, and a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per tire for tires greater than twenty-two (22) inches in diameter. Residents must show a copy of a current water bill in the resident's name to gain entrance to the city waste drop-off site. 
(b)  No commercial or heavy equipment tires will be accepted at the city waste drop-off site. 
(c)  Residents may not deliver more than one (1) set of four (4) vehicle tires per calendar year to the city waste drop-off site. 
(Ord. No. O-01-07, § III, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-09D-15, § VIII, 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-12C-15 , § III, 12-7-15) 
Secs. 10-36-10-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY SOLID WASTE TRANSFER POINT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09E-10, § I, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, renamed art. III, which was entitled "City Landfill" as set out herein. 

Sec. 10-46. - Use required. 
    Garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish and any other material regulated by this article shall not be disposed of in any manner other than through the City of Crockett Solid Waste Department. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-9; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § VI, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 10-47. - Separating and collecting items prohibited. 
    All junk and other material located at the city transfer point is the property of the city, and no person is allowed to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of the same, except under the direction of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3-12; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § VII, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 10-48. - Persons and property authorized to enter the city waste drop-off site. 
    Officers and agents of the private contractor collecting trash and garbage for the City of Crockett, officers of the city, employees of the city employed at the city waste drop-off site and those persons delivering yard debris, waste, motor oil and tires are allowed upon the grounds of the city solid waste transfer site, and all other persons are prohibited therefrom. No one may transport household garbage or refuse into the city waste drop-off site under any circumstances. Nonresidents may not deliver material to the city waste drop-off site, nor shall materials originating outside the city be delivered to the city waste drop-off site. Heavy accumulations such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes, cinders, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, appliances, automobile frames, dead trees, other bulky or heavy material, pieces of wood, barrels, crates, scraps of iron, wire or any other metals shall not be delivered to the city waste drop-off site. 
(Ord. of 7-10-72, § 2; Ord. No. O-09F-05, § VIII, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09D-15, § IX, 9-21-15) 
Sec. 10-49. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall pay the city a franchise fee equal to twelve (12) percent of the gross collections for residential collection. 
(b)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall pay the city a franchise fee equal to ten (10) percent of the gross collections for commercial collection. 
(c)  The private contractor collecting solid waste for the city shall pay the city a franchise fee equal to ten (10) percent of the gross collections for roll-off fees. 
(Ord. No. O-09D-15, § X, 9-21-15) 
Secs. 10-50-10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09F-05, §§ X-XVI, adopted Sept. 6, 2005, repealed article IV in its entirety. Former article IV, §§ 10-66-10-72, pertained to commercial haulers, and derived from Ord. No. O-6-82, § 2, adopted June 7, 1982. 

Secs. 10-66-10-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 10-100. - Violation of chapter. 
(a)  Violation of any duty imposed by this chapter, the commission of any act prohibited by this chapter, the failure to perform any act required thereunder, or the commission of any act defined to be unlawful or an offense thereunder, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who by act of either omission or commission commits such misdemeanor or causes same to be committed shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing subsection (a) the violation of section 10-1, Prohibited Dumping, of the Crockett Code shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections (a) and (b), the penalties of this section shall not apply to violations of section 10-200. 
(Ord. No. O-2-93, § VII, 2-1-93; Ord. No. O-04-07, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. O-12D-15 ) 
Secs. 10-101-10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCRAP TIRES 

Sec. 10-200. - Marking scrap tires by tire dealers. 
(a)  The term "scrap tire" means a tire that can no longer be used for its original intended purpose. 
(b)  No person, firm or organization engaged in the business of selling tires shall possess a scrap tire which is not marked in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Each tire dealer shall mark scrap tires in accordance with this section in a color assigned to the dealer by the code enforcement officer. No two (2) dealers shall be assigned the same color by the code enforcement officer. 
(d)  Scrap tires shall be marked across the sidewall from the center to the outer edge with a single painted stripe, which must be at least one (1) inch in width and in the dealer's assigned color. In the event the tire has no sidewall, it shall be marked completely across the tread with a single painted stripe, which must be at least one (1) inch in width and in the dealer's assigned color. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 2, 4-16-07) 
Sec. 10-201. - Penalty. 
    An offense under section 10-200 is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 3, 4-16-07) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Health officer, § 8.01. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, § 4-1 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, § 5-1 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, § 7-1 et seq.; flood hazard prevention, § 8-1 et seq.; food and food handlers, § 9-1 et seq.; garbage and trash, § 10-1 et seq.; water generally, § 19-21 et seq.; sewers generally, § 19-56 et seq.; industrial waste, § 19-76 et seq.; vegetation, § 20-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- General health power of city, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(28), (34). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Rabies control, § 4-36 et seq.; duty of property owners to trim trees and hedges, § 20-1. 

Sec. 11-16. - Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow holes or places on said lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit same to remain. It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit same to remain. 
State Law reference- Power of city to so provide, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 11-17. - Accumulations of carrion, filth etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, buildings, establishment, lot or yard in the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. 
State Law reference- Power of city to so provide, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 11-18. - Growth or accumulation of weeds, grass or plants; duty to cut, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property to: 
(1)  Permit weeds, grass, brush or plants that are not cultivated to grow upon said premises to a greater height than twelve (12) inches on average or to grow in rank profusion thereon; 
(2)  Keep, store or accumulate refuse, unless the refuse is entirely contained in a closed receptacle; 
(3)  Keep, store or accumulate rubbish, including newspapers, abandoned vehicles, refrigerators, stoves, furniture, tires, and cans, unless the rubbish is completely enclosed in a building and is not visible from a public street; or 
(4)  Maintain the premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitos, rodents, vermin or disease-carrying pests. 
Any such premises shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any owner of any premises to remove or cause to be removed or cut all weeds, grass, brush or plants that are not cultivated as often as may be necessary to comply with subsection (a) of this section and to remove any other matter prohibited by this section; provided, however, that the removal and cutting of said weeds, grass, brush or plants that are not cultivated at least once every three (3) weeks during the period between June 1 and October 1 shall be deemed to be in compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-12B-13, § I, 12-9-13) 
State Law reference- Power of city to so provide, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 11-19. - Notice to correct or remove condition. 
    In the event that any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property permits any condition to exist thereon in violation of this article, the city shall notify such person of his failure to comply and direct him to correct, remedy, or remove such condition within ten (10) days after such notice. Such notice shall be sent to the person by certified or registered mail with a five-day return requested. The property owner or agent's name and address will be taken from the city tax rolls as obtained from the Houston County Central Appraisal District. If the person's correct address cannot be obtained and notification cannot be made by letter, notice shall be given by publication in two (2) consecutive issues of the Houston County Courier, Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-7C-85, § 2, 7-15-85) 
State Law reference- Required notice, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 11-20. - Correction or removal of condition by city. 
(a)  If the owner of real property permits any condition to exist thereon in violation of this article, the city may give notice of the violation in the following manner: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication one (1) time in the Houston County Courier, Crockett, Texas; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(b)  If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "Refused" or "Unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(c)  If the owner of the property fails or refuses to correct, remedy or remove the condition specified in the notice within seven (7) days after notice of the violation, the city may: 
(1)  Do the work or make the improvements required; or 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(d)  In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within a one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take the action permitted by subsections (c)(1) and (2) and assess its expenses as provided by section 11-20.1. 
(Ord. No. O-7C-85, § 3, 7-15-85; Ord. No. O-09B-02, § I, 9-16-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 11-20.1. - Assessment of expenses; lien. 
(a)  The city may assess expenses incurred under section 11-20 against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, municipal health officer or municipal official designated by the mayor must file a statement of expenses with the County Clerk of Houston County, Texas. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. 
(c)  The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. 
(d)  The lien is inferior only to: 
(1)  Tax liens; and 
(2)  Liens for street improvements. 
(e)  The city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. 
(f)  The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(Ord. No. O-09B-02, § II, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 11-20.2. - Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds. 
(a)  The city may abate, without notice, weeds that: 
(1)  Have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 11-20. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations of the ordinance that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the municipality abated the weeds; and 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the municipality's abatement of the weeds. 
(d)  The code enforcement officer shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing. 
(e)  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. 
(f)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 11-20.1. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 11-20.1. 
(g)  The authority granted by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 11-20. 
(Ord. No. O-09B-02, § III, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 11-21. - Violations. 
    Any person notified as provided in section 11-19 who fails or refuses to correct or remove the condition specified in such notice within ten (10) days after the date of notification by letter or within ten (10) days after the date of second publication of the notice in the newspaper, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and issued a warrant to appear in municipal court. Each and every day that the violation remains uncorrected shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
State Law reference- Power of city to so provide, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436; responsibility of corporations for violations, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 11-22. - Appeal to district court. 
    Any interested person may appeal a determination by the city under sections 11-20, 11-20.1 or 11-20.2 within thirty (30) days after a copy of the determination of the city is delivered, mailed, published or posted, by filing a verified petition with the District Court of Houston County, Texas stating that the decision is illegal in whole or in part. Review by the district court shall be de novo, and the district court may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-09D-12, § I, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 11-23. - Disposal of grass clippings, leaves and tree limbs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant and person in charge of premises and each person performing labor on-premises to insure that all grass clippings, leaves and tree limbs are properly disposed of without creating a health or safety hazard. No one shall blow, rake or sweep or otherwise place grass clippings, tree limbs or leaves on any city street within the City of Crockett. No person shall cause grass clippings, tree limbs or leaves to be dumped, raked or otherwise placed into ditches, creeks or streams within the City of Crockett. 
(b)  The refuse control officer may issue a citation to appear in municipal court to any person he believes has violated the provisions of this section. Any violation of the provisions of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-B-10, § 1, 4-5-10; Ord. No. O-09D-12, § I, 9-4-12) 
Editor's note- Formerly codified as § 11-22, which was renumbered as set out herein, due to the inclusion of a new § 11-22 added by Ord. No. O-09D-12. 
Secs. 11-24-11-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCES; EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, repealed the former art. III., §§ 11-36-11-58, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-5-83, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 16, 1983; Ord. No. O-10A-83, adopted Oct. 3, 1983; Ord. No. O-2A-84, adopted Feb. 20, 1984; Ord. No. O-10B-84, § I, adopted Oct. 1, 1984; Ord. No. O-8A-85, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 19, 1985; Ord. No. O-4A-86, § 1, adopted Apr. 21, 1986 and Ord. No. O-9-86, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 1986. 
State Law reference- Ambulances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4590b. 

Sec. 11-36. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to: 
(1)  Establish a regulated ambulance service system, which can provide clinical quality of care, with reasonable, reliable response time standards, and with the goal of furnishing the best possible chance of survival, without disability or preventable complication, to each ambulance patient. 
(2)  Establish a sole-provider ambulance system, because it is unreasonable to have unnecessarily high rates and/or public subsidy to make needed improvements to ambulance service in the service area, when a more efficiently designed system can achieve the same results at a lower cost. The most efficient design to achieve the goals of high-quality service, at the lowest cost, consistent with the quality of care required, is the implementation of the system described herein. 
(3)  Provide a method to develop specific performance standards, adequate review, and either a continuation of service or an appropriate procedure to obtain alternate proposals from other providers. 
(4)  Provide more effective medical oversight by recognizing a medical director who is a licensed physician expert in emergency medicine and related specialties as the individual empowered to oversee all clinical aspects of the emergency medical system that affect patient care within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 2, 12-5-05) 
Sec. 11-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Ambulance: Any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients. 
    Ambulance patient or patient: Any person being transported in a reclining position, whose transport originates within the city limits, to or from a health care facility. 
    Ambulance service contractor: That entity which is then currently under contract to provide all ambulance and ambulance patient services within the city limits, except those services specifically exempted by section 11-38 of this article. 
    Contract/regulated service area: The geographic area encompassing the city and other such areas where the city may be responsible for the provision of public safety service, including ambulance service. This includes and is defined as the geographical area within the city and the surrounding areas served by the city water system. 
    EMS system: That network of individuals, organizations, facilities and equipment whose participation is required to generate a clinically-appropriate, pre-planned, system-wide response for pre-hospital care and transport or interfacility transport, so as to provide each patent the best possible chance of survival without disability, given available financial resources and EMS technology. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental agency, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Special event: Any public event located within the regulated service area, for which standby ambulance service is arranged in advance, and for which an ambulance (or ambulances) are hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 2, 12-5-05) 
Sec. 11-38. - Authority to operate-Exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an ambulance, nor furnish, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of ambulance patients within the regulated service area, or provide special event standby coverage, unless such person is the ambulance service contractor. No person shall knowingly solicit ambulance services regulated herein except the ambulance service contractor. 
(b)  However, the prohibitions set forth in subsection (a), immediately above, shall not be applicable to an ambulance service provider: 
(1)  Which is rendering assistance to patients in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the contractor's ambulances are insufficient or unable to cope; or is 
(2)  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the regulated service area and transported to a location within the regulated service area; or is 
(3)  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the regulated service area and transported to a location beyond the limits of the regulated service area and only incidentally passing through the regulated service area; or is 
(4)  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location within the regulated service area and transported to a location outside the regulated service area. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 2, 12-5-05) 
Sec. 11-39. - Compliance with law. 
    All persons and entities regulated under this section shall comply with the laws of the state and reference to permits, licenses, minimum equipment and minimum qualifications of operators and attendants and all state and federal laws and regulations applicable to its ambulance operation. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 2, 12-5-05) 
Secs. 11-40-11-65. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Establishment and maintenance of free public library, § 3.11(p). 

Sec. 12-1. - Overdue materials; charges. 
(a)  Any material borrowed from the city library shall be deemed delinquent if it is not returned within twenty-one (21) days from the day it is borrowed. 
(b)  Overdue charges shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) per day, not to exceed a total charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per item. 
(Ord. No. O-9-81, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. O-10C-02, § I, 10-7-02) 
Sec. 12-2. - Lost books. 
    If a book or periodical is lost and cannot be returned, the patron shall pay the city public library the cost of the item as listed in the most current issue of Books in Print in effect on the date of the loss. 
(Ord. No. O-9-81, § 1, 9-8-81) 
Sec. 12-3. - Failure to return library materials. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or knowingly fails to return library materials to the city public library which were loaned to such person or borrowed in such person's name with his consent. 
(b)  Intent or knowledge as used in subsection (a) shall be presumed if: 
(1)  Pursuant to the agreement, the library materials were to be returned to the library on a date specified. 
(2)  Actual notice is given or notice in writing is sent by depositing in the United States mail a notice addressed to the patron at his address as shown on the records of the library stating that the library materials were not returned on the date specified. 
(3)  The library material is not returned to the library within twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice. 
(c)  When the notice required by subsection (b)(2) has been sent and the library materials have not been returned within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the notice, the library shall send a second notice to the patron and if the patron shall neglect to return the library materials within ten (10) days of the mailing of the second notice, the patron shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  If a notice is given in accordance with subsections (b) or (c), it shall be presumed that the notice was received no later than five (5) days after it was sent. 
(Ord. No. O-9-81, § 1, 9-8-81) 
Sec. 12-4. - Action in municipal court. 
(a)  Charges may be filed in the municipal court for violation of this chapter, upon proper complaint. 
(b)  In prosecutions brought under this chapter, it is no defense that the patron, though the actual borrower, no longer possesses the library materials. The patron is responsible for the library materials when they are checked out. 
(c)  In a prosecution under this chapter, it is an affirmative defense that another borrowed the library material in the name of the patron without his effective consent. 
(d)  Upon conviction of an offense under this chapter, the patron shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each item. 
(Ord. No. O-9-81, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. O-10C-02, § II, 10-7-02) 
Sec. 12-5. - Responsibility of parents for acts of minors. 
    A parent or legal guardian of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time library material is borrowed from the city public library shall be responsible for violation of this chapter by their child. 
(Ord. No. O-9-81, § 1, 9-8-81) 
Chapter 13 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Certification of food handlers, § 9-16 et seq.; hotel occupancy tax, § 18-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1015, 1175(34). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Establishments in which alcoholic beverages are consumed. 
(a)  In this section "establishment" means any privately owned place of business operating for profit to which the public is invited and in which alcoholic beverages are consumed or have been consumed within the past twenty-four (24) hours, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment, including dance halls and music venues. 
(b)  No establishment may remain open or have any customers on the premises between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(c)  No establishment may hold any private party on the premises, between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(d)  This section does not apply to any establishment permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to remain open after those hours. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or person in charge of an establishment to allow any customer or other person not an employee of the establishment to remain on the premises or to hold any private party on the premises between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday, and such activity is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this section. 
(f)  Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than allowed by law. 
(g)  In addition, or as an alternative thereto, the city may, in the event of such violation, obtain injunctive relief in an appropriate court with jurisdiction in Houston County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-10, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. O-03-13, § 1, 3-4-13) 
Secs. 13-2-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-04, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2004, repealed provisions formerly set out as art. II, §§ 13-16-13-20, 13-26-13-49, of this chapter, which pertained to peddlers, itinerant vendors, and commercial amusement operators and derived from Ord. No. O-11-83, §§ 1, 3-10, 12-16, adopted Nov. 7, 1983; and Ord. No. O-10A-86, §§ 2-9, adopted Oct. 20, 1986. Section 2 of Ord. No. O-12-04 added new provisions to this chapter which have been included herein as arts. II-IV at the editor's discretion. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of the provisions of Ord. No. O-12-04. 

Sec. 13-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person who engages in a temporary business within the city limits and who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house-to-house, business-to-business or upon public property. 
    Solicitor means any person who engages in a temporary business within the city limits and who solicits or attempts to solicit, from house-to-house, business-to-business or upon public property, goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions, or publications to be delivered at a future date or time or orders for services to be performed at any time. The term "canvasser" is included under this definition of "solicitor". 
    A merchant shall be considered temporarily in business unless it is the intention of such merchant to remain continuously in business at each location where the merchant is engaged in business in the city as a merchant for a period of sixty (60) days or more and unless the merchant does in fact so remain continuously in business for sixty (60) days or more. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.010), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-17. - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in business within the city without first obtaining a permit from the code enforcement officer as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.020), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-18. - Permit-Exemptions. 
    The following are excluded from permitting provisions: 
(1)  Newspaper carriers; 
(2)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them; 
(3)  Locally-based nonprofit organizations; however, they are required to notify the code enforcement officer, at least three (3) business days in advance of any campaign, as to the approximate dates of the campaign, the areas in which they will be selling, and a description of items and services to be sold. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.030), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-19. - Permit-Written application required. 
    Any peddler or solicitor desiring to engage in business within the city must file a written application for a permit with the code enforcement officer, which application shall give the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's name, telephone number, address, birthdate, physical description and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social Security number and an official, government-issued picture identification card; 
(2)  If the applicant is peddling or making solicitations for any commercial, charitable or political organization, the name, telephone number and address of such organization; 
(3)  A full and complete list of goods to be sold and/or services to be performed; 
(4)  For each individual involved in the peddling or solicitation campaign: Name, telephone number, address, birthdate, physical description and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social Security number and an official, government-issued picture identification card; 
(5)  Description (year, make, type) and license plate number and state of all vehicles to be used in soliciting and peddling; 
(6)  A surety bond approved by the code enforcement officer or a cash bond, in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the applicant comply with all provisions of the Crockett Code and all other applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(7)  Satisfactory proof that the applicant possesses a valid Texas sales tax permit. 
    The applicant must provide original identifying documents to the code enforcement officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.040), 12-6-04; Ord. No. O-08-12, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 13-20. - Permit-Fees. 
(a)  All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by section 13-21 shall pay a permit fee to the city secretary of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for one (1) individual and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional person. 
(b)  All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by section 13-21 shall pay to the City of Crockett the cost incurred by the city in conducting a background check with the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.050), 12-6-04; Ord. No. O-08-12, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 13-21. - Permit-Fees-Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the permit fee: 
(a)  Any individual soliciting or peddling for a philanthropic, charitable, political or religious organization; 
(b)  Any individual engaged in interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.060), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-22. - Permit-Denial. 
(a)  A copy of the application for permit will be referred to the chief of police, who will undertake an investigation of the applicant's record and background, such as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the public. An application for permit under this article may be denied where: 
(1)  Required application information is incomplete or incorrect; 
(2)  Applicant is currently wanted on a warrant for arrest; 
(3)  Applicant has been finally convicted of an offense under Chapter 21, 22, 29, 30, 31 or 32 of the Penal Code of the State of Texas or of a crime committed in another jurisdiction which, if it had been committed in the State of Texas, would be classified under one (1) or more of said chapters. 
(b)  If the code enforcement officer denies a permit, the applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the planning and zoning commission. A subcommittee of the planning and zoning commission, composed of the chairman of the commission and two (2) members of the commission appointed by the chairman, shall decide whether to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer by majority vote. If the subcommittee denies a permit, the applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the city council, which may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the subcommittee. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.070), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-23. - Permit-Issuance, duration. 
(a)  If the code enforcement officer or appellate authority finds that the application is completed in conformance with sections 13-19 through 13-22, a permit shall be issued within one (1) working day. The permit shall be the original application under section 13-19, with an official stamp indicating approval by the code enforcement officer. Each permit will be valid for one (1) month from date of issue; 
(b)  The code enforcement officer will retain one (1) copy of the approved permit for official records. The permit may not be represented as an endorsement or approval by the City of Crockett of the purposes of a solicitation or a product offered by the permittee; 
(c)  One (1) copy of the approved permit will be sent to the chief of police; 
(d)  Only those peddlers or solicitors whose names are listed on the approved application may conduct business under the issued permit. If any new peddlers or solicitors join the campaign after the original permit is issued, they must supply the code enforcement officer with the information required in section 13-19. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.080), 12-6-04; Ord. No. O-08-12, § 3, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 13-24. - Permit-Display. 
    Each peddler or solicitor will carry his or her permit at all times while engaging in business in the city. Upon request or demand of a peace officer, the peddler or solicitor will exhibit the permit to indicate compliance with all of the relevant requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.090), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-25. - Permit-Non-transferability. 
    Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable in any situation and will be clearly marked "Not Transferable." 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.100), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-26. - Permit-Suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police or the chief's designee may, upon documented violation of law or endangerment of public welfare, health or safety by a peddler or solicitor, suspend and confiscate a permit issued under this article. 
(b)  Peddlers and solicitors whose licenses are suspended have three (3) business days during which to request an administrative review by the code enforcement officer of the suspension. If request for administrative review is not made within three (3) working days, the permit is revoked. If the code enforcement officer decides to suspend or revoke the permit, the permit holder may appeal this decision in writing to the planning and zoning commission. A subcommittee of the planning and zoning commission, composed of the chairman of the commission and two (2) members of the commission appointed by the chairman shall decide whether to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer by majority vote. If the subcommittee suspends or revokes a permit, the permit holder may appeal this decision in writing to the city council, which may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the subcommittee. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.110), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-27. - Permit-Revocation. 
(a)  Upon a permittee's request, the code enforcement officer shall provide the permittee with written notice containing the particulars of any and all complaints against the permittee and the time, date and place for an administrative review of the suspension. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer will conduct an administrative review to determine whether the permit shall be restored or revoked. 
(c)  After notice and review, the code enforcement officer may revoke any permit issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent statements or omissions on a permit application or in conduct of permitted business; 
(2)  Violation of law; 
(3)  Endangerment of public welfare, health or safety. 
(d)  If the code enforcement officer revokes a permit, the permittee may appeal the decision in writing to the planning and zoning commission. A subcommittee of the planning and zoning commission, composed of the chairman of the commission and two (2) members of the commission appointed by the chairman, shall decide whether to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer, by majority vote. If the subcommittee revokes a permit, the permit holder may appeal this decision in writing to the city council. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer. 
(e)  Revocation of any permit shall bar the permittee from eligibility for any permit under this article for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.120), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-28. - Hours of operation. 
    No peddler or solicitor may conduct activities defined in section 13-16 except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.130), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-29. - No solicitor signs. 
    Any peddler or solicitor who conducts or attempts to conduct business at a place where a sign clearly indicates that solicitors or peddlers are unwelcome is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.140), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-30. - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.150), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-31. - Peddlers and solicitors prohibited in downtown area. 
    No peddler or solicitor shall engage in business in the downtown area. The downtown area is the area highlighted in yellow on the attached map (map of file with the city). 
(Ord. No. O-08-12, § 4, 8-6-12) 
Secs. 13-32-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- See the editor's note to art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 13-36. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to show or conduct any carnival or circus within the city limits without first obtaining a license to do so from the city council. Any person showing or exhibiting, or in any manner connected with or taking part in the showing or exhibiting of, a carnival or circus within the city limits without first applying for and obtaining such a license shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and fined not more than allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.210), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-37. - Application for license. 
(a)  Filing of application. Any person desiring to conduct or show a carnival or circus within the city limits shall make application for a license to the city council and file the same with the code enforcement officer not less than two (2) weeks prior to the time when it is desired to show or conduct such carnival or circus. Such application shall give the name and permanent address of the owner of the carnival or circus, and, if the carnival or circus is owned by a company or corporation, the application shall show such fact and shall show the name and address of the manager or other officer in charge of the carnival or circus. In any event, the application shall identify the person in active charge and control of showing and conducting the carnival or circus. The application shall further list all shows, rides, booths, and other businesses and attractions operated in connection with the carnival or circus and the location within the city where such carnival or circus is to be held. Such applicant shall also submit with the application, in the form of affidavits and financial statements, evidence as to the solvency and responsibility of the owner of the carnival or circus. In making such application, the person making same shall also pledge to conduct the carnival or circus and each and all of the shows, attractions, rides, booths, businesses and exhibits therein in an orderly and law-abiding manner. 
(b)  Approval of application. After an application is filed under this section, the code enforcement officer shall refer the same to the city council for action, and if the city council is convinced from the evidence submitted that the owner of the carnival or circus is solvent and that he has in the past conducted and proposes to conduct, while showing in the city, the carnival or circus in a decent, orderly, and law-abiding manner, the city council shall approve the application. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.220), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-38. - Fee for license. 
    As a condition and requirement of the licensing of any carnival or circus to show in the city, the applicant for such license shall pay to the city secretary a license fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.230), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-39. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon approval by the city council of an application for a license under this section, and payment of the fee prescribed, the code enforcement officer shall issue a license to the applicant to show and conduct the carnival or circus in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.240), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-40. - Term of license. 
    A license issued under this section shall cover one (1) appearance in the city and shall be good only for as many days as the carnival or circus remains continuously in the city. A new license shall be required each time the carnival or circus returns to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.250), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-41. - Operation under license. 
    Any person obtaining a license to show and conduct a carnival or circus within the city limits shall have the right to show, maintain, and operate only such shows, rides, booths, businesses and other attractions as shall be under the direct charge and supervision of the owner or operator of the carnival or circus, and it shall not be lawful for any person to show or conduct in connection with the carnival or circus, any show, attraction, ride, booth or concession of any kind or character independent of the carnival's or circus' ownership and management. The license granted to such carnival or circus covers and permits only such shows, attractions, rides, booths and concessions as are owned and operated by the person applying for the license. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.260), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-42. - Exemption. 
    This article shall not apply to any show or exhibition supported and sponsored by local operators for charitable and benevolent purposes-not for individual or personal profit to those managing and operating the same-regardless of whether such local show or exhibition shall have some of the features of a carnival or circus in connection with same, nor shall it apply to ferris wheel, merry-go-round ride and similar amusement devices sponsored by local merchants, service clubs, and other organizations, and not operated in connection with any show or exhibition. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.270), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-43. - License-Display. 
    Each applicant for a carnival or circus license will display the license at all times while engaging in business in the city. Upon request or demand of a peace officer, the licensee will exhibit the permit to indicate compliance with all of the relevant requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.280), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-44. - License-Non-transferability. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable in any situation and will be clearly marked "Not Transferable." 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.290), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-45. - License-Suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police or the chief's designee may, upon documented violation of law or endangerment of public welfare, health or safety by a carnival or circus, suspend and confiscate a license issued under this article. 
(b)  Carnivals or circuses whose licenses are suspended have three (3) business days during which to request an administrative review by the code enforcement officer of the suspension. If request for administrative review is not made within three (3) working days, the license is revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.300), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-46. - License-Revocation. 
(a)  Upon a licensee's request, the code enforcement officer shall provide the licensee with written notice containing the particulars of any and all complaints against the licensee, and the time, date and place for an administrative review of the suspension. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer will conduct an administrative review to determine whether the license shall be restored or revoked. 
(c)  After notice and review, the code enforcement officer may revoke any license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent statements or omissions on a license application or in conduct of a licensed carnival or circus; 
(2)  Violation of law; 
(3)  Endangerment of public welfare, health or safety. 
(d)  If the code enforcement officer revokes a permit, the permittee may appeal the decision in writing to the planning and zoning commission. A subcommittee of the planning and zoning commission, composed of the chairman of the commission and two (2) members of the commission appointed by the chairman, shall decide whether to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer, by majority vote. If the subcommittee revokes a permit, the permit holder may appeal this decision in writing to the city council. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the subcommittee. 
(e)  Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from eligibility for any license under this article for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.310), 12-6-04) 
Secs. 13-47-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOL HALLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note- See the editor's note to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 13-51. - Definition of terms. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the same meaning respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Billiard table shall mean any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are played with a stick or cue. 
(2)  Licensee shall mean any person holding a pool hall license issued under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Pool hall shall mean any place which charges a fee for the use of one (1) or more billiard tables. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.410), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-52. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.420), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-53. - License. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Application for license. Each person, firm, company, association or corporation desiring to operate a pool hall in the city shall make an application in writing on a form provided by the city requesting a license for such pool hall. Each application for a license to operate a pool hall shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, age, sex, address, and telephone number of applicant and of the manager or officer in charge of the proposed pool hall; 
(2)  The location of the proposed pool hall; 
(3)  The number of persons to be employed by applicant, if any, and nature of such employment; 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant or manager or other officer in charge has ever been charged with, or convicted of, a felony, any violation of the liquor laws, any offense involving lewd or indecent conduct or narcotics, or any other misdemeanor (other than traffic violations) and full information concerning any convictions. 
(5)  A statement that any violation of state law, this article, or any other city ordinance which may occur at such establishment will be promptly reported to the police department. 
(6)  A statement that no person will be allowed to work or perform duties at such establishment who has been finally convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or indecent conduct, or narcotics. 
(c)  Making false statements. It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a license under the provisions of this section to make any false statements while making application therefor. 
(d)  Fee for license. The fee to be charged and collected for any license issued under the provisions of this section shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(e)  Denial of license. No license to operate a pool hall shall be issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant or manager or officer in charge: 
(1)  Has had a license revoked during the past one (1) year; 
(2)  Has had a license denied during the past one (1) year; 
(3)  Has been convicted of a felony, a crime involving moral turpitude or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or indecent conduct, or narcotics; 
(4)  Has not maintained the premises to be used in accordance with the provisions of this article, state law, and other city ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(f)  Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended upon the violation by a licensee or any of his employees of any applicable provision of this section, state law, or other city ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(g)  Complaints. 
(1)  Any person may initiate proceedings for revocation or suspension of any license issued under the provisions of this article by filing a sworn complaint with the code enforcement officer alleging the commission of any act in violation of any applicable provision of this article, state law, or other city ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(2)  Upon the filing of any complaint alleging the violation of any applicable provision of this article, state law, or other city ordinances, rules or regulations by any person holding a license under the provisions of this section or any agent or employee of such person, the code enforcement officer shall give at least ten (10) days written notice to such licensee that a hearing will be held to determine whether or not such licensee's license shall be suspended or revoked. The date, time and place of the hearing shall be set forth in the notice. 
(3)  After hearing the evidence and testimony, the code enforcement officer shall determine whether or not the licensee has committed the violation alleged in the complaint. If he finds for the licensee, the complaint shall be dismissed. If he finds that the licensee is guilty of the violation, he shall either suspend the license for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months or revoke the license. 
(h)  Appeal of revocation or suspension. If the code enforcement officer suspends or revokes a permit, the permittee may appeal the decision in writing to the planning and zoning commission. A subcommittee of the planning and zoning commission, composed of the chairman of the commission and two (2) members of the commission appointed by the chairman, shall decide whether to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer, by majority vote. If the subcommittee suspends or revokes a permit, the permit holder may appeal this decision in writing to the city council. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the subcommittee. 
(i)  Display of license. All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall be promptly displayed by the licensee at the subject pool hall. 
(j)  Inspection. Any pool hall within the city shall be subject to inspection by members of the police department and the code enforcement officer at any time. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.430), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-54. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04, § II(13.440), 12-6-04) 
Secs. 13-55-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II, adopted March 7, 2005, amended provisions formerly set out as Art. III, §§ 13-61-13-74, of this chapter in its entirety, which pertained to similar provisions as this Art. V, §§ 13-61-13-74, and derived from Ord. No. O-5-96, §§ I-XIV, adopted May 6, 1996. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of the provisions of Ord. No. O-03B-05. 

Sec. 13-61. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Driver means an individual who drives or operates a taxicab. 
    Holder means a person who is granted an annual operating permit to operate a taxicab service under the provisions of this article. 
    Operate means to drive or be in control of a taxicab. 
    Operating permit means permission granted by the city to operate a taxicab service inside the city for a period of one (1) year, renewable under the provisions of this article. 
    Operator means the driver of a taxicab, the owner of a taxicab or the holder of an annual operating permit. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, agency, trust, partnership, or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. 
    Taxicab means a private passenger for-hire vehicle used to transport persons for hire in vehicles designed for carrying no more than eight (8) passengers, on a call or demand basis, within the city limits of the municipality, or on property owned by the municipality, either singly or jointly with other municipalities or public agencies, or on property in which the municipality possesses an ownership interest, or from such municipality, municipal property, or municipal property interest and returning thereto, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise or permit for the transportation by said vehicle of passengers for hire, legally issued by an authorized agency of the state, or a vehicle being operated as a chartered bus under a contract to carry nine (9) or more passengers; 
(2)  Vehicles being used as ambulances; 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for self operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such a vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the same. 
    Taxicab driver's license means a license issued to a person by the city authorizing that person to operate a taxicab in the city for a period of one (1) year from the date of its issuance. 
    Taxicab service means a passenger transportation service operated for hire that uses one (1) or more taxicabs in the operation of the service and includes, but is not limited to, a facility from which the service is operated, taxicabs used in the operation, and a person who owns, controls, or operates the service. 
    Taximeter means a device that automatically computes a taxi fare based upon the distance traveled or the time the taxicab is engaged or both. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.510), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-62. - Conduct of drivers. 
    While on duty, a taxicab driver shall conduct himself in a reasonable, prudent and courteous manner. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.511), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-63. - Inspection and qualification of taxicabs. 
    Before being allowed to operate upon the streets of the city, each taxicab shall be inspected and approved annually by the chief of police or his representative. No taxicab shall be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the same is in safe condition and free from mechanical defects, and it must further meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Have a current valid state inspection sticker and be in compliance with the safety requirements of the state motor vehicle code, as amended; and 
(2)  Be no more than five (5) years old; and 
(3)  Have a seat belt for each passenger; and 
(4)  Have an operating heater and air conditioner; and 
(5)  Have a two-way radio on the holder's dispatch frequency; and 
(6)  Have a current valid sticker issued by the city affixed to the windshield; and 
(7)  Have painted on both sides the trade name of the organization under whose operating permit such taxicab is being operated, the taxicab unit number, and the business telephone number of the holder of the operating permit. Such letters and numbers shall not be less than three (3) inches high with one-half-inch stroke, painted on each taxicab with permanent, nonwashable paint of a color sharply contrasting to the color of the taxicab so that the same will be readily apparent. Each holder of an operating permit for taxicab service in the city shall cause each taxicab to be painted in such a manner as to properly distinguish it from private vehicles and taxicabs operated by different taxicab services. The color combinations to be used shall be filed with the city secretary; and no two (2) such taxicab services shall be permitted to use the same or similar color combinations. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.512), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-64. - Taximeter. 
(a)  Every taxicab operating under an operating permit granted by the city shall have affixed thereto a taximeter which shall calculate fares in accordance with services rendered and rates established by the city council. 
(b)  The rates to be charged for taxicab service in the city shall be established by the city council as it may from time to time determine by resolution. 
(c)  Rates shall be posted inside the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.513), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-65. - Refusal to convey passengers. 
(a)  While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless: 
(1)  The person is disorderly; or 
(2)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; or 
(3)  The driver is in fear of his personal safety. 
(b)  Except as specified in subsection (a) above, while operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by radio dispatcher when the location of the taxicab is within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.514), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-66. - Operating permit required. 
    No person shall drive, operate or cause to be operated, nor shall any person employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated, any taxicab upon any street in the city for the purpose of transporting a passenger or passengers for compensation, nor shall any person accept compensation for transportation of passengers, without first having obtained from the city, under the provisions of this article, an operating permit authorizing such operation and acts, except a vehicle which is lawfully transporting a passenger or passengers from a point outside the city to a destination within the city, or, after discharging such passenger within the city, is returning empty by the most direct route to its regular place of business outside the city; provided, however, that no such vehicle without such operating permit shall solicit or accept a passenger or passengers from any point within the city for transportation to any destination whatsoever, and no such vehicle without such operating permit shall remain waiting for more than five (5) minutes at any point in the city for a passenger brought in by it for the purpose of continuing the journey of such passenger or for any purpose except to have repairs made upon it at a garage or other place where automobile repairs are customarily made. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.515), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-67. - Application for operating permit. 
(a)  To obtain a taxicab operating permit, a person shall file a written application with the city secretary in the manner prescribed by this section. That applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed taxicab service. An applicant shall file with the city secretary a written verified application containing the following: 
(1)  The form of business of the applicant, if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business, and the name, address and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business; 
(2)  Name, address and verified signature of the applicant; 
(3)  An actual or pro forma income statement and balance sheet showing the assets, liabilities and the equity of the business; 
(4)  Description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing passenger transportation services, identification and description of any revocation or suspension of a license, franchise or permit held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application; 
(5)  The number of vehicles and description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab service; the description of the operations of the proposed taxicab services and the location of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation; 
(6)  The description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the applicant's taxicabs; 
(7)  Documentary evidence from an insurance company, authorized to do business in the state, indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance required by this article; 
(8)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab service; 
(9)  A description of each felony or misdemeanor for which the applicant has ever been convicted, including the nature of the offense, the date of the offense, the date of conviction, the name and address of the convicting court, and the number and style of the criminal case; and 
(10)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include to aid in the determination of whether the requested operating permit should be granted; and 
(11)  Such additional information as the city council considered necessary to assist or promote the implementation or enforcement of this article or the protection of the public safety. 
(b)  When an application for an operating permit containing the required information in full, properly verified, is filed with the city secretary, it shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of such application. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.516), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-68. - Investigation of application for operating permit by city council. 
(a)  After receiving any application for an operating permit, the city council shall make or cause to be made by its agents or employees, or by a person designated by it, such investigation as it may consider necessary. If such person has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with the section 13-73(5) hereof. The city council shall determine whether or not the public necessity and convenience require the operation of such taxicabs and whether or not the applicant is fit and proper, qualified and able to officially conduct such business and render such service to the public, but the operating permit will not be granted unless the holder of the operating permit: 
(1)  Provides taxicab service to the entire city with a minimum of one (1) taxicab registered to service; and 
(2)  Provides taxicab service between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week; and 
(3)  Provides dispatch service to taxicabs between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week; and 
(4)  Provides proof of minimum liability insurance for each taxicab as follows: 
a.  Bodily injury, two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) each person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence; and 
b.  Property damage, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each occurrence; and 
(5)  The holder of an operating permit pays an annual operating fee based on a rate as the city council may determine from time to time by resolution. 
(b)  An operating permit may not be granted for a period longer than one (1) year; however, the annual operating permit is automatically renewed; provided, however, the holder thereof is in full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.517), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-69. - Public hearings on application for operating permit. 
    No permit to operate a taxicab service in the city shall be granted until a public hearing shall have been held before the city council on such request at a regular meeting of the city council. Upon approval of an application for a taxicab operating permit by the city council, the permit will be granted in the manner prescribed in this article, containing such terms or conditions as are included by the city council. Unless the permit expressly indicates otherwise, the provisions of this article are expressly set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.518), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-70. - Transferability of operating permit. 
    An operating permit issued under the provisions of this article may not be transferred to another person unless such transfer is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.519), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-71. - Revocation of operating permit. 
    The city council may revoke a taxicab operating permit if it determines that the holder has done any of the following: 
(1)  Failed to comply with any provisions of this article; 
(2)  Breached any of the terms of the operating permit; 
(3)  Failed to pay city ad valorem taxes on property having taxable situs in the city, used directly or indirectly in connection with the taxicab service; 
(4)  Failed to pay the annual permit fee when due. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.520), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-72. - Taxicab driver's license required. 
(a)  A person may not drive a taxicab inside the city unless he has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A holder may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab owned, controlled, or operated by the holder unless the person has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.521), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-73. - Qualifications for taxicab driver's license. 
    To qualify for a taxicab driver's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be a legal resident of the United States; 
(2)  Hold a valid license issued by the state authorizing application to operate a taxicab; 
(3)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(4)  Not have been convicted of more than four (4) moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions, nor involved in more than two (2) automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that he was at fault, within a twelve-month period during the preceding thirty-six (36) months; 
(5)  Not have been convicted of any crime involving murder, theft, burglary, robbery, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, public lewdness, a sexual offense or a drug related offense, unless five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date. 
(6)  Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred adjudication for, driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs; 
(7)  Have completed a defensive driving course approved by the National Safety Council within the last twelve (12) months prior to making his or her application for the license initially granted to the applicant; 
(8)  Pay a taxicab driver's license permit fee annually based on a rate as determined by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.522), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-74. - Revocation of taxicab driver's license. 
    The chief of police may revoke a taxicab driver's license if he determines that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. The revocation of the taxicab driver's license is effective immediately upon notification in writing to the driver or the holder of the annual operating permit. The licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council within five (5) days of receipt of the notice of revocation of the taxicab driver's license. 
(Ord. No. O-03B-05, § II (13.523), 3-7-05) 
Secs. 13-75-13-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION OF RETAIL ELECTRIC PROVIDERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03-03, adopted March 24, 2003, enacted new provisions which in effect amended Art. VI of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. VI, §§ 13-100-13-103, pertained to retail electric providers and derived from Ord. No. O-01D-02, § I, adopted Jan. 22, 2002. Sections 1-4 of Ord. No. O-03-03 have been included herein as a new Art. VI, §§ 13-100-13-103 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 13-100. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of Crockett City Council finds that it is in the best interest of the public to require that a retail electric provider (REP) register as a condition of serving city residents. This article establishes a "safe harbor" process for registration of REPs to standardize notice and filing procedures, deadlines, and registration information and fees. The "safe harbor" registration process provides certainty to city and REPs, thereby facilitating the development of a competitive retail electric market in Texas. 
(b)  Repeal of existing ordinance addressing REP registration. To the extent that an existing ordinance or ordinances of the City of Crockett address REP registration, such other ordinance or ordinances are hereby repealed. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Commission or PUC shall mean the Public Utility Commission of Texas. 
    PURA shall mean the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, as amended. 
    REP shall mean retail electric provider. 
    Registration form shall mean the registration form approved by the commission in accordance with Commission Substantive Rule § 25.113 and available on the commission's website or from the commission's central records division. 
    Resident shall mean any electric customer located within the city, except the City of Crockett, regardless of customer class. 
    Revocation shall mean the cessation of all REP business operations within city, pursuant to commission order. 
    Suspension shall mean the cessation of all REP business operations within city associated with obtaining new customers, pursuant to commission order. 
(d)  Non-discrimination in REP registration requirements. The registration requirements apply equally to all REPs and types of REP. However, the city may exclude from its registration requirement the REP that provides service only to the city's own electric accounts as long as the REP providing service to the city does not serve any residents of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. O-03-03, § 1, 3-24-03) 
Sec. 13-101. - Registration. 
(a)  Standards for registration of REPs. Registrations will be processed administratively by city. 
(1)  A REP shall register within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article or thirty (30) days after providing retail electric service to any resident of the city, whichever is later. 
(2)  A REP shall register with the city by completing the registration form approved by the commission, and signed by an owner, partner, officer, or other authorized representative of the registering party. Forms may be submitted to city by mail or facsimile. 
(3)  The city shall review the submitted registration form for completeness, including the remittance of the registration fee. Within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of an incomplete registration, the city shall notify the registering party in writing of the deficiencies in the registration. The registering party shall have twenty (20) business days from the issuance of the notification to cure the deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not cured within twenty (20) business days, the city shall notify the registering party that the registration is rejected without prejudice. 
(b)  Information. The city shall require a REP to provide only the information set forth in the registration form. 
(c)  Registration fees. REPs shall pay a reasonable administrative fee for the purpose of registration. 
(1)  Each retail electric provider required to register under this article shall pay to the city a one-time registration fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  A REP shall pay a late fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) if the REP fails to register within thirty (30) days after this article requiring registration becomes effective or thirty (30) days after providing retail electric service to any resident of the municipality, whichever is later. 
(d)  Post-registration requirements and re-registration. 
(1)  A REP shall notify city within thirty (30) days of any change in information provided in its registration. In addition, a REP shall notify city within ten (10) days if it discontinues offering service to residents of city. 
(2)  If a REP's registration is revoked and the REP subsequently cures its defects and resumes operations it must re-register. In that circumstance, the REP may register in the same manner as a new REP. 
(Ord. No. O-03-03, § 2, 3-24-03) 
Sec. 13-102. - Suspension and revocation. 
    The city may suspend or revoke a REP's registration and authority to operate within the municipality upon a commission finding that the REP has committed significant violations of PURA Chapter 39 or rules adopted under that chapter. The city will not suspend or revoke the registration of the affiliated REP or provider of last resort (POLR) serving residents in the city. The city shall not take any action against a REP other than suspension or revocation of a REP's registration and authority to operate in the municipality, or imposition of a late fee in accordance with this article. 
(1)  The city may provide a REP with a warning prior to seeking to suspend or revoke a REP's registration. 
(2)  The city shall provide the REP with at least thirty (30) calendar days written notice, informing the REP that its registration and authority to operate shall be suspended or revoked. The notice shall specify the reason(s) for such suspension or revocation. 
(3)  The city may order that the REP's registration be suspended or revoked only after the notice period has expired. 
(4)  In its suspension order, the city shall specify the reasons for the suspension and provide a date certain or provide conditions that a REP must satisfy to cure the suspension. Once the suspension period has expired or the reasons for the suspension have been rectified, the suspension shall be lifted. 
(5)  In its revocation order, the city shall specify the reasons for the revocation. 
(6)  A REP may appeal a suspension or revocation order to the commission. 
(Ord. No. O-03-03, § 3, 3-24-03) 
Sec. 13-103. - Notice and effective date. 
    Upon adoption of this article, the city shall file the article with the commission in a docket established by the commission for the purpose of submitting municipal REP registration ordinances. The filing of this article in such docket in accordance with Commission rules relating to the filing of pleadings, documents, and other materials shall serve as notice to all REPs of the requirement to submit a registration to the city. This article will become effective thirty-one (31) days after the article has been filed with the commission in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. O-03-03, § 4, 3-24-03) 
Secs. 13-104-13-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COIN OPERATED MACHINES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12C-04, §§ II-V, adopted Dec. 6, 2004, added new provisions to this chapter as Art. IV, §§ 13-101-3-104. As other provisions have been previously designated as Art. IV and §§ 13-101-13-103, the provisions of Ord. No. O-12C-04, §§ II-V, have been redesignated as Art. VII, §§ 13-121-13-124. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of the provisions of O-12C-04. 

Sec. 13-121. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Coin-operated machine means any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card, or check, including a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
    Music coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine, including a phonograph, piano or graphophone, that: 
(1)  Dispenses music or is used to dispense music; 
(2)  Is operated by inserting a coin or currency, metal slug, token, electronic card or check; and 
(3)  Is not an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child. 
    Owner means a person who owns a coin-operated machine in the city. 
    Person includes an individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation or organization or a manager, agent, servant, or employee of an individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, or organization. 
    Service coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine or device, including a pay toilet or telephone, that dispenses only a service. The term does not include a machine or device that dispenses merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
    Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill, or pleasure or is operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. The term: 
(1)  Includes a marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature race track machine, miniature football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and 
(2)  Does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child. 
(Ord. No. O-12C-04, § II (13-101), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-122. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  An occupation tax is imposed on each coin-operated machine that an owner exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in this city. 
(b)  The rate of the tax shall be equal to one fourth (1/4) of the rate of the Texas state occupation tax imposed on coin-operated machines, as it now exists and is from time to time hereafter amended. 
(c)  The tax shall be due and payable on each date or dates on which the Comptroller of Public Accounts of the State of Texas has prescribed as the due date or dates of the state occupation tax on coin-operated machines, as they now exist and are hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. O-12C-04, § III (13-102), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-123. - Exemptions. 
(a)  An individual who owns a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine for personal use and amusement in the individual's private residence is not required to pay an occupation tax for it. 
(b)  This article does not apply to: 
(1)  A stamp vending machine; 
(2)  A service coin-operated machine; or 
(3)  If subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, a: 
a.  Gas meter; 
b.  Food vending machine; 
c.  Confection vending machine; 
d.  Beverage vending machine; 
e.  Merchandise vending machine; or 
f.  Cigarette vending machine. 
(c)  A corporation or association owning, leasing, or renting a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine is exempt from the requirement of paying an occupation tax if: 
(1)  The corporation or association is organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, educational, or benevolent purposes; 
(2)  The corporation's or association's net earnings do not inure to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual; and 
(3)  The corporation or association owns, leases, or rents the coin-operated machine: 
a.  For the corporation's or association's exclusive use; and 
b.  To further a purpose of the corporation or association; 
(4)  Assessment of the tax is prohibited by other law. 
(Ord. No. O-12C-04, § IV (13-103), 12-6-04) 
Sec. 13-124. - Sealing authorized; release fee. 
    For each coin-operated machine for which any installment of the occupation tax is not fully and timely paid, the code enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Seal the coin-operated machine; and 
(2)  Charge a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the release of each sealed coin-operated machine upon payment of the tax in full. 
(Ord. No. O-12C-04, § V (13-104), 12-6-04) 
Secs. 13-125-13-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT OPERATORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II, adopted March 7, 2005, added new provisions to this chapter as Art. VI. As other provisions have been previously designated as Art. VI, the provisions of O-03C-05, § II, have been redesignated as Art. VIII. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of the provisions of O-03C-05. 

Sec. 13-141. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Commercial amusement shall mean any business whose purpose is offering entertainment or games of skill or chance to the general public, including, but not limited to, a recreation hall, miniature golf course, bowling alley, electronic arcade, cafes, bars, lounges and clubs not having a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, and fairs. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.610), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-142. - Enforcement by police. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen engaging in a commercial amusement operation, and who is not known by such officer to have a license, to request the person to produce a license, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.611), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-143. - Reporting violations. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city secretary all convictions for violating this article. The city secretary shall maintain a record of each license issued under this article and each violation reported by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.612), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-144. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of commercial amusement operator in the city, without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.613), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-145. - Application for license. 
(a)  A commercial amusement operator shall make application to the city secretary prior to the contemplated amusement being open to the public. 
(b)  The application shall be in the form of an affidavit, stating: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant and applicant's employer, if any. 
(2)  The location of applicant's principal office and place of business. 
(3)  The names and addresses of its officers, if a corporation or limited liability company, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners, if a partnership. 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the kind and character of the amusements offered for sale or exhibited. 
(5)  A certified copy of its charter, if a corporation or limited liability company incorporated under the laws of the state. 
(6)  A certified copy of its authority to do business in the state if a foreign corporation. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant made by a police official of the city. 
(9)  A sales tax permit issued by the state, if required by the state. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.614), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-146. - Bond. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license required by this article shall execute, as principal, a bond in the sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the city secretary, which bond shall be payable to the mayor and the mayor's successors in office for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto and conditioned that the principal and sureties will pay all damages to persons caused by or arising from or growing out of the commercial amusement operation in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license provided for in this article, and for two (2) full years after such license expires. 
(b)  One (1) bond as set forth in subsection (a) may serve as sufficient surety for no more than three (3) licenses. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.615), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-147. - Fees. 
    The fees per year for licenses required by this article shall be as follows: 
Type License      Fee 
Commercial amusement operator ..... $100.00 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.616), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-148. - Issuance. 
    Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee, the city secretary shall issue a license to the applicant. The license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and type of amusements to be offered thereunder, the date of issuance and the expiration date of the permit. The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. No person may operate a commercial amusement in the city prior to the time a license is issued. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.617), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-149. - Limitation on number of businesses, places. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article authorizes the operation of the business from only one (1) room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.618), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-150. - Nontransferability; use by others. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be transferable or give authority to more than one (1) person to operate as a commercial amusement operator, either by the licensee's agent, employee or by any method. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.619), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-151. - Term. 
    The license provided for in this article shall continue for a term of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.620), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-152. - Display. 
    Licenses issued under this article shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where an amusement is being offered and shall remain displayed as long as any amusements are being offered. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.621), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-153. - Revocation. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city administrator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Any conviction of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.622), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-154. - Notice of hearing of revocation. 
    Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid to the license holder at the address given in the application, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.623), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-155. - Appeal from license revocation. 
    Any person aggrieved by any action with reference to the revocation of a license shall have the right of appeal to the city council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the revocation has been mailed to him. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the city council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.624), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-156. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial amusement between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.625), 3-7-05) 
Sec. 13-157. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O-03C-05, § II(13.626), 3-7-05) 
Secs. 13-158-13-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 

Sec. 13-200. - Definitions. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Permit holder means the owner who obtained the sign permit from the City of Crockett or the owner's agent. 
    Private real property does not include real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the City of Crockett to use the property for a public purpose. 
    Sign means an outdoor structure, sign, display, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or other thing that is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform. "Sign" does not include a sign giving directions to a place of business which: 
(1)  Is located on real property adjacent to a public roadway; 
(2)  States only the name of the business, the address of the business and directions from the public roadway to the business; 
(3)  Is affixed to the ground and is no more than six (6) feet in height and three (3) feet in width; and 
(4)  Is limited to one (1) directional sign for each place of business. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07; Ord. No. O-03B-11, § I, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 13-201. - Off-premises signs prohibited inside city limits. 
    No new off-premises sign shall be erected inside the city limits of the City of Crockett. Signs lawfully in place as of the effective date of this article shall comply with sections 13-206-13-209 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-202. - Regulation of off-premises signs within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
    Off-premises signs will be permitted in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city only with a specific use permit granted under the procedures in section 303 of the City of Crockett Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-203. - Fees for specific use permit. 
    A nonrefundable fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee shall be paid to the city at the time each application for a specific use permit for an off-premises sign is made. If the specific use permit is granted, an additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) must be paid to the city before the specific use permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-204. - Spacing of off-premises signs. 
(a)  No off-premises sign shall be located within a five hundred-foot radius of another off-premises sign. 
(b)  The spacing requirements of subsections (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Off-premises signs separated by buildings, natural surroundings or other obstructions in such a manner that only one (1) sign located within the above space distances is visible from the highway or street at any one time. 
(2)  Off-premises signs at street intersections placed so that each sign is to be viewed primarily from a separate street; provided however, no off-premises sign at a street intersection shall be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from another off-premises sign facing an intersecting street. 
(c)  Each double-faced, back-to-back or V-type sign shall be considered a single off-premises sign for spacing purposes. The largest face on a double-faced, back-to-back or V-type sign will govern spacing requirements. 
(d)  In computing the distance between off-premises signs, all measurements shall be made based on the centerpoint location of the signs structure. 
(e)  No off-premises sign or structure shall be located in the setback area, as defined by section 104 of the City of Crockett Zoning Ordinance, or, if no setback area applies, outside the property line. In any event, no off-premises sign or sign structure shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the curb of any public street. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-205. - Construction requirements for off-premises signs. 
(a)  All off-premises signs shall be supported by not more than three (3) steel columns or three (3) columns of a material that is of the strength equal to or stronger than steel, if the face area of the sign is in excess of three hundred (300) square feet. If the face area of the sign is three hundred (300) square feet or less, the sign shall be supported by not more than two (2) steel columns or two (2) columns of material that is of strength equal to or stronger than steel. 
(b)  No part of the face of an off-premises sign shall be lower than ten (10) feet above the grade level of the nearest street or in excess of forty-five (45) feet above the grade level of the nearest street. 
(c)  Signs must meet wind load pressure requirements as shown in the table below: 
Height, in feet above the ground, as 
measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the structure. Pressure, pounds per square foot 0-5 0 6-30 20 31-50 25  
(d)  Lighting. Signs may be illuminated except for signs that contain, include, or are illuminated by: 
(1)  Any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights, including any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays, such as an LED (Light Emitting Diode) screen or other type of video display, even if the message is stationary, except those giving only public service information such as time, date, temperature or weather; 
(2)  Lights that are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way of a regulated highway; 
(3)  Lights of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or vision impairment to the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle; and 
(4)  Lights that interfere with the effectiveness of, or obscure, an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-206. - Maintenance of off-premises signs. 
    All off-premises signs and sign structures shall be kept in good repair and, unless of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be thoroughly painted as often as is necessary, consistent with good maintenance. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frames and fastenings shall be free from deterioration or loosening. If illuminated, all lights must be operational. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-207. - Abandonment of off-premises sign structures. 
(a)  Any off-premises sign structure lawfully erected that displays no copy, transcript, reproduction, model, likeness, image, advertisement or written material for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days shall be restored to use or removed by the owner or permittee within thirty (30) days after notice by the code enforcement officer of such violation. If the owner or permittee fails to restore the off-premises sign structure to use or to remove the abandoned off-premises sign structure within the specified thirty (30) days, the code enforcement officer may remove the sign structure, at the cost of the owner or permittee. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer or his designee will monitor off-premises signs for compliance by the fifteenth day of each month. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-208. - Off-premises sign registration, permitting and sign list procedures. 
(a)  Each person requesting a permit to erect a new off-premises advertising sign must file a permit request with the code enforcement officer. New sign requests will be processed using the specific use permit process as described in sections 13-202 and 13-203. The new sign request must describe the location, type, dimensions, facing direction and permit number of each off-premises sign. The packet will include a: 
(1)  Map from the Houston County Appraisal District Office with the location of the sign; 
(2)  Signed agreement with the landowner of the property where the sign is to be erected; 
(3)  Construction drawings and specifications; 
(4)  Photo or sketch of the proposed sign; and 
(5)  Written access easement authorizing city inspection of the signage. 
(b)  The owner of each sign already in place on the effective date of this article must, within thirty (30) days after its effective date, apply to the code enforcement officer for a permit number for each such sign. 
(c)  Each person owning an off-premises sign in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall file with the code enforcement officer a list, by permit number, of all signs owned as of January 1 of each year. The list shall be filed on or before February 1 of each year and shall describe the location, type, dimensions, facing direction and permit number of each off-premises sign. A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per sign face owned will be remitted with each list. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-209. - Exception for off-premises signs lawfully in place on the effective date of this article. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection 13.208(b), those off-premises signs lawfully in place on the effective date of this article are exempted from its provisions. 
(b)  An off-premises sign lawfully in place on the effective date of this article shall be removed and not replaced if the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or other matter on the sign. A sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign is more than sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. The code enforcement officer will determine whether the sign can be repaired. 
(c)  The owner/permittee of an existing sign may move the sign, by specific use permit, to another location within the city, provided the sign is placed and maintained in accordance with all provisions in this article relating to new signage. 
(d)  The owner/permittee may renovate an existing sign provided he obtains appropriate building permits and that the sign is placed and maintained in accordance with the placement and construction provisions in this article for new signage. 
(e)  A sign which was lawfully in place on or after July 14, 2013 which, or a substantial part of which, was damaged, blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose between July 14, 2013 and July 14, 2014 may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced. The repair, replacement or rebuilding must be in the same location as the sign which was blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled, may not be any larger than the sign which was blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled and must be rebuilt in at least as good a condition as the sign was in before it was blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07; Ord. No. O-07-14, § I, 7-14-14) 
Sec. 13-210. - Exception for political signs. 
(a)  This article does not regulate a sign that contains primarily a political message and that is located on private real property with the consent of the property owner, unless the sign contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis and is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), this article does apply to a sign that: 
(1)  Has an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet; 
(2)  Is more than eight (8) feet high; 
(3)  Is illuminated; or 
(4)  Has any moving elements. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-211. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer shall administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this article and all other provisions of law relating to signs. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall make annual inspections or as may be necessary and initiate an appropriate action to bring about compliance with this article and other applicable law if any such inspection discloses noncompliance. The code enforcement officer shall thoroughly investigate any complaints of alleged violations of this article. 
(c)  Upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge of property or the permit holder, the code enforcement officer may enter, for the purposes of inspecting and investigating signs and sign structures, any building, structure or other premises or property during normal business hours, provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist that may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, and where the owner, agent or tenant in charge of the property is not available after the code enforcement officer has made a good faith effort to locate him, the code enforcement officer may enter the aforementioned structures and premises at any time upon presentation of proper identification to any person on the premises. Whenever the code enforcement officer or his representative shall enter upon private property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating signs or sign structures, which property has management in residence, such management, or the person then in charge, shall be notified of his presence and shown proper and official credentials. The code enforcement officer, when on private property, shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. Whenever the code enforcement officer is denied admission to inspect any premises, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection for violations of this article. In applying for such a warrant, the code enforcement officer shall submit to the magistrate his affidavit setting forth his belief that a violation of this article exists with respect to the place sought to be inspected and his reasons for such belief. Such affidavit shall designate the location of such place and the name of the person believed to be the owner, operator or occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause exists for a search of the premises in question, he shall issue a warrant authorizing the search, such warrant describing the premises with sufficient certainty to identify the same. Any warrant so issued shall constitute authority for the code enforcement officer to enter upon and inspect the premises described therein. 
(d)  Upon notice and issuance of a stop order from the code enforcement officer, work on any sign or sign structure that is being conducted in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article or is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required to be given by the code enforcement officer. Following the issuance of a stop order, the code enforcement officer shall initiate proceedings to revoke any permit issued for the work covered by such stop order, unless the cause of the stop order is resolved to the code enforcement officer's satisfaction. 
(e)  The code enforcement officer shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this article for violation of the terms and provisions of this article, provided that the code enforcement officer shall conduct a hearing prior to the revocation of any license or permit authorized under this article to determine the facts incident to the pending revocation. The person whose license or permit is under consideration shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days' written notice of the hearing and shall be permitted to present relevant facts and legal argument regarding the pending revocation. Following such hearing, the code enforcement officer shall consider the merits of the case and shall present a written opinion prior to any action. Provided, further, that if, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the area is endangered by any violation of this article, the code enforcement officer may immediately revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this article and shall conduct the necessary hearing as soon as possible thereafter, but in no case later than three (3) business days after the effective date of the revocation, unless the affected licensee or permittee shall request in writing a later date. 
(f)  Should any sign, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, become insecure or in danger of failing, or otherwise unsafe, the code enforcement officer shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the permit holder. The person so notified shall correct the unsafe condition of the sign in a manner to be approved by the code enforcement officer in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  In case any sign or sign structure shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this article, the code enforcement officer shall give written notice to the permit holder, ordering the owner, lessee or person to alter the sign or sign structure so as to comply with this article or to remove the sign and sign structure within a specified period of time. For portable and banner signs, the specified period shall be seventy-two (72) hours. For other signs, the specified period shall be ten (10) working days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays observed by the closure of city offices. In the event that the code enforcement officer determines that the sign poses an immediate threat to the public safety, the notice period shall be twenty-four (24) hours. 
(h)  Any written notice to alter or to remove a sign shall be given by the code enforcement officer by certified mail or written notice served personally upon the permit holder or person responsible for the sign, or the owner's agent. If such order is not complied with within the specified time, the code enforcement officer shall initiate proceedings to revoke the permit and remove the sign at the expense of the owner, lessee or person responsible therefor. 
(i)  Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the code enforcement officer on the grounds that the decision misconstrues or wrongly interprets this article may, within thirty (30) days after the decision, give notice of appeal of the same in writing to the planning and zoning commission, pursuant to its rules and regulations, and thereafter to the city council, providing that the appealing party shall give notice of appeal in writing to the city secretary within ten (10) days following the decision appealed from and, provided further, that the appealing party shall comply with the code enforcement officer's decision pending appeal, unless the code enforcement officer shall direct otherwise. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 13-212. - Declaratory, monetary and injunctive relief. 
    Upon request of the code enforcement officer, the planning and zoning commission or the city council, the city attorney shall file such lawsuit or lawsuits as he deems proper to enforce the provisions of this article, including a request for declaratory judgment, injunctive relief, monetary damages, attorney's fees and costs of court. 
(Ord. No. O-05-07, § II, 5-21-07) 
Secs. 13-213-13-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - COMMERCIAL FILMING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-236. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to protect the personal and property rights of Crockett's residents and businesses. The city administrator may impose additional regulations in the interest of public safety if deemed necessary. 
(b)  These guidelines cover requests for commercial use, in the filming of movies, TV shows, commercials, and related activities, of city-owned property, city-owned equipment, city employees and private property which may affect adjacent public or private property. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-237. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to filming performed by or on the property of the Texas State Railroad except that persons engaged in activities covered by this article on the property of the Texas State Railroad are required to comply with the requirements of sections 13-244, 13-245, 13-246 and 13-273. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-238. - City control and city administrator authority. 
(a)  The city administrator may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, or public building, city-owned equipment, or city employees for commercial uses in the filming or taping of movies, television programs, commercials, or training films and related activities. 
(b)  The City of Crockett shall have full control over the use of public streets and buildings of the city while being used, as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming if determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The city may inspect all structures, devices, and equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping if required by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-239. - Use of city personnel. 
(a)  The applicant shall pay for the costs of any police, fire, public works, or other city personnel assigned to the project (whether specifically requested by the applicant or not). 
(b)  The city administrator has the authority to require additional police or fire coverage if it is determined to be in the best interest for public safety. Off-duty police officers or firefighters are to be paid one and one-half (11/2) times their hourly rate. 
(c)  The city administrator will provide the applicant an estimate of the additional city personnel, other than the personnel requested by the applicant, necessary for the safe completion of the project. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-240. - Use of city property. 
(a)  In conjunction with the use of any street, right-of-way, public building, name, trademark, logo, or equipment of the city, the city administrator may require that all or part of the fee specified or determined for such use be paid in advance. A security or damage deposit may also be required at the city manager's discretion. 
(b)  The city administrator shall establish a fee schedule for the use of city property and city equipment. The city administrator may, with respect to a specific request for use of city property or city equipment, establish rates that are adequate to compensate the city for the use of that property or equipment if the standard rate schedule is inapplicable or inappropriate for the specific use proposed. 
(c)  The City of Crockett shall have full control over the use of the name, trademark and logo, public streets, and buildings of the city while being used, as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-241. - Special equipment and vehicles. 
    The applicant shall provide a report listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the filming including their proposed hours of use and their proposed parking locations. Such locations shall be specifically approved by the city so as to maintain traffic safety. On-street parking, use of public parking lots, use of exterior lighting, power generators, or any other noise or light producing equipment is subject to city manager approval. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-242. - Hours of filming. 
    Unless special permission has been obtained from the city manager in advance, filming will be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays and holidays, and noon to 7:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-243. - Notification of neighbors. 
    The applicant shall provide a short written description, approved by the city manager, of the schedule for the proposed production to the owners and residents of each property in the affected neighborhood (as defined by boundaries set by the city manager). The description shall provide a telephone number through which the residents of the affected neighborhood may communicate to the applicant. The applicant shall make reasonable attempts to accommodate the concerns of the residents of the affected neighborhood, and shall report to the city administrator a summary of all such communications, along with the name, address, and phone numbers of all contacted residents. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-244. - Certificate of insurance. 
    The producer shall provide a certificate of insurance, naming The City of Crockett as an additional insured, showing coverage in at least the following amounts: 
(1)  General commercial liability, including bodily injury and property damage: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(2)  Automobile liability (combined single limit): One million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(3)  Umbrella coverage: Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-245. - Hold harmless agreement. 
    The applicant shall sign the following hold harmless agreement holding the city harmless from any claim that may arise from their use of designated public property, right-of-way, or equipment in conjunction with the permitted use: 
"I certify that I represent the firm which will be performing the filming/taping at the locations specified on the attached permit application. I further certify that I and my firm will perform in accordance with the direction and specifications of The City of Crockett and that I and my firm will defend, indemnify and hold harmless The City of Crockett for and from any loss, damage, expense, claims and costs of every nature and kind arising out of or in connection with the filming/taping to this permit". 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-246. - Liability. 
    The applicant agrees to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or private property, resulting from or in connection with, the production and restore the property to its condition prior to the production. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Secs. 13-247-13-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 13-271. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake a commercial filming project unless a valid permit has been issued by the city. Commercial filming projects underway before the effective date of this article must be permitted within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-272. - Application. 
(a)  Before filing an application for filming, the applicant is encouraged to contact the city administrator to discuss the production's specific filming requirements and the feasibility of filming. 
(b)  Application for a commercial filming permit shall be made with the city secretary by the commercial producer. The application shall be made on a form designated by the city, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The title of the commercial, film, or photo shoot. 
(2)  The type of production to be undertaken. 
(3)  The location of the filming. 
(4)  The dates of the filming. 
(5)  Contact information for the production office, producer and location manager. 
(6)  Production schedule and activities to include stunts, pyrotechnics, special effects, aerial photography, amplified sound or use of animals. 
(7)  Number of persons involved with the production, including cast and crew. 
(8)  Anticipated need of city personnel, equipment or property. 
(9)  Description of any areas in which public access will be restricted during production. 
(10)  Description of any alterations that will be made to the property. 
(11)  Number and type of production vehicles that will be used and the locations where they will be stored. 
(12)  Location where the crew will be fed, if not at the production location. 
(13)  Location where extras will be held, if not at the production location. 
(c)  The application form shall include an acknowledgement by the applicant of the restrictions provided in division 1 of this article, and an affirmation that the operations to be conducted will comply with those requirements. 
(d)  The city administrator may request additional information if useful or necessary to assist in making the necessary determinations. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-273. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  The application must be filed in advance of the commencement of filming or any other substantial activity related to the project. 
(1)  For commercials or episodic television, the application should be filed two (2) business days in advance; 
(2)  For feature films, the application should be filed five (5) business days in advance. 
(b)  The city administrator may grant exceptions to this requirement for good cause. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-274. - Fees. 
    An application processing fee in accordance with the city's schedule of fees should accompany each application for filming. The city administrator may waive this fee for nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-275. - Vested rights not created by issuance. 
    No license granted under this division shall be deemed the granting of a vested right, but such license shall remain subject to such legislation as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 13-276. - Refund of fees; transferability; expiration. 
(a)  The applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees paid in accordance with this division for any cause whatsoever. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be assignable. However, the license may be transferred from one (1) location or place of business to another location after the city administrator shall have been given five (5) days' notice of such proposed transfer, and the city has given consent thereto. 
(c)  The license shall expire forty-five (45) days after the last date of scheduled filming on the application, unless an express expiration date is required by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-06-08, § I, 6-2-08) 
Secs. 13-277-13-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FIRE ALARMS AND SECURITY ALARMS 

Sec. 13-300. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Alarm site. A single location or premises served by an alarm system or that is under the control of one (1) person. 
    Alarm system. A device or system which transmits a signal which summons an emergency service of the city. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises, if the alarm system does not omit a signal that is audible or visible outside the premises that it is installed upon; nor 
(2)  An alarm installed upon the premises occupied by the city. 
    Alarm systems company. Any person or company that sells, installs, services, monitors, or responds to fire alarm signal devices or any other electrical, mechanical, or electronic device used: 
(1)  To prevent or detect fire; or 
(2)  Primarily to detect and summon police for security alarm emergencies and include persons relaying alarm notifications; or 
(3)  Primarily to detect and summon aid for fire emergencies and include persons relaying alarm notifications. 
    Alarm user. The person, firm, partnership, associations, corporation, company or organization of any kind which owns, controls or occupies any building, structure, facility or vehicle used for habitation wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
    Automatic dialing device. An alarm system device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
    Business owner. The owner of a retail establishment or commercial establishment or manager on duty. 
    City. The City of Crockett, Texas. 
    False alarm. 
(1)  The activation of an alarm system which elicits a response from the fire or police department, when the situation requiring such a response does not in fact exist. False alarms include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Error or mistake. Any action by any person, firm, corporation, association, or other entity or agency thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building, or place, which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists; 
b.  Malfunction. Any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, or maintenance of the system, by faulty equipment, or by a change in the environment or premises upon, or within which, the alarm system is operating; 
c.  Intentional misuse. Any activation of an alarm system when one knows, has reason to know, or should have known no fire or other emergency is in progress; and 
d.  Testing. Failure to notify alarm monitoring service or testing. Any alarm transmitted to the fire or police department while alarm is being serviced or tested by personnel without previously notifying the fire and police departments of test status. 
(2)  The alarm will not be considered to be a false alarm if determined by the fire or police officer in charge that the security/fire alarm was caused by: 
a.  A natural or manmade catastrophe or an act of God. Such events include, but are not limited to, tornadoes, floods, lightning (causing physical damage to the protected premises), or similar violent conditions or adverse weather conditions; 
b.  Activation by other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user; or 
c.  An alarm caused by a resident of the premises or other person who has pulled an alarm lever and does not understand the consequences of his actions. (i.e., small child, elderly person). 
    False fire alarm notification. A fire alarm notification to the fire department, when the responding fire department personnel find no evidence of smoke or fire having occurred. 
    False security alarm notification. A security alarm notification to the police department, when the responding police department personnel find no evidence of an intrusion or other evidence that an intrusion or attempted intrusion of the property occurred. 
    Fire alarm actuating device. A device that is designed to respond either manually or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire extinguishing system. 
    Fire alarm notification. A notification intended to summon firefighting forces, which is indicated or triggered manually or automatically by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of fire. 
    Fire chief. The fire chief or designee. 
    Fire marshal. The fire marshal or designee. 
    Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure. 
    Occupant. The person responsible for having the alarm system installed or activated. 
    Permit holder. The person designated in the permit application who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees and fines assessed under this chapter. 
    Permit reinstatement fee. A fee to be paid prior to having an alarm permit reinstated. The fee shall be established by city council resolution. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity. 
    Police chief. The police chief or designee. 
    Security alarm actuating device. A device that is designed to respond automatically to intrusion detection sensor devices of a security alarm system. 
    Security alarm notification. A notification intended to summon police officers, which is indicated or triggered by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of intrusion or security violation. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-301. - Permits required; applications; fees; false statements. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person activates, operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the municipal court clerk, or while the permit has not been renewed. Violations will result in a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) on the first occurrence and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for subsequent violations. 
(b)  Any person using an alarm system shall pay such permit fees, renewal fees, and service fees as provided for in this article. There will be no annual permit fee. Permits must be renewed annually, by the 31st day of January for each alarm system in use on January 1st of that year. Permit fees are as follows: 
(1)  Initial registration: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per alarm system. Should the facility have separate security and fire systems, the fees will be twenty dollars ($20.00) per system. This is a one-time registration fee per system. 
(2)  Annual permit fees: No annual permit fees will be assessed. However, failure to register the alarm system may result in fines specified in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  A permit holder must pay any fees as assessed under the provisions of this article within thirty (30) days after receiving notification from the city that a fee has been assessed. If the assessed fees become ninety (90) days delinquent, a ten percent late charge will be added. 
(d)  A permit holder will be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty fee for the signaling of a false alarm by a security or fire alarm system in excess of five (5) false alarms which will have occurred during the preceding twelve-month period. The penalty may be waived by the municipal court if the permit holder submits documentation proving that he has performed all necessary repairs or adjustments required by the city, and has complied with all provisions of this article. 
(e)  A permit shall only be issued to the resident of a single-family dwelling, the tenant occupying the unit of a multifamily complex, and the business owner of any retail or commercial establishment. Permits are not transferable. 
(f)  Contents of application. 
(1)  Each permit application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person who is responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees or charges levied under this article. 
(2)  Each retail or commercial permit application shall contain the names and phone numbers (home and business) of two (2) people who when notified by the police or fire department will come to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes if requested, to terminate the alarm signal and secure the property. 
(3)  Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of approval to the city to deactivate an alarm system that sounds an alarm signal for longer than thirty (30) minutes. 
(g)  False statements. Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or for the purpose of making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to grant or to suspend a permit. 
(h)  Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required permit fee (where applicable), the municipal court clerk shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a late fee, service fee and/or fines assessed under this article for which a bill has been issued. 
(i)  An alarm permit is issued to a specific individual and a specific address. An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or another address. However, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm can be changed. A permit holder must inform the city of any changes that alters information listed on the permit application. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(j)  All fees owed by an applicant for whom a bill has been issued must be paid before a permit may be issued. 
(k)  Failure of the alarm user to renew an alarm permit by December 31st of each calendar year shall be considered as not having a valid permit; provided, however, the city must give the permit holder thirty (30) days notice before terminating an alarm permit for nonrenewal. 
(l)  An alarm user may utilize one (1) permit for a combination fire and police alarm. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-302. - Permit duration and renewal. 
(a)  A permit expires each year on December 31st and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the municipal court clerk. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. 
(c)  All service fees and late fees assessed under this article must be paid prior to renewal of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-303. - Responsibilities of permit holders. 
(a)  A permit holder in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of the alarm system to suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to: 
a.  Transient pressure changes in water pipes; 
b.  Flashes of light; or 
c.  Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies. 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications; 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the city to repair or de-inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises to provide security for the premises; 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; and 
(5)  Notify the municipal court clerk in writing of the date a permit is to be cancelled or that the permit will not be renewed. The notification must include the date the document was signed and signature of the permit holder. The city must receive the cancellation or nonrenewal notice in writing no later than fifteen (15) days before the permit expiration date. 
(b)  If a permit holder or an emergency contact person is contacted to inspect an unsecured building or residence and fails to respond to the alarm site in the allowed time of thirty (30) minutes to secure the building or residence, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged to the permit holder if the city representatives have to secure the premises. The city is not responsible for loss or damage. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-304. - Duties of alarm system company. 
    Any alarm system company engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems shall: 
(1)  On the installation or activation of an alarm system, distribute to the occupant of the alarm system location the following information: 
a.  A copy of this article; 
b.  Information on how to prevent false alarms; and 
c.  Information on how to operate the alarm system. 
(2)  Report alarm signals only by using telephone numbers designated by the 911 emergency dispatch office or police/fire chief; 
(3)  Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the police/fire chief; and 
(4)  On the first day of each calendar month provide to the police/fire chief a report which contains the name, address, telephone number, and date of activation of all current subscribers within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-305. - New installations. 
    Newly installed alarms on sites which have not previously had an alarm system shall have a thirty-day grace period. During the first thirty (30) days the system is in operation, false alarms will not count toward those which result in fees being charged for excessive false signals. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-306. - Manual reset required. 
(a)  A person in control of a local alarm or an alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation, the system will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset. 
(b)  Each alarm notification shall be treated as a false alarm, only if the appropriate agency of the city has responded within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and the agency has determined from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-307. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
    A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the police/fire chief or designee or that is not licensed by the Texas Board of Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies, or the Texas Commission on Fire Protection, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-308. - Reinstatement of permit. 
    A person whose alarm permit has not been renewed after thirty (30) days' notice by the city may be issued a new permit if the person: 
(1)  Submits an updated application and pays a reinstatement fee, established by resolution of the city council; 
(2)  Pays or otherwise resolves all citations in municipal court issued to the person under this article; 
(3)  Pays all outstanding late fees and/or service fees assessed under this article for which a bill has been issued; and 
(4)  Submits documentation to the police/fire chief stating that the permit holder had performed all necessary repairs or adjustments required by the city, and has complied with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-309. - System performance reviews. 
    If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the police and/or the fire chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the alarm company responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-310. - Automatic dialing device. 
    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary telephone line belonging to the city, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary telephone line belonging to the city within twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the police/fire chief. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-311. - Confidentiality. 
    All information submitted in compliance with this article shall be deemed confidential and not subject to public disclosure unless required by law. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-312. - Appeal of notice of restitution due. 
(a)  The alarm user may appeal to the police or fire chief, as appropriate, his or her decision in writing within fourteen (14) days, who shall conduct an investigation within a reasonable time. Within thirty (30) days of the investigation, and after consideration of the evidence, the chief will render a decision in writing. The chief shall then notify the alarm user of the decision and advise the alarm user of the right to appeal to the city administrator. 
(b)  In the event the alarm user desires to appeal the chief's decision to the city administrator, notice must be given in writing to the city administrator within fourteen (14) days of the chief's decision. The city secretary will place the matter before the city administrator and notify the alarm user of the date and time of the meeting when the appeal will be heard. 
(c)  The city administrator will render his or her decision in writing, which shall be final. In the event the alarm user fails to appear at the hearing before the city administrator, he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal and no other recourse will be available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Sec. 13-313. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation that violates any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be subject to penalty and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  An offense committed before the effective date of the ordinance codified herein is governed by prior law and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crockett, as amended, in effect when the offense was committed, and the former law is continued in effect for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-08B-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-29-11) 
Secs. 13-314-13-335. - Reserved. 
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire lanes, § 7-100 et seq.; city ambulance service, § 11-36 et seq.; taxicabs, § 13-61 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 16-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arterial street. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by the city as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state department of health, emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city council, private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen or certified emergency medical services volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, and vehicles operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United States, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs or medicines, or organs. 
    Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter. 
    Business district shall mean the downtown area and shall be all the part of the city within the border of the following streets: 
"Beginning with the intersection of North Seventh Street and East Lamar Street; thence in a southerly direction to the intersection of South Seventh Street and East Fannin Street; thence in a westerly direction to the intersection of East Fannin Street and South Second Street; thence in a northerly direction to the intersection of North Second Street and East Lamar Street; thence in an easterly direction to the place of beginning. 
    Business district shall also include the territory contiguous to and including a highway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Courthouse square shall mean the immediate tract of land upon which the county courthouse is situated, and bordered by the curbing around the tract. The term "around the courthouse square" shall include the four (4) streets around the courthouse which extends from the intersection of North Fifth Street and East Houston Avenue; thence to North Fourth Street and East Houston Avenue; thence to South Fourth Street and East Goliad Avenue; thence to South Fifth Street and East Goliad Avenue. 
    Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at any intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word "crosswalk" also includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrians crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Daytime and nighttime. "Daytime" means from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset and "nighttime" means at any other hour. 
    Driveaway-tow away operation. Any operation in which any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, singly or in combination, new or used, constitutes the commodity being transported, when one (1) set or more of wheels of any such vehicle are on the roadway during the course of the transportation, whether or not any such vehicle furnishes the motive power. 
    Driver. Every person who drives or is in immediate physical control of a vehicle. 
    Exhaust emission system. Any motor vehicle engine modification to control or cause the reduction of substances emitted from motor vehicles or motor vehicle engines beginning with the model year 1968, which system is installed or incorporated in any motor or motor vehicle engine in compliance with the requirements imposed by or under authority of the (United States) Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act, Public Law 89-272, 42 U.S.C. 1857 et seq., or other applicable law. 
    Explosives. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
    Farm tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry. 
    Flammable liquid. Any liquid which has a flash point of zero degrees Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
    Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
    Gross weight. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    House trailer. A trailer or semitrailer: 
(1)  Which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place (either permanently or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways; or 
(2)  Whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined in subsection (1), but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier. 
    Implement of husbandry. Every vehicle designed and adapted for use as a farm implement, machinery or tool as used in tilling the soil, but shall not include any passenger car or truck. 
    Improved shoulder. A paved shoulder. 
    Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways, thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. The junction of an alley with a street or highway shall not constitute an intersection. 
    Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Light truck. Any truck with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity not to exceed two thousand (2,000) pounds and is intended to include those trucks commonly known as pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks and carryall trucks. 
    Limited-access or control-access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Metal tire. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material. 
    Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor-assisted bicycle means a bicycle which may be propelled by human power or a motor, or by both, with a motor of a capacity of less than sixty (60) cubic centimeters piston displacement, which is capable of a maximum speed of not more than twenty (20) miles per hour on a flat surface with not more than one (1) percent grade in any direction when the motor is engaged. 
    Motor-driven cycle. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) brake horsepower (brake horsepower developed by a prime mover, as measured by a brake applied to the driving shaft), and every bicycle with motor attached other than a motor-assisted bicycle. 
    Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Muffler. A device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and/or turbine wheels for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from a diesel engine, both of which are effective in reducing noise. 
    Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with law placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Owner. A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
    Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or merchandise except an involuntary stopping of such vehicle by reason of mechanical failure or direction of a policeman. 
    Passenger car. Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, designed for carrying ten (10) passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
    Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
    Personal injury. A wound or injury to any part of the human body which necessitates treatment. 
    Pneumatic tire. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load. 
    Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Policeman or police officer. Any member of the police department of the city authorized by law to make arrests in traffic offenses. 
    Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership ordinarily used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad sign or signal. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district, when the property on such street for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Roadway. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Road tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus. Every motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification requirements set forth in the most recent edition of standards as produced and sponsored by the National Commission on Safety Education of the National Education Association, Washington, D.C., and is being used to transport children to or from school or in connection with school activities, but not including buses operated by common carriers in urban transportation of school children. 
    Semitrailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Shoulder. The portion of a highway that is: 
(1)  Contiguous to the roadway; 
(2)  Designed or ordinarily used for parking; 
(3)  Set off from the roadway by different design, construction or marking; and 
(4)  Not intended for normal vehicular travel. 
    Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Solid tire. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load. 
    Special mobile equipment. Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally operated or moved over a highway, including but not limited to: Ditch-digging apparatus, well boring apparatus and road construction and maintenance machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditchers, levelling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carryalls and scrapers, power shovels and draglines, and self-propelled cranes and earth moving equipment. The term does not include house trailers, dump trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels, or other vehicles designed for the transportation of persons or property to which machinery has been attached. 
    Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Stop. When required, means complete cessation from movement. 
    Stop, stopping or standing. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Streetcar. A car other than a railroad train for transporting persons or property and operated upon rails principally within a municipality. 
    Through highway. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign or other official traffic-control device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided by law. 
    Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, and by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be or is transported upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1960, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 13 et seq. 
Sec. 14-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specially referred to in a given section. 
(2)  Where otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 21. 
Sec. 14-3. - Enforcement officers generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police by approval of the council to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 14-4. - Authority to direct traffic. 
(a)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police upon approval of the council, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws; further provided that such officers may be assigned by the chief of police alone in cases of emergency. 
(b)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2). 
Sec. 14-5. - Vehicle condition and equipment. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in unsafe condition as to endanger any person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by state law or regulation which is equipped in any manner in violation of state law or regulation. 
State Law reference- Vehicle condition and equipment, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 108. 
Sec. 14-6. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from its location to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage or parking lot designated by or other place maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to move such vehicle from in front of the driveway to another point on the highway; 
(3)  When any vehicle is found upon a street and report has previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been stolen; 
(4)  When any such member has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned; 
(5)  When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person in charge of the vehicle is incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or is not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle; 
(6)  When such member arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense; 
(7)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or alley and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
(8)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite obstruction to the street cleaning department of the city engaged in cleaning the street upon which the vehicle is illegally parked, or when any vehicle is illegally parked and constitutes an obstruction to the progress of construction or repair work on any of the city's water or sewer lines, or when any vehicle is illegally parked in a fire lane or so as to obstruct easy access to a fire hydrant; 
(9)  If a nonresident of the city has failed on more than one occasion to comply with notice attached to an illegally parked vehicle owned by him, and warrants have been issued for his arrest but not served because of his absence, when said vehicle is next found left unattended upon a street and illegally parked; 
(10)  When such vehicle is illegally parked on private property; 
(11)  When such vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of section 14-166 of the Crockett Code; 
(12)  When such vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of section 14-167 of the Crockett Code; 
(13)  When the operator of a vehicle has not maintained or cannot present proof of financial responsibility required by the Texas Transportation Code. The Crockett Police Department is hereby authorized to adopt a policy for towing motor vehicles when the operator of the vehicle either fails to maintain, or cannot [present] proof of, financial responsibility required by the Texas Transportation Code. Crockett Police Department officers are authorized to remove or impound any vehicle when the operator has failed to maintain, or cannot present proof of, the required financial responsibility. The vehicle shall not be released to the owner, operator or lienholder without proof of financial responsibility required by the Texas Transportation Code. The Crockett Police Department is also authorized to develop a financial responsibility verification form for any owner, operator or lienholder to obtain release of any vehicle removed or impounded pursuant to this section and the Crockett Police Department Policy. The fee for the financial responsibility verification shall be five dollars ($5.00). That fee shall be in addition to any applicable fees, towing and storage charges. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor, and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinabove provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three (3) days, then and in the event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent written report of such removal by mail to the Texas Department of Transportation or other state agency whose duty it is to register motor vehicles. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(d)  In the event a vehicle is removed from a street under this section, the owner of same shall pay in addition to the fine, if any, assessed against him, reasonable costs incurred in removing said vehicle from the street, and reasonable storage for the time same is stored in a garage or parking lot, and all costs. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-98, § 2, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-02-05, § 2, 2-7-05; Ord. No. O-12B-15 , § I, 12-7-15) 
State Law reference- Removal of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94. 
Sec. 14-7. - Application of chapter to persons propelling push carts or riding animals. 
    Every person propelling any push cart or driving any animal-drawn vehicle or riding on an animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by their very own nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25. 
Sec. 14-8. - Application of chapter to drivers of government vehicles, road crews, etc. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, or any city, county, town or other political subdivision of this state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(a), (f). 
Sec. 14-9. - Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of applicable state law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24. 
Sec. 14-10. - Designation of through truck routes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck tractor, and semitrailer, or any commercial vehicle with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or more according to the manufacturers' classification, or the equivalent thereof, being operated as through traffic, to use any route other than state highway loop 304. 
(b)  A through vehicle shall be any commercial vehicle whose origin and destination is other than the city, having no legitimate business reason for not using the designated through truck route. 
(c)  Deviations from the through truck route shall be allowed only for a detour prescribed by the city or the state highway department, to load or unload, to report to truck carrier terminal or for repairs. Proof of legitimate reason for being off the through truck route shall be available in the truck log or manifest of the vehicle involved and shall be shown to the officer stopping the truck, upon request. Deviations may be allowed at any time for emergency, public utility or municipal vehicles. 
(d)  No through truck traffic will be permitted in or on the area of the city commonly known as the courthouse square, unless the truck is making a pick up or delivery or is there for another legitimate reason specified in this chapter. 
(e)  When a legitimate deviation of the through truck route is made, the shortest distance back to the through truck route shall be used and the courthouse square shall not be used. 
(f)  Appropriate signs and markings are to be erected by the city to designate the through truck route on state highway loop 304. 
(Ord. No. 0-8B-81, § 1, 8-17-81) 
Sec. 14-11. - Permits required for parades and processions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any funeral procession or parade containing persons or vehicles to occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are in effect. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 14-12. - Immediate notice of accident. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 14-13. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 14-14. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 14-15. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-8) 
Sec. 14-16. - Riding motorcycles. 
    A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 174. 
Sec. 14-17. - Railroad trains not to block streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-8) 
Sec. 14-18. - Restrictions on riding in vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-8) 
Sec. 14-19. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceed three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 175. 
Secs. 14-20-14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 14-36. - Generally. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices installed or erected in the city shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highways and public transportation commission. All signs and signals required under this chapter shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 31. 
Sec. 14-37. - Obedience. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign or signal applicable thereto placed in accordance with ordinance; unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of any such sign. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32(a). 
Sec. 14-38. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
    The city administrator shall, with the approval of the city council, place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and in case of emergency may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-3-2, 10-3-12) 
Sec. 14-39. - Authority to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones. 
    The city administrator is hereby authorized as follows: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where required by the city council. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as prescribed by the city council. 
Sec. 14-40. - Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city administrator shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-5) 
Sec. 14-40.1. - Designation of one-way streets. 
    [ North Fifth Street. ] The 100 block of North Fifth Street, being that portion of North Fifth Street located between Lamar Street and East Houston Street, is hereby designated a one-way street where traffic may proceed only in a southerly direction. The city administrator is directed to place and maintain signs giving notice thereof in accordance with the requirements of section 14-40, Crockett Code. 
(Ord. No. O-4-97, § 1, 4-21-97) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-4-97, adopted April 21, 1997, added new provisions to the Code as § 14-40A. In order to maintain the Code's numbering system as established in the Preface of the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. O-4-97 have been redesignated as 14-40.1 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 14-41. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city administrator is hereby authorized, when directed by the city council, to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway, where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-3) 
Sec. 14-42. - Erection of stop signs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city administrator to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting a through street, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic controlled signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through and a heavy traffic street not designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the chief of police upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study and upon authority of the council. 
(b)  Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height and such sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements upon the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-6) 
Sec. 14-43. - Necessity of signs. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32(b). 
Sec. 14-44. - Ratification of existing devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
Sec. 14-45. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(a)  Green indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(3)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in this division, pedestrians, facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Steady yellow indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 19-38, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(c)  Steady red indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and may then turn right or, if the intersecting streets are both one-way streets and left turns are permissible, may turn left, after standing until the intersection may be entered safely, yielding right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. Traffic not so turning shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. Turns shall be prohibited on a steady red sign if a notice is posted at such intersection giving notice that such turns are prohibited. 
(2)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in this division, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 33. 
Sec. 14-46. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Don't Walk," or "Wait" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(a)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(b)  Don't Walk or Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" or "Wait" signal is showing. 
Sec. 14-47. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through an intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 35. 
Sec. 14-48. - Lane-direction-control signals. 
    When lane-direction-control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 35A. 
Sec. 14-49. - Altering, injuring, etc., devices, signs, signals. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 37. 
Sec. 14-50. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  No person shall place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign of any kind or color within one thousand (1,000) feet of any intersection unless a permit is granted by the state highway and public transportation commission for such flashing sign or electric sign. 
(d)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(e)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 36. 
Secs. 14-51-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-66. - Starting parked vehicles. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 67. 
Sec. 14-67. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 51. 
Sec. 14-68. - Direction of travel generally; exception. 
    The traffic upon all streets within the city shall travel both ways, except around the courthouse square. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 14-69. - Driving on right side of road. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) hereof. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or out of an alley, private road, or driveway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 52. 
Sec. 14-70. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 53. 
Sec. 14-71. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
    The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 54. 
Sec. 14-72. - Operation of vehicle on improved shoulder. 
(a)  A driver may operate a vehicle on an improved shoulder to the right of the main traveled portion of the roadway as long as necessary and when the operation may be done in safety only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  To stop, stand or park; 
(2)  To accelerate prior to entering the main traveled lane of traffic; 
(3)  To decelerate prior to making a right turn; 
(4)  To overtake and pass another vehicle that is slowing or stopped on the main traveled portion of the highway disabled or preparing to make a left turn; 
(5)  To allow other vehicles to pass that are traveling at a greater speed; 
(6)  When permitted or required by an official traffic-control device; or 
(7)  At any time to avoid a collision. 
(b)  A driver may operate a vehicle on the improved shoulder to the left of the main traveled portion of a divided or controlled-access highway when the operation may be done in safety only under the following conditions: 
(1)  To slow or stop when the vehicle is disabled and traffic or other circumstances prohibit the safe movement of the vehicle to the shoulder to the right of the main traveled portion of the roadway; 
(2)  When permitted or required by an official traffic-control device; or 
(3)  To avoid a collision. 
(c)  The provisions of this section limiting the operation of vehicles upon improved shoulders shall not apply to: 
(1)  Authorized emergency vehicles responding to calls; 
(2)  Police patrols; or 
(3)  Vehicles and equipment actually engaged in work upon a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 54A. 
Sec. 14-73. - When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one (1) direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway except as provided by section 14-71. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 55. 
Sec. 14-74. - General limitations on overtaking on the left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter and unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within two hundred (200) feet of any approaching vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 56. 
Sec. 14-75. - Other limitations on driving on left. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where sight restriction is such that the section of highway being traversed lies within a no passing zone as determined and marked in accordance with law; 
(2)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; 
(3)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, or to any driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 57. 
Sec. 14-76. - No-passing zones. 
    Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as required by law, no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no-passing zone throughout its length. However, this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of such pavement striping, or the center line within a no-passing zone marked by signs only, in making a left turn into or out of an alley, private road or driveway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 58(b). 
Sec. 14-77. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices. 
(3)  If official signs are erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign. 
(4)  If official traffic-control devices are installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 60. 
Sec. 14-78. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when following another vehicle, maintain an assured clear distance between the two (2) vehicles, exercising due regard for the speed of such vehicles, traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway, so that such motor vehicle can be safely brought to a stop without colliding with the preceding vehicle, or veering into other vehicles, objects or persons on or near the street or highway. 
(b)  The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall whenever conditions permit leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle. 
(c)  The drivers of motor vehicles driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall drive so as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicles to enter and occupy such space without danger. The provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 61. 
Sec. 14-79. - Driving through safety zones. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 85. 
Sec. 14-80. - Following fire apparatus or ambulance. 
(a)  No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, nor shall such driver drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle, except a driver on official business, may follow closer than five hundred (500) feet behind an ambulance when the flashing red lights of the ambulance are operating. No driver of a vehicle may drive or park his vehicle at a place where an ambulance has been summoned for an emergency call in a manner calculated to interfere with the arrival or departure of the ambulance. 
(Code 1960 § 10-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 100. 
Sec. 14-81. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the fire department when such hose has been laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 101. 
Sec. 14-82. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway inside or outside of a business or residence district upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on said school bus a visual signal as specified by state law, and said driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 104. 
Sec. 14-83. - Limitations on backing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 173. 
Sec. 14-84. - Racing on highways. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle in any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record, and no person shall in any manner participate in any such race, competition, contest, test or exhibition. 
(b)  Drag race is defined as the operation of two (2) or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one (1) or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit. 
(c)  Racing is defined as the use of one (1) or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, outdistance or prevent another vehicle from passing, to arrive at a given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long distance driving routes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 185. 
Sec. 14-85. - Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer. 
    Any driver of a motor vehicle who willfully fails or refuses to bring his vehicle to a stop, or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police vehicle, when given visual or audible signal to bring the vehicle to a stop, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, emergency light or siren. The officer giving such signal shall be in uniform, prominently displaying his badge of office, and his vehicle shall be appropriately marked showing it to be an official police vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 186. 
Sec. 14-86. - Driving upon sidewalk. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized driveway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 187. 
Sec. 14-87. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 14-88. - Drivers in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 14-89. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the city administrator. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 14-90. - Driving upon city park walking and biking trails. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle upon a walking trail or biking trail in any city park. 
(Ord. No. O-03-04, § 1, 3-15-04) 
Secs. 14-91-14-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED 

Sec. 14-101. - Safe speed required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 166(a), (c). 
Sec. 14-102. - Maximum limits generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any street, roadway or highway in the city at a greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, except where speed zone signs are erected indicating a higher or lower rate of speed, in which case the speed indicated by the speed zone signs shall be the maximum speed permitted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 166(a)(1). 
Sec. 14-103. - Maximum limits specifically. 
    The maximum speed for traffic on Loop 304 shall be as follows: 
From State Highway 19 South going west to FM 2022, a distance of 4.801 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour in either direction. 
From FM 2022 going south to State Highway 21 East, a distance of 0.598 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour in either direction. 
From State Highway 21 East going south to US 287, a distance of 1.668 miles, the speed limit shall be forty (40) miles per hour in either direction. 
From US 287 East to a point approximately 1,911 feet south, a distance of 0.362 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty (50) miles per hour in either direction. 
From a point approximately 1,911 feet south of US 287 going west to State Highway 19 South, a distance of 1.207 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour in either direction. 
From mile point 1.703, a point approximately 0.703 miles west of State Highway 19 south to mile point 2.225, a point approximately 0.256 miles south of State Highway 7/21, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) mph when lights are flashing and remain fifty-five (55) mph all other times in either direction. 
(Ord. No. O-09-05, § I, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-02B-08, 2-4-08) 
Secs. 14-104-14-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-116. - Right-of-way of vehicles approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or traffic-control device erected by public authority, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle on a single lane street or roadway, or a street or roadway consisting of only two (2) traffic lanes, upon approaching the intersection, not otherwise controlled by traffic signs or signals, of a divided street or roadway, or of a street or roadway divided into three (3) or more marked traffic lanes, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to vehicles on such other street which are within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle on an unpaved street or roadway approaching the intersection of a paved roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any vehicle on such paved roadway which is within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such paved street or roadway. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway, not otherwise regulated herein, or controlled by traffic-control signs or signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any other vehicle which has entered the intersection from such driver's right or is approaching such intersection from such driver's right in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter such intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a street or roadway from a street or roadway which terminates at the intersection, not otherwise regulated in this section or controlled by traffic-control signs or signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of the intersection to another vehicle which has entered the intersection from the other street or roadway or is approaching the intersection on the through street or roadway in such proximity as to constitute a hazard and after stopping may only proceed when the driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with the traffic using the other street or roadway. 
(f)  A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accord with this section who is involved in a collision or interference with other traffic at such intersection is presumed not to have yielded the right-of-way as required by this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 71. 
Sec. 14-117. - Right-of-way of vehicles turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 72. 
Sec. 14-118. - Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 14-121 and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. Provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 73. 
Sec. 14-119. - Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. 
(Code 1960, § 19-139) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 74. 
Sec. 14-120. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of applicable state law or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 75. 
Sec. 14-121. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 91A. 
Sec. 14-122. - Vehicle emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 92. 
Sec. 14-123. - Obstructing traffic. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-6) 
Sec. 14-124. - Discharging passengers in intersections and crosswalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop a vehicle within an intersection or a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-8) 
Sec. 14-125. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
    Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered, or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train; 
(3)  A railroad engine approaching within approximately fifteen hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such engine by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 86. 
Secs. 14-126-14-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 14-141. - Turning at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(a)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(c)  If official traffic-control devices are placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such devices. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65; authority of city to regulate turning at intersections, art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8). 
Sec. 14-142. - Turning on curve or crest of grade. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred (500) feet. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 66. 
Sec. 14-143. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in section 14-142, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(d)  The signals provided for in section 14-145 of this Code shall be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, or start from a parked position and shall not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 68. 
Sec. 14-144. - General limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle upon any street unless a turn of said vehicle can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
Sec. 14-145. - Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 69. 
Sec. 14-146. - Manner of giving hand and arm signals. 
(a)  All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(b)  The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand-and-arm, or by a signal lamp or signal device approved by the appropriate state agency. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 70. 
Secs. 14-147-14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-161. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
b.  On a sidewalk. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
h.  On any railroad track. 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance (when properly sign-posted). 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area specified above or away from a curb such distance as is lawful. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 95. 
Sec. 14-162. - Prohibited for certain purpose. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Using such vehicle or trailer for advertising purposes or displaying large signs therefrom containing pictures or reading matter. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-11) 
Sec. 14-163. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96. 
Sec. 14-164. - Parking in alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it shall be unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-11) 
Sec. 14-165. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps which, when lighted, shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet to the front of the vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear of the vehicle. The location of said lamp or lamps shall be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any persons and vehicles within a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet upon such street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(c)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise and there is insufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with and shall display lamps meeting the requirements of subsection (a). 
(d)  Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-10) 
Sec. 14-166. - Parking of trucks with a rated capacity of one and one-half tons or more, truck tractors, semitrailers and pole trailers on streets and highways and the shoulders thereof prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a truck with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or more, a truck tractor, a semitrailer or a pole trailer on any street or highway or the shoulder of any street or highway within the city limits of Crockett, Texas. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person parks a truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or pole trailer in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. O-6A-98, § 1, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 14-167. - Parking of trucks with a rated capacity of one and one-half tons or more, truck tractors, semi-trailers and pole trailers on private property in districts zoned AR, R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 within the city limits for more than two hours in any twenty-four-hour period prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a truck with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or more, a truck tractor, a semi-trailer, or a pole trailer, on any privately owned property in districts zoned AR, R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 within the city limits of Crockett, Texas for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period, except when the vehicle is actually in use in a lawful business activity. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person parks a truck, truck tractor, semi-trailer or pole trailer in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, parking of such vehicles on the premises of lawfully permitted commercial, non-residential premises is not prohibited if the operation and parking of such vehicles is an integral part of the lawfully permitted business activity. 
(Ord. No. O-02-05, § 1, 2-7-05) 
Secs. 14-168-14-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN PARKING 

Sec. 14-181. - Parking of trucks prohibited in the downtown business district. 
    Parking of trucks or truck trailers is hereby prohibited within the downtown business district. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-11) 
Sec. 14-182. - Downtown parking meters abandoned. 
    The use of parking meters in the downtown business district is permanently abandoned. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-81, § 1, 7-20-81) 
Sec. 14-183. - Downtown parking zones. 
(a)  There shall be delineated a customer parking zone for downtown shoppers, the boundaries of which are visually shown and outlined in the heavy black markings on the map attached to Ordinance No. O-11B-96 as "Exhibit A," and referred to and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. Except as excused in this division, no person shall park anywhere in the customer parking zone for more than two (2) hours at one time. Overtime parking anywhere in the customer parking zone over the two-hour limit shall be penalized by a fine of five dollars ($5.00) for the first ticket of the day and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional ticket on the same day. The walking patrol is hereby authorized to place in ink by his or her hand on existing parking tickets any correction with regard to the fine changes that are necessitated by the passing of Ordinance No. O-11B-96. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the merchants of downtown Crockett owning businesses adjoining the portions of avenues and streets in the downtown and courthouse square parking zones shall have the option to validate over-parking tickets given to their legitimate customers. The validation shall be done with rubber stamps provided by the city and purchased by the business firm. Any misuse of the rubber stamp shall result in termination by forfeiture of the stamp of the merchant involved. 
(c)  District judges and their court reporters shall be exempted from the above restrictions and fines. Handicapped persons with automobile license plates so designating them may park in areas set aside for handicapped persons. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-81, § 2, 7-20-81; Ord. No. O-5A-84, § 1, 5-21-84; Ord. No. O-5A-86, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. O-8-87, § 1, 8-3-87; Ord. No. O-11B-96, § 1, 11-18-96; Ord. No. O-08C-05, § 1, 8-15-05) 
Editor's note- "Exhibit A," referred to in § 14-183 above, has not been included within the Code, but may be found attached to Ord. No. O-11B-96, on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Sec. 14-184. - Enforcement of two-hour parking limits; chalking tires. 
    The two-hour parking limit established for the downtown parking zone shall be enforced by a walking patrol. The walking patrol shall chalk the tires of all vehicles in the zone at two (2) hour intervals. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-81, § 2, 7-20-81; Ord. No. O-11B-96, § 2, 11-18-96; Ord. No. O-08C-05, § 2 8-15-05) 
Secs. 14-185-14-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. O-8-87, adopted Aug. 3, 1987, deleted §§ 14-185, 14-186 and 14-187 in their entirety. Prior to deletion, said sections pertained to overtime parking, reserved spaces around the courthouse, and the city parking facility, and were derived from Ord. No. O-7A-81, §§ 3-5, adopted July 20, 1981; and Ord. No. O-5A-84, § 1, adopted May 21, 1984. 
Sec. 14-188. - Loading zones. 
    The city council shall designate such portions of the streets of the downtown business district as it deems necessary as loading zones, which zones shall be used for the purpose of loading and unloading goods, wares and merchandise by the merchants of the downtown business district. The loading zones are designated as tow-away zones. The penalty for parking or illegal use of such spaces shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the cost of removing and storing the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-81, § 6, 7-20-81; Ord. No. O-11B-96, § 3, 11-18-96) 
Sec. 14-189. - Special parking spaces. 
    The city council may, upon application, designate parking spaces in the downtown business district to be used by individuals with special medical or other needs. The charge for the rental of such spaces shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) monthly. Payments for such spaces shall be made on or before the first day of each month and are payable in advance. Such spaces are designated as tow-away zones. The penalty for parking in these spaces by unauthorized persons shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the cost of removing and storing the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-81, § 7, 7-20-81; Ord. No. O-11B-96, § 4, 11-18-96) 
Sec. 14-190. - Fines for parking violations. 
    The fines for the various listed violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Double parking ..... $10.00 
(2)  Improper parking ..... 5.00 
(3)  Fire zone or hydrant ..... 50.00 
(4)  No-parking zone ..... 25.00 
    The walking patrol is hereby authorized to place in pen ink by his or her hand on existing parking tickets any correction with regard to the fine charges that are necessitated by the passing of Ord. No. O-11B-96. 
(Ord. No. O-5A-86, § 2, 5-5-86; Ord. No. O-11B-96, § 5, 11-18-96; Ord. No. O-1-97, § 1, 1-6-97) 
Sec. 14-191. - Parking spaces for vehicles transporting persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Designation. 
(1)  The city council may designate one (1) or more parking spaces and parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities. 
(2)  Each parking space and area located on property owned by the city or in which the city has any interest, so designated for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities, shall conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the commissioner of licensing and regulation under section 5(c), Article 9102, Revised Statutes of Texas. 
(3)  All parking spaces and parking areas located on property owned by the city or on property in which the city has any interest, designated for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities, existing on the effective date of Ordinance No. O-1A-97, are hereby ratified, validated and designated for the purpose of this section as parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities. 
(4)  The city council may, from time to time, by resolution, designate additional parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities. 
(5)  The penal provisions of this section also apply to parking spaces and parking areas on private property designated by a person who owns or controls such private property for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities, whether or not such parking spaces or parking areas on private property conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the commissioner of licensing and regulation under section 5(c), Article 9102, Revised Statutes of Texas. 
(b)  Violations; penalties. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle, on which are displayed license plates issued by the Texas Department of Transportation by or for the transportation of a person with a disability or a disabled parking placard, in a parking space or area designated specifically for persons with disabilities when the person does not have a disability and the person is not transporting a person with a disability. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle, on which license plates issued by the Texas Department of Transportation for the transportation of a person with a disability or a disabled parking placard is not displayed, in a parking space or area designated specifically for individuals with disabilities. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an architectural improvement designed to aid persons with disabilities, including an access or curb ramp. 
(4)  A person commits an offense if the person lends a disabled parking placard issued to the person to a person who uses the placard in violation of this section. 
(5)  In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person who parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(6)  Except as provided by subsections (7) through (11) of this subsection (b), an offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(7)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted one (1) time of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(8)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted two (2) times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more than four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(9)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted three (3) times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(10)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted four (4) or more times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(11)  In addition to the fines imposed by the preceding subsections of this section, an offense under this section is punishable by a sentence of community service not to exceed one hundred (100) hours. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the terms "persons with disabilities," "disability" and "disabled parking placard" shall be given the same definitions as those terms are given in Chapter 681, Texas Transportation Code, as from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. O-1A-97, § 1, 1-6-97) 
Secs. 14-192-14-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 14-206. - Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as provided in section 14-45, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of any official traffic-control signals. 
(c)  Except in crosswalks, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 76. 
Sec. 14-207. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 77. 
Sec. 14-208. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the highway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices or marked crosswalks; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices or marked crosswalks pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-9; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 1, 6-6-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art 6701d, § 78. 
Sec. 14-209. - Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 79) 
Sec. 14-210. - Pedestrians to use the right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 80. 
Sec. 14-211. - Pedestrians on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when possible walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(c)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, contributions, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(d)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 81. 
Sec. 14-212. - Crossing in the downtown parking district. 
(a)  No pedestrian may cross a roadway in the downtown parking district except in an officially marked crosswalk. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the downtown parking district is described as the area shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk as being bounded by heavy lines. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05, § 2, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 14-213. - Penalty. 
    An offense under article V. Pedestrians, of the Code is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05, § 3, 6-6-05) 
Secs. 14-214-14-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLES CARRYING DANGEROUS MATERIALS 

Sec. 14-226. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corrosive materials shall mean materials which consist of gases, liquids and solids and range from mildly active to materials capable of causing deep chemical burns. Corrosive materials include, but are not limited to, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, sulphuric acid, carbolic acid, chlorine, phosphorus, lime and caustic. 
    Dangerous or hazardous materials shall mean any of the substances designated in this section. 
    Dangerous materials formed by chemical reaction shall mean those materials which represent no particular disposal difficulty if they are kept from contact with other materials with which they might react forming a dangerous reaction product such as when calcium carbide reacts with water forming lime, acetylene and explosive gas, when sodium, potassium and calcium metals react with water forming hydrogen, an explosive gas when mixed with air or when cyanide salts (used in metal cleaning) form deadly hydrogen cyanide gas when reacted with organic and inorganic acids. All materials reacting with commonly encountered substances to form dangerous materials are considered to be in this class. 
    Explosive materials shall mean only those which are inherently unstable chemically with respect to themselves so that they can decompose or react under the influence of heat, light, shock, spark ignition, high-frequency wave motion or general aging with such a rapid evolution of energy that explosive forces result. Common compounds of this classification include, but are not limited to, organic nitrates, perchlorates, peroxides, fulminates, oxides and hydrides. Nitroglycerine (dynamite), TNT, hydrogen peroxide, ammonium nitrate and ketone peroxides are further examples of this classification. 
    Flammable materials shall mean those petroleum products or derivatives which are capable of being burned in the presence of air or oxygen when they are exposed to a flame, spark or any other form of ignition, including, but not limited to, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, naphthas, gasolines, oils and other flammable petroleum products. Such materials can be gaseous, liquid or solid or any combination thereof. 
    Radioactive materials shall mean materials which emit alpha, beta or gamma radiation. Radium, cobalt-60, carbon-14, strontium-90 and all radioactive isotopes are common examples of radioactive materials which might be encountered in the city. 
    Toxic and poisonous materials shall mean materials which consist of gases, liquids and solids and in which the degree of toxicity ranges from slight to deadly. Examples of toxic materials are: 
(1)  Gases: Carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, ammonia, hydrogen cyanide, chlorine, bromine and fluorine. 
(2)  Liquids: Hydrocyanic acid, carbolic acid, oxalic acid, formic acid, benzene, toluene, aniline and nitrobenzene. 
(3)  Solids: Arsenic and arsenic compounds, tellurides, beryllium compounds and organic drugs. 
    Vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle, motor truck, trailer or any other vehicle having attached thereto a tank or other receptacle used for the carrying of dangerous or hazardous materials. The term "vehicle" shall not include trains. 
(Ord. No. D-1, § 2, 1-16-78) 
Sec. 14-227. - Enforcement. 
    The fire marshal, fire department, chief of police and police department shall diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. D-1, § 3, 1-16-78) 
Sec. 14-228. - Trucks carrying dangerous materials restricted. 
(a)  Except for businesses located in the city carrying products outside the city and foreign businesses making local deliveries or parked on any public street or residential area within the city and engaged in the delivery or unloading of a product, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven, or to operate or maintain any vehicle for the purpose of the transport of any dangerous or hazardous material over any street, alley or other place within the city, except as designated in subsection (b). 
(b)  Loop 304 and any segment of a street or highway lying between Loop 304 and the city limits shall be used for the transport of dangerous or hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. D-1, § 1, 1-16-78) 
Secs. 14-229-14-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 14-241. - Effect of article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon a public thoroughfare or public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 178. 
Sec. 14-242. - Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles; competitive racing. 
(a)  Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(b)  Organized, competitive bicycle races may be held on public roads, provided that the sponsoring organization shall have obtained the approval of the police department. The sponsoring organization and the police department may establish by agreement special regulations regarding the movement of bicycles during such races, or in training for races, including, but not limited to, permission to ride abreast and other regulations to facilitate the safe conduct of such races or training for races. "Bicycle" as used herein means a nonmotorized vehicle propelled by human power. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-1-4, 10-1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 179. 
Sec. 14-243. - Obedience to traffic devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 14-244. - Parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle in such a manner as to interfere or obstruct pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 14-245. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the business district of the city. 
(b)  The city administrator is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon and when such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the same. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 14-246. - Manner of riding on bicycles. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 180. 
Sec. 14-247. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicles shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 181. 
Sec. 14-248. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Whenever a useable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 182. 
Sec. 14-249. - Carrying articles on bicycles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 183. 
Sec. 14-250. - Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
(a)  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 184. 
Secs. 14-251-14-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-02-02, § I, adopted Feb. 19, 2002, repealed former Art. VIII, §§ 14-266-14-274, of this chapter in its entirety, which pertained to junked vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 70-F, §§ II-IV, XI, adopted May 4, 1970; Ord. No. O-7A-85, §§ 1-3, 5, adopted July 1, 1985; and Ord. No. O-7B-85, § 1, adopted July 15, 1985. Section II of Ord. No. O-02-02 added new provisions to this chapter as Art. VIII, §§ 14-266-14-269. 
Cross reference- Keeping junk, etc., restricted, § 10-4; abandoned, derelict, etc. property, § 15-25 et seq. 

Sec. 14-266. - Definitions. 
    In this article, "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; and 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(Ord. No. O-02-02, § II, 2-19-02; Ord. No. O-09D-07, § 1, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 14-267. - Offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Owns or possesses a junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way, or 
(2)  Owns an interest in or is in possession of real estate on which is located a junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(c)  Upon conviction for this offense, the municipal court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-02-02, § II, 2-19-02) 
Sec. 14-268. - Authority to abate nuisance; procedures. 
(a)  On request of a person who receives notice as provided by this section made not later than the date by which the junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle shall be removed, a public hearing shall be held as provided by this section. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall conduct all hearings to determine whether a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle shall be removed from private or public property or a public right-of-way as a public nuisance. All such hearings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  For a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle to be subject to removal as a public nuisance, it must be visible from a public place or public right-of-way. 
(d)  The code enforcement officer, refuse control officer or any police officer may enter private property to examine a vehicle or part of a vehicle to determine if it is a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(e)  Upon determining that a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle may constitute a nuisance subject to removal, the code enforcement officer, refuse control officer or any police officer must personally deliver or send by certified mail, with five (5) day return requested, notice to the last known registered owner of the vehicle, each lienholder of record of the vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the property on which the vehicle is located, or, if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. The notice must state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(f)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the vehicle or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(g)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(h)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under this section, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the service of notice. 
(i)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle or part of a junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. At the hearing, if the code enforcement officer determines, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle or part of a vehicle is a nuisance, he shall order it removed to a scrap yard or a motor vehicle demolisher, and he shall give notice to the Texas Department of Transportation identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. If the vehicle is not removed as ordered by the code enforcement officer, the municipal court may order the removal of the nuisance, and it may enforce its orders by contempt. Additionally, the city may remove the vehicle at the expense of the owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupier of the real estate on which the vehicle was last situated. 
(j)  The orders of the code enforcement officer and municipal court must prohibit the vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal. 
(k)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, an order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; and 
(3)  License plate number. 
(l)  Upon order of the code enforcement officer, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in this article, the city may remove the vehicle and cause it to be delivered to a scrap yard or a motor vehicle demolisher. 
(m)  The relocation of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. O-02-02, § II, 2-19-02; Ord. No. O-09D-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 14-269. - Inapplicability of this article. 
(a)  Procedures adopted under this article do not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(b)  In this section: 
(1)  Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
(2)  Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
a.  Owns one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
b.  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
(3)  Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. O-02-02, § II, 2-19-02) 
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city council to exercise police power by ordinance, § 3.11(o). 
State Law reference- Police power of city, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011, 1175(34). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Unreasonable noise prohibited; permit for sound devices on vehicles. 
(a)  Any person using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising, political advertising or attracting the attention of the public, or the yelling, shouting or singing on the public streets for any purpose, in a way to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of the persons of reasonable sensibilities in any office, business house, dwelling or hotel shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate the vehicle so equipped. 
(Code 1960, §§ 6-1-7, 12-2-2) 
Sec. 15-2. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snaplock or other locking device. 
(Code 1960, § 6-5-1) 
Sec. 15-3. - Concealed weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon his person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol, dagger, stiletto or other deadly weapon. 
(Code 1960, § 6-4-2) 
Sec. 15-4. - Curfew for City Park and Mary Bethune Park; exempted activities; penalty. 
(a)  A curfew is established for the City Park and Mary Bethune Park of 10:30 p.m. in the evening until 6:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(b)  The following activities shall be exempted from said curfew: 
(1)  All activities or events approved and scheduled through the City of Crockett Parks and Recreation Department. 
(2)  Athletic events in either the football or baseball stadiums. 
(3)  Scheduled activities in the Lions Club Rodeo Arena. 
(4)  A primitive tent campground is established directly east of the pond and south of the municipal pool in the City Park. A plat of the campsite is described in the attached exhibit, which is incorporated by reference. The campground will consists of six (6) tent sites, as well as water and cooking grill facilities. Overnight camping is authorized, by permit only, in the primitive tent campground. Campers must remain in the primitive tent campground and the restrooms located at the main pavilions during curfew hours. The remainder of the park is off limits except for activities listed in subsections (b)(1) through (3) above. Campsites will only be permitted for groups under the supervision of an adult at least twenty-one (21) years of age. Permits may be acquired from the City of Crockett Water Office at City Hall during normal business hours. 
(c)  Any person found to be violating the hereinabove curfew shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined the sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-11-84, §§ 1-3, 11-19-84; Ord. No. O-01-11, § I, 1-11-11) 
Cross reference- Juvenile curfew, § 15-51 et seq. 
Sec. 15-5. - Smoking prohibiting in enclosed public places and public transit, and smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco products prohibited in buildings and motor vehicles owned, leased or rented by the city. 
(a)  There shall be no smoking or use of smokeless tobacco products in any building or motor vehicle owned, leased or rented by the city. 
(b)  Appropriate signs shall be posted by or at the direction of the city administrator in each building and motor vehicle owned, leased or rented by the city warning that there shall be no smoking or use of smokeless tobacco products therein. 
(c)  Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including, but not limited to the following places: 
(1)  Elevators; 
(2)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the city and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
(3)  Restrooms; 
(4)  Service lines; 
(5)  Retail stores; 
(6)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, attorneys' offices and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels; 
(7)  Restaurants; 
(8)  Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums; 
(9)  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of a stage production; 
(10)  Sports arenas and convention halls; 
(11)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state; 
(12)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, private and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor's offices and dentist's offices; 
(13)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(14)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in multiple-unit commercial facilities; and 
(15)  Polling places. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Designated areas in restaurants and bars that are completely enclosed except for doorways and served by a separate air conditioning system. 
(2)  Designated areas in places of employment that are completely enclosed except for doorways and served by a separate air conditioning system and where nonsmoking employees are not required to go. 
(3)  Private residences, except when used as child care or health care facilities. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores. 
(5)  Hotel and motel rooms designated by the owner of the hotel or motel as smoking rooms on a smoking floor. 
(e)  Any restaurant, bar, or business that elects to designate a portion of the establishment for smoking must post a prominently displayed reasonably sized notice at each entrance to the area. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a smoking establishment. Any restaurant, bar or business that elects to designate the entire establishment for smoking must post a prominently displayed reasonably sized notice at each entrance to the establishment. 
(g)  All notices required by this section must be at least eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches in size, with letters at least one (1) inch in height. 
(h)  Enforcement of this section shall be implemented by the city administrator. 
(i)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement with the city administrator. 
(j)  The fire department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self-certification" from the owner, manager, operator, or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this section have been complied with. 
(k)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this section. 
(l)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this subsection. This subsection does not apply to a smoking establishment designated under subsection (f). 
(m)  The city administrator shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this subsection to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators and managers in their compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this subsection. 
(n)  This subsection shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(o)  Any violation of any provision of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. O-9C-96, § I, 9-23-96; Ord. No. O-02-06, § 1, 2-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-06, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-9C-96, § I, adopted Sept. 23, 1996, amended Ord. No. O-12-87, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 7, 1987, in its entirety, provisions of which were formerly set out as § 15-5 of the Code. Former § 15-5 pertained to smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco products in the city hall and civic center. The provisions of Ord. No. O-9C-96 have been included herein as a new § 15-5 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 15-6. - Facility use fees. 
(a)  Agricultural arena fees. 
Usage fees: 
 (1)  Commercial (for profit), per calendar day or any part thereof or 10% of gross salary whichever is greater, admission, etc. ..... $400.00  (2)  Nonprofit (sales or admission), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... 300.00  (3)  Not-for-profit group (no sales or admissions), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... 300.00  (4)  Individual or Business (no ticket sales or admission) ..... 300.00  (5)  Local youth groups (not for profit and sales or admissions), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... 35.00  (6)  Hourly practice rate to practice horsemanship in the arena ..... 25.00/hour  (7)  Horse Stall rental ..... 10.00/day    (If user handles rentals, they get 1/2 of rental fee)   Setup and cleanup ..... All actual costs to be reimbursed to city to include watering of arena, etc. User pays for cost of cleanup. Minimum $50.00, and actual costs above $50.00.   Livestock sales fee ..... 1% of gross sales; $1,500.00 minimum for more than 50 head; less than 50-head minimum charge is $1,000.00. Usage fee deleted for livestock sales.   Deposit ..... Equal to 1 day usage fee. Refundable except for damage or cleanup expense. Youth/agricultural education groups shall be exempt from deposit; however, facility shall be cleaned by group or at their expense, or privilege of building use will end.  (b)  Civic center rates.  
Usage fees: All Facilities Foyer Area (1) Commercial (for profit), per calendar day or any part thereof or 10% of gross receipts, whichever is greater, admission, etc. ..... $750.00 $200.00 (2) Nonprofit (sales or admission), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... $375.00 $200.00 (3) Not-for-Profit group or individual (no sales or admissions), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... $300.00 $200.00 (4) Not-for-profit youth group or church activities (no sales or admissions), per calendar day or any part thereof ..... $200.00 $200.00 Deposit:  Nonalcohol events ..... $300.00 Refundable except for damage and cleaning expense  Alcohol served ..... $500.00 Refundable except for damage and cleaning expense Setup and cleanup ..... Setup and cleanup costs for tables, chairs and other items are as follows:  
 Setup/Rehearsal $100.00  Kitchen costs $25.00/day  Janitorial $150.00/day  Portable PA $50.00/day Tables/Chairs and Bleachers  Tables w/8 Chairs $4.00/table with 8 chairs  Table cloths $12.00/cloth  Bleachers setup $100.00 Sound and Lights Contact operator approved by city for cost  
(c)    Other fees and policies for both facilities. 
Security personnel, per hour, per person ..... $17.50 Concessions ..... City controls concessions, with the exception that a nonprofit organization can provide concessions. Concessionaire space:  (1) County resident or business, per space. ..... $30.00  (2) Noncounty resident or business, per space. .....   
$50.00 Youth and church activities ..... These limited events shall not be scheduled more than 30 days in advance. The city reserves the right to charge for significant, related expenses, such as utilities, setup, and cleanup costs. Ag Arena concession stand (completed by Crockett Lions Club in 1996), per day .....   
$100.00 Additionally, there shall be paid to the city prior to the use of the concession stand an additional sum of $100.00 as a deposit to assure proper use of the concession stand and the building and related facilities. If there is any damage to the concession stand, building or related facilities due to the use thereof by the operator, the sum of $100.00 deposited shall be applied toward repair of the damage. Any balance remaining after the payment of damages shall be returned by the city within 30 days after the cessation of the use of concession stand by the operator.  
(d)  Liability insurance for both facilities. Insurance requirements for the use of these facilities shall be determined by the type of activity. Certificates of insurance for five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) will be accepted if the user has a current policy for the requested event. Rodeos, youth ranch rodeos, adult ranch rodeos, and any Ag Arena event which sells tickets, regardless of the expected attendance, will require five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in insurance coverage. Insurance may be waived or reduced in coverage amount on a case by case basis for roping or horse shows where there are no admissions and normally only family spectators. Other users of these facilities must acquire this same amount of insurance for the number of days of facility use. Insurance will be issued based on the type of event. While using or occupying the facilities, the user agrees to save and hold harmless the city, public officials and employees of the city from any and all losses, claims, damages or causes of action arising out of the use or occupancy of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-9B-88, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. O-10C-88, 10-17-88; Ord. No. O-1-90, § 1, 1-22-90; Ord. No. O-9-96, §§ I, II, 9-9-96; Ord. No. O-09C-05, § I, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09B-10, § I, 9-7-10) 
Sec. 15-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-06, § I, adopted Oct. 2, 2006, repealed § 15-7, which pertained to loitering and derived from Ord. No. O-6-01, §§ 1-3, adopted June 18, 2001. 
Secs. 15-8-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 15-16. - Defined. 
    The term "firearms", as used in this article, shall mean any instrument used to propel any shot, shell or bullet or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including what are commonly known as air rifles and BB guns. 
(Code 1960, § 6-4-1) 
Sec. 15-17. - Discharge prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or description within the city; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1960, § 6-4-3) 
Sec. 15-18. - Permits. 
    The city council may, at any time, upon receipt of a proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. The permits shall be in writing attested by the city secretary and shall conform to such requirements as the city council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the city council. 
(Code 1960, § 6-4-4) 
Sec. 15-19. - Carrying of concealed handguns by license holders prohibited on city premises. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person who holds a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety may carry a concealed handgun on city premises. Any license holder violating this prohibition shall be referred to the appropriate authorities for prosecution for the crime of criminal trespass. 
(b)  "City premises" defined. The term "city premises" shall be defined as any building or other real property owned by the city or as to which the city is a lessee or licensee, except streets, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas and public parks. 
(c)  "Building" defined. The term "building" shall be defined in the same manner as that term is defined in the Penal Code of the State of Texas, as now in existence and from time to time amended. 
(d)  Posting of notices. The city administrator is authorized to cause to be posted appropriate notices prohibiting the carrying of handguns on city premises. 
(Ord. No. O-2-96, § I, 2-5-96) 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 15-20-15-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOL AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 15-24. - Consumptions of alcohol in public places. 
(a)  Finding. The City Council of the City of Crockett, Texas determines that possession of an open container or the public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the central business district is a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container containing alcoholic beverages or to consume alcoholic beverages in public in the central business district of the city. The central business district is defined as that area identified as "city center shopping" on the map attached to Ord. No. O-12-15 as "Exhibit A" and incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not prohibit possession of an open container or the consumption of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, buildings not owned or controlled by the city, residential structures or licensed premises located in the area of prohibition. 
(d)  Definition. In this section " open container " means a container that is no longer sealed. 
(e)  Penalty. Anyone guilty of violating this section shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-4-86, § 1, 4-21-86; Ord. No. O-07-10, § I, 7-12-10; Ord. No. O-12-15 , § I, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 15-24.1. - Mixed beverages late hours. 
    All holders of a mixed beverage late hours permit may also sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. O-08-03, § I, 8-18-03) 
Sec. 15-24.2. - Prohibition of sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, hospitals, public and private schools, day care centers and child care facilities. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1)  Private school means a private school, including a parochial school, that: 
a.  Offers a course of instruction for students in one (1) or more grades from kindergarten through grade twelve (12); and 
b.  Has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(2)  Day care center means a child care facility that provides care for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
(3)  Child care facility means a facility licensed, certified or registered by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services to provide assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the twenty-four-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may not be sold by a dealer whose place of business is within: 
(1)  Three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; 
(2)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a public school, if the city council receives a request from the board of trustees of the school district under V.T.C.A. Education Code, § 38.007; or 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a private school, if the city council receives a request from the governing body of the private school. 
(c)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multi-story building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(d)  The city council may allow variances to the regulations of this section if it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(e)  The provisions of this section prohibiting sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school do not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale of service of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  A retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or 
(3)  A wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's, manufacturer's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, ch. 102. 
(f)  The prohibition of sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school does not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A license or permit issued under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, chs. 27, 31 or 72, who is operating on the premises of a private school; or 
(2)  A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.53, and that it is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school. 
(g)  The prohibition of sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a private school does not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering a premises that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school; or 
(2)  A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.53, and that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school. 
(h)  This subsection applies only to a permit or license holder under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, chs. 25, 28, 32, 69 or 74, who does not hold a food and beverage certificate: 
(1)  Except as provided by this subsection, the provisions of this section relating to a public school also apply to a day care center and a child care facility. 
(2)  The provisions of this section prohibiting sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within one thousand (1,000) feet do not apply to a day care center or child care facility. 
(3)  This subsection does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if: 
a.  The permit or license holder and the day care center or the child care facility are located on different stories of a multi-story building; or 
b.  The permit or license holder and the day care center or child care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day care center or child care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multi-story building. 
(4)  This subsection does not apply to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home or agency home, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code, § 42.002. 
(Ord. No. O-11-07, § I, 11-19-07) 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED, DERELICT, ETC. PROPERTY 

Sec. 15-25. - Nuisance declared; impoundment authorized. 
(a)  Any personal property, other than a motor vehicle, which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance, the Charter of the city or any state law; or left unattended for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, public property or public place in the city; or which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in or on any public street, alley or sidewalk in such a manner as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or constitute a barrier to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is declared a public nuisance. Any such property when so found by the police officers of the city shall be removed or caused to be removed summarily to the police pound or any other place of impoundment designated by the city administrator. 
(b)  Trash receptacles and newspaper and magazine vending machines on public sidewalks shall not be deemed obstructions under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-26. - Notice to owner. 
    Within ten (10) days after any personal property is impounded under this article, the city shall notify the owner of such property and all lienholders, if their names and addresses be known, that such property has been impounded. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-27. - Lien on impounded property. 
    A lien for all costs incurred in the impounding, storing and advertising for sale of personal property pursuant to this article shall exist and inure to the benefit of the city. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the city may retain possession of such property until all costs are paid and may sell the same as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-28. - Redemption of impounded property. 
    The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any impounded personal property as provided for in this article may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  By paying to the city, before sale, the applicable fees set out in section 15-31. 
(2)  By paying to the buyer at the sale double the amount paid for such personal property, and any reasonable expenses incurred for keeping the same; provided, that the property shall be redeemed from the buyer within thirty (30) days after the date of the sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise title to the property shall become absolute in the buyer. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-29. - Sale. 
(a)  When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within thirty (30) days after being impounded, the same may be sold in the manner designated by the city administrator. 
(b)  Before selling any personal property as provided for in this article, the city shall post two (2) notices thereof, one (1) at the county courthouse door and one (1) at the entrance of the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a daily newspaper published in the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the day of the sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold, designate the place of sale, the manner of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of the first posting of such notices. 
(c)  When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the city shall sell such property in the manner designated by the city administrator, and execute a bill of sale of such property to the purchaser thereof; provided, that he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of thirty (30) days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-30. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
    After deducting the fees to which the city is entitled pursuant to section 15-31, the city shall hold the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to pay the same to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds within thirty (30) days, they shall belong to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-31. - Fee for impounding and storage. 
    The fee for impounding and storage shall be fifty cents ($0.50) a day per item of personal property. 
(Ord. No. O-6-86, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 15-32-15-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUVENILE CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Curfew for City Park and Mary Bethune Park; exempted activities; penalty, § 15-4. 

Sec. 15-51. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Curfew hours means the hours between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday and 5:30 a.m. of the following day and the hours between 12:00 midnight on any Friday or Saturday and 5:30 a.m. of the following day. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes a medical emergency or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a person or public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
    Operator means any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members and partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means: 
(1)  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor; or 
(2)  A person who is at least twenty (20) years of age and is authorized by a natural parent, adoptive parent, stepparent or guardian of a minor to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Premises means a building, a portion of a building or a private driveway, street, sidewalk, walkway, parking lot, parking garage or other private parking area. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-52. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he is present in a public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city limits of Crockett, Texas during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to be present and unaccompanied by a parent or guardian in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to be present upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 2, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 2, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-53. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 15-52(a) that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand made necessary by an illness, injury or emergency; 
(3)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without any detour or stop; 
(4)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate, inter-city or inter-county travel; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(7)  On the sidewalk abutting the residence of the minor's next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(8)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults or the City of Crockett, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Crockett, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(10)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A. Texas Family Code, ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 15-52(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment directed the minor to leave the establishment and promptly thereafter notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 3, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 3, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-54. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense under section 15-53 is applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 4, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 4, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-55. - Juvenile curfew processing office. 
    The Chief of Police of the City of Crockett, Texas is hereby directed to designate a juvenile curfew processing office. The juvenile curfew processing office must be an office that is an unlocked, multipurpose area that is not designated, set aside or used as a secure detention area or part of a secure detention area, and it may not be designated or intended for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 5, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 5, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-56. - Procedures for police officer taking a minor into custody for violation of this article. 
(a)  A police officer taking into custody a person under seventeen (17) years of age for violation of this article shall, without unnecessary delay: 
(1)  Release the minor to the minor's parent, guardian or custodian; 
(2)  Take the minor before the municipal court to answer the charge; or 
(3)  Take the minor to the juvenile curfew processing office designated by the Chief of Police of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(b)  The minor may not be secured physically to a cuffing rail, chair, desk or stationary object. 
(c)  The minor may not be held in the juvenile curfew processing office longer than necessary to accomplish the purposes of identification, investigation, processing and release to parents, guardians or custodians or arrangement of transportation to school or court. 
(d)  The minor must be under continuous visual supervision by a peace officer or other adult during the time the minor is in the juvenile curfew processing office. 
(e)  A minor may not be held in the juvenile curfew processing office for more than six (6) hours. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 6, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 6, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-57. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation was committed. 
(b)  Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 7, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 7, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-58. - Review of this article. 
    Before the third anniversary of the date of the adoption of this juvenile curfew ordinance codified in this article, by the City of Crockett, Texas, and every third year thereafter, the city council shall: 
(1)  Review this article's effects on the community and on problems the article was intended to remedy; 
(2)  Conduct public hearings on the need to continue this article; and 
(3)  Abolish, continue or modify this article. 
(Ord. No. O-6-98, § 8, 6-15-98; Ord. No. O-04-10, § 8, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 15-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 

Sec. 15-60. - House moving fees. 
(a)  No person shall move a house or other building on, along or across any street in the City of Crockett, Texas, without first obtaining a permit from the code enforcement officer. 
(b)  The fee for such a permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or portion thereof that any of the city streets are so used. 
(Ord. No. O-10D-02, § I, 10-7-02) 
Sec. 15-61. - Fees for burn permits. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any outdoor burning in the City of Crockett, Texas, without having first received a permit from the code enforcement officer. 
(b)  The fee for each day of burning shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. No. O-10D-02, § II, 10-7-02) 
Sec. 15-62. - Fees for sale of mulch. 
    The price for each three-yard scoop of mulch sold by the city shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. O-10D-02, § III, 10-7-02) 
Sec. 15-63. - Fees for sale of sludge. 
    The price for each yard of sludge sold by the city shall be two dollars ($2.00). 
(Ord. No. O-10D-02, § IV, 10-7-02) 
Secs. 15-64-15-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIAL 

Sec. 15-86. - Definitions. 
    Illegal smoking material shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; or 
(2)  2-[1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; or 
(3)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrabenzo [c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); or 
(4)  1-pentyl-2-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-030); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081). 
    Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2", "K-2 Summit", "K-2 Sex", "Genie", "Dacents", "Zohai", "Sage", "Spice", "Ko Knock-Out 2", "Spice Gold", "Spice Diamond", "Yucatan Fire", "Solar Flare", "Pep Spice", "Fire N' Ice", and "Salvia Divinorum". 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
    Illegal smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in smoking, ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-87. - Illegal smoking materials; purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of illegal smoking materials as defined within the city limits of the City of Crockett, Texas, and to prohibit the possession of illegal smoking materials within the city limits of the City of Crockett, Texas. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-88. - Sale, delivery, offer or gift. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any illegal smoking material to any person. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-89. - Use or possession of illegal smoking material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession or to use illegal smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-90. - Use or possession of illegal smoking paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession any illegal smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to smoke, ingest, inhale or otherwise consume illegal smoking material. It is a violation of this section, if a person is found in possession of illegal smoking paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of illegal smoking material are present on the illegal smoking paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-91. - Affirmative defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the possession or use of the illegal smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the sale, use or possession of the illegal smoking material was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if an individual charged with violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the possession or use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination which has long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 15-92. - Penalty. 
    Violations of sections 15-10 and 15-11 of this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state shall not be required for a proof of an offense under sections 15-10 and 15-11. Violations of section 15-12 shall be subject to a penalty of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state shall be required for proof of an offense under section 15-12. The penal provisions in this article shall not prevent the City of Crockett from filing suit to enjoin a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-09H-10, § I, 9-20-10) 
Secs. 15-93-15-115. - Reserved. 
Chapter 15.5 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, adopted July 25, 1995, added provisions to the Code as a new Ch. 21, Sexually Oriented Businesses. However, in order to maintain the alphabetical sequencing of chapters within the Code; the provisions of Ord. No. O-9-95 have been redesignated herein as Ch. 15.5 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 15.5-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. These regulations prevent concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city and prevent the establishment of these types of businesses near sensitive areas. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  The city council finds that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. Numerous studies, reports and findings concerning the harmful effects of sexually oriented businesses on surrounding land uses and neighborhoods have been produced. 
(c)  It is the intent of the city council that the regulations of this chapter are promulgated pursuant to Chapter 243, Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-2. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:] 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine or any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers, as it principal business, accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Chief building official means the chief building official of the city or his designated agent. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately perform semi-nude modeling or a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the State of Texas, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of: 
(1)  Human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering; or 
(2)  Any portion of the anal cleft or cleavage of the male or female buttocks. Attire that is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, thongs, and any other clothing or covering that does not completely and opaquely cover the anal cleft or cleavage of the male or female buttocks; or 
(3)  The portion of the human female breast directly or laterally below a point immediately above the top of the areola with less than a fully opaque covering; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided the areola is not exposed; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Regularly features means an event or activity which occurs (on separate days) at a frequency of two (2) or more times within any one hundred eighty (180) day period. 
    Residential district means an agricultural-residential, single-family residential, two-family residential or multiple-family residential district as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision and campground use which are uses permitted by right in "residential districts" in the city zoning ordinances. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the employees of the establishment is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent as the floor area exists at the date of passage of Ordinance No. O-9-95. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-3. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
Adult arcades; 
Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
Adult cabarets; 
Adult motels; 
Adult motion picture theaters; 
Adult theaters; 
Escort agencies; 
Nude model studios; and 
Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-4. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application shall be sworn to and shall: (i) include the name and address of the applicant; (ii) state whether or not the applicant meets each of the requirements set forth in section 15.5-5; (iii) the name and address of each person required to sign the application pursuant to subsection 15.5-4(d) below, and the name, address and type of entity (if any) of each person or entity owned or controlled by each person which owns or controls an interest in the business to be licensed; and (iv) such other matters, consistent with this chapter, as may be specified in the application form. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who must comply with section 15.5-18, relative to sexually explicit films and videos, shall submit a diagram meeting those requirements. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the code enforcement officer, fire department, and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty (20) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 15.5-5 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-5. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless he finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the fire department, code enforcement officer, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(9)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Promotion of prostitution; 
3.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
4.  Compelling prostitution; 
5.  Obscene display or distribution; 
6.  Obscenity; 
7.  Employment harmful to children; 
8.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
9.  Sexual performance by a child; 
10.  Possession or promotion of child pornography; 
b.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code: 
1.  Public lewdness; 
2.  Indecent exposure; 
3.  Indecency with a child; 
4.  Sexual exploitation by a mental health service provider; 
c.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
d.  Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
for which: 
f.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
g.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
h.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  An applicant who has been convicted, or whose spouse has been convicted, of an offense listed herein may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required herein has elapsed. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-6. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire department, code enforcement officer and building official, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department, fire department, code enforcement officer or building official at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-8. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 15.5-4. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the chief of police denies renewal of license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-9. - Suspension of license. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-10. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension as set out herein occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed herein for which the time period required herein has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed herein, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal Code. (This does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view); or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under section 15.5-5, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required thereunder has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-11. - Appeal. 
    If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council by filing a written appeal within ten (10) days of receiving written notice of the decision of the chief of police. The appeal will be considered filed only when physically received by the city secretary or city administrator. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-12. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-13. - Locations of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  The location of sexually oriented businesses is subject to the city zoning ordinance and to the distance and licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Sexually oriented businesses may not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(1)  A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in this chapter; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this chapter; 
(6)  A licensed daycare center; 
(7)  A C-1 neighborhood commercial district as defined in section 201.5 of the Crockett Code, Appendix A-Zoning; or 
(8)  The C-3 city center shopping district, as defined in the Crockett Code, Appendix A-Zoning. 
(c)  Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the business or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship or public or private elementary or secondary school or licensed day-care center or the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential or C-1 of C-3 district or residential lot. 
(d)  The operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business shall be prohibited. The distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(e)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of enactment of Ordinance No. O-9-95 that is in violation of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park or C-1 or C-3, residential or C-1 or C-3 district or residential lot within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-14. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-15. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view of persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-16. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view of persons of the opposite sex. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, operator, assistant manager, assistant operator, ticket seller, ticket taker, usher or any other person connected with or employed by any motion picture theater or drive-in motion picture theater to show or exhibit at a motion picture theater or drive-in motion picture theater in the city, or to aid or assist in such showing or exhibition, any motion picture, film, slide or other exhibit which is visible from any public street or highway in which the pubic area, bare buttocks or bare female breasts of the human body are shown. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-17. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. The terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-18. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit film or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of the floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee; 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agent and employees present in the premises to ensure that the viewing area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more projection stations and the location of all projection screens and sound fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various dimensions of all areas of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a projection station or projection screen may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee; 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each projection station at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(5)  The exterior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that the screens are not visible from any public thoroughfare or from adjacent property. Additional screening may be required if deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agent and employees present in the premises to ensure that the viewing and lobby areas remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A person having a duty set out in this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-19. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this subsection "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-20. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A conviction for violating sections 15.5-4 or 15.5-13 is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1.000.00). 
(b)  A conviction for violating a provision of this chapter other than sections 15.5-4 or 15.5-13 is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(c)  Each day any violation of this chapter shall continue, or be permitted to continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(f)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or otherwise violates this section is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 15.5-26. - Amendment of this chapter. 
    Section 15.5-13 of this chapter may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a zoning ordinance. Other sections of this chapter may be amended by vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-9-95, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Control of streets by city, § 14.02. 
Cross reference- Placing garbage and trash in streets prohibited, § 10-2; motor vehicles and traffic, § 14-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- General authority relative to streets and sidewalks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(16)-(18), (20). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Construction of streets. 
    Section 17-78, General principles of street system layout, section 17-79, Street structural thickness design, and section 17-80, Street names, of Chapter 17, Subdivisions, Article III, Standards and specifications, Division 1, Generally, shall apply to the construction of streets by the City of Crockett, Texas, exclusive of those requirements applicable only to subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. O-9E-87, § 1, 9-21-87) 
Secs. 16-2-16-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-16-16-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 16-26. - Legislative findings. 
    The public convenience, safety and necessity of the city require that there be proper construction and maintenance of access driveway facilities across state highway department rights-of-way in accordance with regulations for access driveways to state highways as adopted by the state department of highways and public transportation. 
(Ord. No. O-9B-83, § 1, 9-19-83) 
Sec. 16-27. - Adoption of state regulations. 
    There is hereby adopted the regulations for access driveways to state highways, as published by the state department of highways and public transportation, of which at least three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city secretary and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and after September 9, 1983, shall be controlling within the city for all matters set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 9B-83, § 3, 9-19-83; Ord. No. O-2-84, § 1, 2-6-84) 
Sec. 16-28. - Assumption of responsibility for permits. 
    The city hereby assumes responsibility for the issuance of all permits for access driveways as outlined in the regulations adopted by section 16-27. The building inspector will have the duty of issuing said permits. 
(Ord. No. O-2-84, § 2, 2-6-84) 
Sec. 16-29. - Certain existing driveways deemed to be in compliance with state regulations. 
    All access driveway facilities in existence on September 9, 1983 across the state highway department rights-of-way shall be deemed to be in compliance and in conformity with the regulations of the department. 
(Ord. No. O-9B-83, § 2, 9-19-83) 
Chapter 17 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-81 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, § 5-1 et seq.; plumbing, § 5-27 et seq.; housing, § 5-61 et seq.; electricity, § 5-116 et seq.; gas, § 5-356 et seq.; flood hazard prevention, § 8-1 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 16-1 et seq.; water, § 19-21 et seq.; sewers, § 19-56 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Platting, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plat shall mean a map or chart of the subdivision. It shall include plan, plat or replat and include both singular and plural. 
    Resubdivision shall mean the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with the relocation of any street lines. 
    Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of the sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include resubdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 3; Ord. No. O-2B-85, § 1, 2-18-85; Ord. No. O-11-85, 11-4-85) 
Sec. 17-2. - Scope. 
(a)  This chapter shall govern every person owning any tract of land within the city limits or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of said city, who may hereafter divide the same in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(b)  Unplatted lots for single-family or duplex residential structures which were established prior to November 19, 1985, are exempt from the platting requirements of this chapter if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The lot fronts on a public street; 
(2)  The lot has a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
(3)  No dedications of easements are required by the city in order to extend water and/or sewer lines to the lot; 
(4)  The owner has a deed to the property, properly recorded in the county clerk's office, which describes the lot by metes and bounds with the point of beginning well-defined. 
(c)  Rural subdivisions located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city where public water and sewer facilities are available or proposed shall provide paved streets. Rural subdivisions located in the ETJ where public water and sewer facilities are not available or proposed may contain nonpaved streets if the minimum lot size is restricted by the plat and individual deeds to a minimum lot size of five (5) acres; provided, however that lots may be further subdivided at such time as full public improvements are provided as required by the remaining provisions of Chapter 17, Subdivisions. 
    Lots not connected to a public sewage system shall be sized to accommodate on-site private sewage facilities according to the standards established by the Houston County Health Department and the Texas Department of Health "Construction Standards for Private Sewage Facilities." 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 2; Ord. No. O-3-86, § 1, 3-3-86; Ord. No. O-7-86, § 1, 7-7-86) 
Sec. 17-3. - Subdivider's responsibility for improvements; bond. 
(a)  All persons desiring to subdivide or resubdivide a tract of land within the city shall be required to provide at their sole expense all necessary street grading, paving, curbs, gutters and storm sewer drains and also utilities required to service such tract as subdivided, or resubdivided, or such portion thereof as may be developed by the erection of permanent buildings thereon. 
(b)  Prior to the final acceptance by the city council of any subdivision or resubdivision, the owner or owners or the agents thereof shall be required to give a good and sufficient bond or a deposit equal to the total estimated cost of the improvements within such tract of land to be subdivided or resubdivided, which shall be for the performance of the above-mentioned improvements. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 1) 
Sec. 17-4. - Withholding utilities prior to approval of subdivision. 
    The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements of whatever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage facilities and water services from all additions and subdivisions, the platting of which has not been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 4; Ord. No. O-4-89, § I, 4-17-89) 
Sec. 17-5. - Street number assignment and building permits to be approved. 
    No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the city on any property other than an original or resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without the written approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 4) 
Sec. 17-6. - Variances. 
    Where extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with this chapter, the city council may vary the provisions hereof so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; however, such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 10) 
Sec. 17-7. - Presentation of plans for improvements. 
    The engineer representing the subdivider must present to the city reproducible complete as-built plans for all paving, drainage structures, water lines and sewer lines within the thirty (30) days after completion of each contract. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 11) 
Sec. 17-8. - When subdivider may award contracts. 
    The subdivider may award the contract and make payments directly to the contractor if the plans and specifications have been approved by the city council for all grading, paving, drainage structures and utilities in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 8; Ord. No. O-4-89, § II, 4-17-89) 
Sec. 17-9. - Consideration to be given to suitable sites for parks, playgrounds, schools. 
    In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, and to the dedication of parks and playgrounds. Such property shall not be of a less desirable nature than other property in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9) 
Sec. 17-10. - Fees. 
(a)  The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid into the general fund of the city when any map or plat is tendered to the city, and each of the fees and charges shall be paid in advance. No action of the planning and zoning commission or the city council shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid. The city administrator or his deputies or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Preliminary plans, ten dollars ($10.00) per plat, plus one dollar ($1.00) per lot. 
(2)  Final plats, twenty dollars ($20.00) per plat, plus two dollars ($2.00) per lot. 
(3)  For approval of multiple-dwelling areas, business or industrial areas not subdivided into lots, both the preliminary and final plat shall carry a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per acre. 
(b)  The above fees shall be charged on all plats regardless of the action taken by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 12; Ord. No. O-4-89, § III, 4-17-89) 
Secs. 17-11-17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-26. - City council approval of plats and replats required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner of land to lay out, subdivide, plat or replat any land into lots, blocks and streets within the city or within a maximum distance of five (5) miles of the city limits without the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 4; Ord. No. O-4-89, § IV, 4-17-89) 
Sec. 17-27. - Assistance by city. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall assist the subdivider through preliminary discussion of proposed plats at all possible times, and shall, through the city administrator, make available all possible assistance. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 10) 
Sec. 17-28. - Water and sewer access as prerequisite to approval. 
    The planning and zoning commission or city council may refuse to approve a plat unless it is evident that proper water and sewer facilities can be supplied within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 10; Ord. No. O-4-89, § V, 4-17-89) 
Secs. 17-29-17-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 17-41. - When submitted; contents. 
(a)  Three (3) copies of a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city administrator for presentation to the planning and zoning commission five (5) days prior to the meeting at which the approval is asked. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch or larger, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  The name of the subdivision. 
(2)  The names of the owner and engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and design. 
(3)  The boundary lines, existing buildings and the width and location of platted streets and alleys within and adjacent to the property. 
(4)  The width and depth and/or area of the proposed lots. 
(5)  The physical features of the property, including the location of water courses, culverts, bridges, proposed drainage ditches, present structures, streets, alleys and highways, including their widths and names. 
(6)  A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision. 
(7)  Adequate plans for off-street parking must be provided for lots set aside or planned for business, public or recreational use. 
(8)  A map on a smaller scale must be presented to show the nearest subdivisions, and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may connect with those nearby. 
(9)  Sites for schools, parks and playgrounds. 
(10)  A letter from the appropriate independent school district stating that provisions for the site of future schools if such required, are adequate or if not required, then such letter shall so state. 
(11)  Profiles of streets and ditches may also be required by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9) 
Sec. 17-42. - Action on preliminary plats by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Following a review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the planning and zoning commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved shall express its approval as "conditional approval" and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat and shall be referenced and attached to any conditions determined by the commission to be necessary. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy retained by the city administrator and the third copy retained by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but is merely authority to proceed with the preparation of the final or record plat. No work shall be done on the subdivision before the final plat is accepted and recorded. Approval of a preliminary plat expires at the end of ninety (90) days unless a final or record plat has been submitted to the planning and zoning commission. Any changes by the planning and zoning commission, the city administrator or others may require submission of another preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9) 
Secs. 17-43-17-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 17-56. - Filing plat; prerequisites. 
    Two (2) white print copies of the final or record plat with reproducible tracing thereof shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission after the preliminary plat has been approved and all changes and alterations made. No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has first been submitted. Such plats shall be filed with the city administrator at least five (5) days prior to the meeting at which approval is requested. 
(Ord. No. 10-9-61, § 9) 
Sec. 17-57. - Size; scale. 
    Final plats shall be drawn upon sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9) 
Sec. 17-58. - Contents. 
    The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)  A title, including the name of the subdivision owner or owners, and the licensed land surveyor, registered engineer or registered public surveyor responsible for the plat, and the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to the original land grants or surveys. The date and north point shall also be included. 
(2)  The certificate of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who surveyed, mapped and monumented the land shall be placed on the face of the plat. 
(3)  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and lienholder of the land. 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated. 
(5)  An accurate on-the-ground boundary survey of the property with bearing and distances and showing the lines of all adjacent land, streets and alleys with their names and width. Streets, alleys and lot lines in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown by dotted lines. All necessary data to reproduce the plat on the ground must be shown on the plat. 
(6)  A certificate of approval to be signed by the mayor and attested by the city secretary or signed by a majority of the members of the city council shall be placed on the face of the plat. 
(7)  Two (2) sets of plans and specifications for water, sewer, paving and drainage prepared by a registered civil engineer, which must be approved by the city council prior to the beginning of any construction in the subdivision. 
(8)  A letter from the servicing utility companies stating that the plat includes easements required by them in the furnishing of utilities to the subdivision. 
(9)  Two (2) copies of deed restrictions. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9; Ord. No. O-4-89, § VI, 4-17-89) 
Sec. 17-59. - Action on final plat by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Following a review of the final plat, and when, to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission, all conditions and requirements have been met, the planning and zoning commission shall approve the plat. 
(b)  Should the final plat, as submitted, fail to meet the conditions and requirements of the planning and zoning commission, then the commission shall disapprove the plat, note its disapproval thereon, and attach thereto a statement of the reasons for its disapproval. 
(c)  Approval or disapproval of the final plat shall be voted upon by the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days after the submission of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 9) 
Sec. 17-60. - Action on final plat by city council. 
(a)  Following a review of the final plat and when, to the satisfaction of the city council, all conditions and requirements have been met, the city council shall approve the plat. 
(b)  Should the final plat as submitted fail to meet the conditions and requirements of the city council, then the city council shall disapprove the plat, note its disapproval thereon and attach thereto a statement of the reasons for its disapproval. 
(c)  Approval or disapproval of the final plat shall be voted upon the city council within thirty (30) days after the date the plat is approved or disapproved by the planning and zoning commission or automatically approved by inaction of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. O-4-89, § VII, 4-17-89) 
Secs. 17-61-17-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-76. - Streets. 
(a)  Streets, in general, must conform to the following: 
(1)  Commercial streets shall have a minimum sixty-foot right-of-way with not less than forty-foot curb to curb width; however, a greater width may be required. 
(2)  Residential streets shall have a minimum forty-foot right-of-way with not less than a thirty-foot curb to curb width; however, a greater width may be required. 
(3)  Streets shall connect with existing streets in adjoining subdivisions. 
(4)  Streets shall be platted with appropriate regard for all topographical features lending themselves to attractive treatment and layout of utilities. 
(5)  Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets. 
(6)  Dead-end streets shall be avoided, except for planning courts. 
(b)  Alleys shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Residential lots shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet wide at the building line and one hundred (100) feet deep and in no case shall any lot contain less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet exclusive of drainage easements. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 5) 
Sec. 17-77. - Survey requirements. 
(a)  Monuments consisting of one-inch iron pipes, twenty-six (26) inches in length, shall be placed at all corners of the block lines. 
(b)  One (1) bench mark for each five (5) acres of property or fraction thereof shall be permanently installed in an approved manner, with their location and the elevation shown on the plat. 
(c)  Lot markers shall be metal or concrete stakes placed at each corner of all lots. The markers shall be flush with the average ground elevation, or they may be countersunk, if necessary, to avoid being disturbed. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 6) 
Sec. 17-78. - General principles of street system layout. 
(a)  General. The developer shall locate and align streets to conform to the comprehensive plan of the city. Streets shall be classified, according to their expected traffic capacity (see Figure 3-1, immediately following this section), as arterial, collector or local streets. 
(b)  Street access. 
(1)  Primary access to large subdivisions, commercial tracts and industrial tracts shall be provided from public streets designed to carry fairly high traffic loads such as arterials and collectors. Residential tracts shall be protected from the adverse effects of through traffic by locating lots facing local streets. 
(2)  The developer shall provide a street system within the development with at least one (1) point of access to a public street adjacent to the development; provided, however, that developments containing one hundred and fifty (150) dwelling units or more shall provide at least two (2) points of access to adjacent public streets. 
(3)  All public streets shall have direct access to another public street. 
(c)  Location of public streets. 
(1)  The city shall determine the location of all public streets. The developer shall submit a design for the system of streets within a tract. Certain streets should be planned to carry large volumes of through traffic (arterials, collectors) while other streets (locals) should be laid out to provide access within a development. Arterial and collector streets if located within a residential subdivision should follow the continuity of city streets leading to or from the tract and should provide for extensions into adjacent tracts. 
(2)  Local streets shall be designed to service only the development in which they are contained. The developer shall design certain local streets (L1, L3) to serve as access to other local streets (L2, L4) as well as access to adjacent property. Local street L2 may be used only when serving the equivalent of twenty (20) single-family dwelling units or less and is not intended for extension into adjacent property. In locating local streets, the developer shall: 
a.  Create building lots of a desirable elevation, size, shape and orientation; 
b.  Discourage through traffic; 
c.  Insure access by firemen, police and other emergency services to all areas of the tract; and 
d.  Insure vision clearance. 
(3)  For developments within the city, the developer shall provide streets in accordance with the criteria shown in Figures 3-2 through 3-5 [immediately following this section]. For all other developments, the developer shall provide streets in accordance with the criteria shown in Figures 3-2 through 3-6 [immediately following this section]. 
(d)  Intersection of public streets. 
(1)  The developer shall keep the number of intersections to a minimum consistent with traffic needs. The developer shall minimize the number of streets permitted to converge at a single intersection. The developer shall design intersecting streets so that they intersect at right angles with variations not to exceed fifteen (15) degrees. If jogs are necessary, the developer shall connect the streets by means of diagonal curve or line; that is, the street shall be curved as it approaches the intersections, in order to effect a nearly right-angle alignment to the extent possible. Intersections shall be staggered or offset only if the distance between street center lines is at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(2)  Local streets intersecting a collector, arterial or expressway street shall have a tangent section of centerline at least fifty (50) feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the higher traffic volume street; however, no such tangent is required if the minor street curve has a centerline radius greater than four hundred (400) feet with the center located in the higher traffic volume street right-of-way line. 
(e)  Right-of-way. The developer shall dedicate the minimum right-of-way for streets as provided in Table 3-1 [following Figures 3-1-3-6 at the end of this section]. If the tract is located adjacent to an existing designated public street having a right-of-way less than the minimum required, the developer shall dedicate sufficient additional right-of-way to bring the right-of-way up to minimum standards. 
(f)  Geometric criteria. The developer shall design public streets according to the minimum geometric criteria established in Table 3-2 and Figures 3-2 through 3-6 [at the end of this section]. 
(g)  Half-streets. Half-streets are prohibited. The developer shall construct full street improvements for any development. 
(h)  Cul-de-sac and dead-end public streets. 
(1)  The developer shall design cul-de-sac streets to prohibit further extensions by arranging lots around the turnaround. The developer shall not design or construct a deadend street unless it is intended to connect with a future street on adjacent land. The developer shall construct a circular turnaround conforming to city standards for all cul-de-sac and dead-end public streets. The cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a pavement radius of forty (40) feet and a right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. In residential developments, the developer shall construct temporary turnarounds at the end of any dead-end street, within the standard right-of-way. In a commercial/industrial development, construction of a temporary turnaround may be waived if adequate alternate means is available for vehicles to turn around. 
(2)  The length of cul-de-sac and dead-end streets is the distance from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street, along the centerline of the cul-de-sac or dead-end street to the center of the circular turnaround. The maximum length of cul-de-sac and dead-end streets shall be related to the expected traffic volume, expressed in vehicle trips per day (VTD), of the street at the time of project buildout. The developer shall furnish the city all necessary data to substantiate the length of the proposed street. VTD for residential areas shall be based on an average of five (5) trips per day per dwelling unit. The maximum length of any cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall be: 
VTD Maximum length in feet Less than 100 1,000 100 or greater 600  
(i)  Reserve access strips. The developer shall not reserve ownership of strips of land at the end or alongside offered or existing streets for the purpose of controlling access to property unless the reserve access strip is dedicated to the public under conditions approved by the city. 
(j)  Alleys. Public alleys shall be prohibited. If secondary access is provided, the developer shall construct private alleys to meet or exceed private street standards. (See also section 17-79(f) through (m).) 
(k)  Construction standard specifications. Construction methods to be used and materials to be incorporated therein in the construction of streets within the City of Crockett, Texas, shall be in accordance with the "Standard Specifications" adopted by the City of Crockett and any hereinafter amendments. A copy of the "Standard Specifications" can be obtained from the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-9D-87, § 1, 9-21-87) 

Figure 3-1 

Figure 3-2 

Figure 3-3 

Figure 3-4 

Figure 3-5 

Figure 3-6 
. 
Table 3-1
Street Rights-of-Way 
Street Classification No. Travel
Lanes No. Parking
Lanes Minimum Row
Width
(in feet) Required Pavement
Width (B-B Curb
or Edge to Edge)
(in feet) Arterial  Stan dard with parking, A-1 5 0 80 61  Stan dard without park- 
ing, A-2 5 2 110 85 Collector  Standard, C-1 2 2 70 41  Estate, C-2 2 0 80 24 Local  Hig h volume residential, 
L-1(1) 2 2 60 37  Low volume residential, 
L-2(2) 1 2 50 28  Indu strial subdivision or 
park, L-3(3) 2 2 60 41  Estate, L-4 2 0 60 20  Private - - 24 - City/County roads  Paved 2 0 80 20  Unpaved 2 0 80 N/A  
       (1) High volume provides access to more than twenty (20) residences. 
       (2) Low volume provides access to twenty (20) or less residences, culs-de-sac or very short connecting streets only. 
       (3) With city approval, reduced pavement width may be used if developer furnishes and installs "No Parking" signs in accordance with city standards. In no case shall pavement width be less than twenty-eight (28) feet, b-b, and increased driveway and intersection radii may be required for truck turning movements. 
Table 3-2
Geometric Design Criteria for Public Streets 
Street
Classification Max.
Grade
% Min.
Grade
% Min. C.L.
Curve
Radius
(feet) Min. Length 
Vertical 
Curves (2) 
(feet) Min.
Sight
Distance
(feet) Min. Tangent
Length
Between Curves
(feet) Curb
Return
Radii
(feet) Arterial 6 0.5 800 300 400 300 30 Collector 8 (1) 0.5 500 100 250 200 25 Local 10 (1) 0.5 200 100 250 100 20 (3)  
       (1) Where existing topography makes conformance to these grades impractical, consideration may be given to allowing an additional two (2) percent increase in grade for distance of five hundred (500) feet or less. 
       (2) Arterial: Or fifty (50) times the algebraic difference in grades. Collector or local: Or twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in grades. 
       (3) Acute angle intersections shall have twenty-five-foot radii. 
    See Figures 3-2 through 3-4 for additional details. 
Sec. 17-79. - Street structural thickness design. 
(a)  Engineered design of street structural section. 
(1)  Except as provided by subsection (b) herein, the developer shall have a registered engineer design the street structural sections (structural thickness) in accordance with: 
a.  American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO), Flexible-Pavement Design Method; 
b.  Asphalt Institute Design Method; 
c.  Portland Cement Association, Rigid Pavement Design Method; or 
d.  Any other design methods not specifically mentioned in this manual may be used with prior approval of the city. 
(2)  The street structural section design shall be based on the total number and weight (plus configuration) of the axles expected to go over the street section during a design life of twenty (20) years. The concept of "equivalent axle loadings" shall be used to express the total number and mixture of loadings that will occur during the street section's expected life. If a roadway is proposed, it will be designed as an arterial, collector, or local, and the street structural section design shall be based on the following loadings: 
Street Design Group Equivalent 18,000 lb. Axle Loads
(20-year design life) Std. arterial (A-1, A-2) collector or local in a medium or heavy Industrial area (C-1, L-1, L-3) 5,000,000 Collector or local in a light industrial or commercial area (C-1, L-1, L-3) 3,000,000 Std. collector (C-1, C-2, C-3) 400,000 Std. local (L-1, L-2, L-4, L-5) 9,000  
(b)  Standard structural section design for paved local streets. In lieu of a designed street structural section, the developer may design and construct local street pavement sections (see also section 17-79(a)(1) and (2)) as follows: 
(1)  11/2" hot-mix asphaltic concrete (H.M.A.C.), 7" flexible base, 6" stabilized subgrade; 
(2)  Two (2) course surface treatment; 
(3)  5" H.M.A.C., 6" stabilized subgrade; 
(4)  6" reinforced Portland Cement concrete (with 2" sand cushion permitted), 6" stabilized subgrade. 
(c)  Soils testing and subgrade stabilization. 
(1)  Prior to the construction of a street or streets, the developer shall submit to the city a soils test report for each one thousand (1,000) square yards of paved surface proposed or for each type of soil encountered in the subgrade. 
(2)  Prior to the construction of a street or streets, the developer shall submit to the city the following data as part of the soils test report: 
a.  Soil classification; 
b.  Optimum moisture/density (modified Proctor, ASTM D 1557); 
c.  Atterberg liquid limits and plasiticity index (P.I.); 
d.  Stabilization requirements for subgrade sole percent lime for clay or percent cement for sandy soils), if street structural section is to be designed by an engineer; 
e.  All tests shall be performed by a certified testing laboratory. 
(3)  The developer shall stabilize all subgrade soils with a P.I. of twenty (20) or more: 
a.  If the standard structural section design for paved local streets is used, five (5) percent lime by weight may be used; otherwise, 
b.  The developer shall have a certified testing laboratory conduct lime (or other approved material) series test to determine the percent of stabilizing agent necessary to lower the P.I. below twenty (20). 
(4)  Native soils with a P.I. of less than twenty (20) may be used as subgrade material as long as they can meet the city's compaction requirements (see below). The developer may add a stabilizing agent (lime, cement, etc.) as recommended by soils analysis, to such low P.I. soil to aid in compaction. 
(5)  Subgrade soils evaluation shall generally apply to the top six (6) inches of soil measured down from the proposed subgrade surface. 
(6)  Construction of a street or streets shall not be commenced until the written approval of the city engineer certifying compliance with this Ordinance No. O-9D-87 has been furnished to the city administrator and the developer. 
(d)  Other basic criteria. 
(1)  The developer shall compact all subgrade and individual layers of base and paving materials to ninety-five (95) percent relative density, modified Proctor test. 
(2)  The total design thickness of the street structural section shall be rounded up to the nearest whole inch. 
(3)  The total thickness of a asphaltic concrete pavement may be divided into different grades of material. Unless otherwise approved by the city, type "D" hot-mix asphaltic concrete (H.M.A.C.), per Item 340, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation Standard Specifications, shall be used for a surface course. 
(4)  The developer shall lay asphalt concrete pavement in lifts no more than three (3) nor less than one and one-half inches each, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(5)  The developer shall completely clear and grub the area within ten (10) feet behind the proposed curbs or edge of pavement prior to construction of any street improvements. 
(6)  The design requirements set forth in this chapter are minimum design standards. The city reserved the right to require additional precautions or treatments consistent with sound engineering practice to provide for conditions not specifically covered herein. 
(e)  Reserve areas of twenty-five (25) acres or less. The provisions of this section shall not apply to reserve areas of twenty-five (25) acres, or less, of subdivisions previously platted and filed with the Houston County Clerk; provided, however, that streets in such subdivision of reserve areas shall be built to same standard as the other streets in said subdivisions. 
(f)  Private streets and alleys. The developer shall design and construct private streets and alleys in accordance with this section. Private streets shall be used only within unified developments. 
(g)  Layout. The developer shall design private streets to: 
(1)  Provide adequate vehicular access to all buildings and facilities within the plat boundaries; 
(2)  Provide adequate interior traffic circulation and access to all buildings containing dwelling units by fire-fighting personnel and equipment; 
(3)  Allow for the smooth flow of vehicular traffic, avoiding such traffic hazards as closely offset intersections; and 
(4)  Provide direct access to the existing public street system adjacent to the tract boundaries. 
(h)  Width. The minimum unobstructed width of any private street shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet. If parking is proposed along the private street, the developer shall widen the street to accommodate such parking. 
(i)  Culs-de-sac and dead-ends. Cul-de-sac and dead-end private streets shall be terminated by a circular turnaround having a paving radius of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(j)  Intersections of private streets with public streets. 
(1)  Private streets shall not be direct (straight line) projections of any public street. The private street shall offset a minimum distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet centerline to centerline from any public street intersection. Intersections of all private streets with public streets shall be at right angles with variations not to exceed fifteen (15) degrees. Right-angle intersections of private streets shall have a twenty-foot radii for the pavement edge at all corners. Acute angle intersections shall have twenty-five-foot radii for the pavement edge at the acute corner on both public and private streets. 
(2)  Except for pavement width, the portion of a private street within public street right-of-way, at its intersection with the public street, shall be designed and constructed by the developer in accordance with city standards. 
(k)  Access. The developer shall provide a street system within the development with at least one (1) point of access to a public street adjacent to the development; provided, however, that developments containing one hundred and fifty (150) dwelling units or more shall provide at least two (2) points of access to adjacent public streets. Private streets shall serve only the land within each development. The developer shall not extend private streets into adjacent tracts under a different ownership or a different property owners' association. 
(l)  Maintenance. Maintenance of private streets shall be the responsibility of property owners within the development. The property owners shall be legally bound together by deed restriction, contract, property owners' association, corporation or other organization that has as one of its purposes the continued care and maintenance of all commonly owned property within the development, including the private streets. 
(m)  Geometric and pavement designs. The developer shall design and construct private streets according to the standards established for local public streets. (See section 17-79). 
(Ord. No. O-9D-87, § 1, 9-21-87) 
Sec. 17-80. - Street names. 
(a)  Public street names. The developer shall name public streets in conformance with the following considerations: 
(1)  Names of new streets, not extensions of existing streets, shall not duplicate any existing street name in the City of Crockett. 
(2)  If a new street is a direct or logical extension of an existing street, existing street names shall be used. 
(3)  Street name suffixes such as "place," "court," "circle" and "loop" shall be designated on streets that are cul-de-sac or loop streets. Suffixes such as "Boulevard," "Parkway," "Expressway" and "Drive" shall be confined to designated arterial or collector streets. Suffixes such as "Highway" or "Freeway" shall be used only on designated highways or freeways falling under the jurisdiction of the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation. 
(4)  Street name prefixes such as "North," "South," "East" and "West" may be used to clarify the general location of the street; however, such prefixes shall be consistent with the existing and established street naming and address numbering system of the general area in which the street is located. Streets running north and south are designated as streets, while those running east and west are designated as avenues. 
(5)  Alphabetical and numerical street names shall not be designated on any development plan unless the street is a direct extension of an existing street with that name. 
(6)  Street names shall fit in with the names of existing streets in the area. 
(b)  Private street names. 
(1)  Private street names shall conform to the same standards applicable to public street names and the following additional criteria: 
a.  The developer shall provide signs for all private streets; the signs shall conform in size, height and material to city standards. 
b.  The suffix "Private" shall be a part of all names established for private streets and such word shall be an integral part of any street sign. (Example of sign lettering: "SCENIC LN. PRIVATE"). 
c.  The background color for any private street sign shall be blue. 
(2)  No private street name shall be changed without approval of the city. 
(3)  Upon the establishment of the name of any private street under the terms and conditions of this article and the erection of signs, the owners of the property adjacent to such private street or a property owners' association shall be responsible for the continued maintenance of the private street signs. No private street sign shall be installed without the approval of the city. 
(4)  Private street signs not established in conformance with the provisions of this section and installed within the right-of-way of any public street may be removed from the public street right-of-way without notice. 
(Ord. No. O-9D-87, § 1, 9-21-87) 
Secs. 17-81-17-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 17-91. - Streets and drainage. 
    The subdivider shall improve all streets in the subdivision. Improvements shall be installed to a permanent line and grade to the satisfaction of the city administrator. All street construction work shall be performed by a bonded contractor who has filed a faithful performance bond with the city. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance of the improvements until the city shall have made actual acceptance of the same. The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be: 
(1)  Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to properly drain the area. 
(2)  Pavement of a width suitable for the traffic on the street. 
(3)  Curb and gutter constructed of twenty-five hundred (2500) pounds per square inch concrete. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 7) 
Sec. 17-92. - Utilities. 
    The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the city council shall be: 
(1)  Water systems with mains of sufficient site and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish an adequate domestic water supply, furnish fire protection to all lots and to meet the other requirements of the city. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer facilities to service the subdivision and meet the other requirements of the city. 
(3)  All services for utilities to be made available for each lot in such a manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street paving, gutter, curb and drainage structures when connections are made. 
(Ord. of 10-9-61, § 7) 
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation generally, § 6.04 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Tax on sale and use of electricity and gas. 
(a)  The tax heretofore imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Local Sales and Use Tax Act is hereby continued on the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use. 
(b)  The sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use shall not be exempt from the tax imposed by the city under the Local Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(Ord. No. D-8, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-78) 
Sec. 18-2. - Penalty to defray attorney's fees in collection of ad valorem taxes. 
    The ad valorem taxes that remain delinquent on the first day of July of any year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, said penalty to be in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the taxes, penalty and interest due the city, which fee shall be an authorized collection expense. 
(Ord. No. O-4-82, § 1, 4-19-82) 
Sec. 18-3. - Real and personal property tax certificates. 
    For every real and personal property tax certificate issued by the City of Crockett, there shall be levied a charge in the amount of eight dollars ($8.00). (The previous charge has been four dollars ($4.00).) This amount is to be charged to the abstract company or any other members of the general public desiring tax certificates. 
(Ord. No. O-8A-87, § 1, 8-3-87) 
Secs. 18-4-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENT HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to so provide, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.13. 

Sec. 18-16. - Granted. 
    From and after the first day of January, 1973, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) years or older on or before the first day of January of any year shall be exempt from all taxation for all city purposes for that year; provided however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the tax levy would legally void the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(Ord. No. A-12-72, § 1, 12-18-72) 
Sec. 18-17. - Filing; proof of age. 
    In order to secure the benefit of the resident homestead exemption, the property owner shall, between the first day of January and the first day of April of each year, file with the city tax assessor and collector a sworn inventory of the property owned on the first day of January of each year for which the exemption is claimed, and shall initially furnish proof of age by a certified copy of his birth certificate or, if such person does not have a certificate of birth, or is unable to secure such certificate, then by an affidavit satisfactory to the city tax assessor and collector. 
(Ord. No. A-12-72, § 2, 12-18-72) 
Secs. 18-18-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1266j, §§ 3a, 3b. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in a hotel and shall not include the costs of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of the room, not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
    Hotel shall mean any building or buildings, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the rights to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license contract or agreement. 
    Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, and the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
    Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 2, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to finance the general promotional and tourist advertising for the city and for such further purposes authorized by law for the expenditure of the funds generated by the tax. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 3, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-33. - Tax levied; rate. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel or motel where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. 
(b)  The tax levied by subsection (a) shall be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the room or space to the hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 1, 10-1-79; Ord. No. O-8-81, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. O-7B-86, §§ 1, 2, 7-7-86) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. O-7B-86, adopted July 7, 1986, raised the tax rate in § 18-33(b) from four (4) percent to seven (7) percent. Section 3 of said ordinance set out the following limitation: "The additional three (3) percent of revenue shall be used only for the retirement of negotiable revenue bonds and the acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of the civic center convention facilities." 
Sec. 18-34. - Exceptions. 
    The tax imposed by section 18-33 shall not be imposed upon: 
(1)  A permanent resident of the city. 
(2)  A corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, in which no part of the net earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 1, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-35. - Duty of operators to collect tax. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any motel or hotel within the city shall collect the tax imposed by section 18-33. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 4, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-36. - Quarterly report; payment of tax. 
    On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required by section 18-35 to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on the occupancies, and other information as the city secretary may reasonably require. The requirements of this section may be met by submitting a copy of the state hotel-motel occupancy tax quarterly report and any amendment thereto to the city secretary. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 5, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-37. - Power of city secretary to establish rules, examine books. 
    The city secretary shall have the power to establish such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied by this article, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 6, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-38. - Agency for administration. 
    The city shall enter into a contract with an agency outside of the city government to administer the funds made available under this article and to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10B-79, § 7, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-39. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed by section 18-33, or shall fail to file a report as required by section 18-36, or shall fail to pay to the city secretary the tax, as required by section 18-36, when said report or payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty prescribed by section 1-11. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty prescribed by subsection (a), any person who fails to remit the tax or violates the reporting provisions imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax; however, the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due. 
(Ord, No. O-10B-79, § 8, 10-1-79) 
Sec. 18-40. - Tax collection; concurrent state tax delinquency. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the City of Crockett adopts all of the provisions of V.T.C.A. Tax Code ch. 351, subch. A. 
(Ord. No. O-04-12, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-12) 
Chapter 19 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public utilities, §§ 5.02, 13.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-84, §§ 3.01-3.05, adopted Dec. 17, 1984, not expressly amendatory of the Code, has been included herein as §§ 19-14-19-18 of Art. I, at the discretion of the editor. 

Secs. 19-1-19-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-14. - Service outside city limits. 
    Hereafter the policy of the city is that water and sewer service shall be extended outside the city limits as follows: 
The city shall not permit and will not undertake the construction and/or extension of water and/or sewer mains and pipes outside the corporate city limits of the City of Crockett, Texas except in the exclusive judgment of the city council such is found to be in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 3.01, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 19-15. - Liability for materials; exceptions. 
    Each property owner or subdivider shall furnish materials and shall install all water service lines and sanitary sewer laterals from the mains to the structures at his own cost and expense to meet the standard details and specifications and the approval of the city, except that the city will furnish the meters, necessary fittings, and meter boxes for the water service lines and will complete the meter installations and connections; provided, however, in order to promote state or local economic development and to stimulate business and commercial activity in the city, under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 380.001, as now in effect and from time to time amended, the city council, by a majority vote of those present at the meeting, may direct the city to install water service lines and sanitary sewer laterals from mains to structures and provide the materials therefor, at total or partial city expense. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 3.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-4-96, § I, 4-15-96) 
Sec. 19-16. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  The rates and charges fixed and prescribed for the waterworks and sanitary systems shall be paid to the city simultaneously by users or customers on the billing date shown on the monthly statement, which shall be the date such rates or charges shall become due or payable unless otherwise indicated. The city shall refuse to accept the payment for a part of such service unless the entire amount due from the respective user or customer of all services supplied and billed is paid. All water, sewer, and garbage service billings to the customer not paid within fourteen (14) days of the billing date shall incur an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent, and the customer will be sent a termination notice giving the customer ten (10) days from the date of the notice to pay the full balance, including penalty, in order to prevent disconnection of services for nonpayment. 
(b)  If disconnected for nonpayment, no customer shall be reconnected to city water services until payment is received for all past due bills, plus the penalty and a reconnection charge. The reconnection charge for first or second time reconnection will be fifty dollars ($50.00). For third, and all subsequent reconnections, the penalty will be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). All customers, with the exclusion of those who qualify for temporary water service under subsection 19-46(a), are billed for water, sewer, and garbage on their bill after requesting service unless any portion of the three (3) services is not available. The customers will not be billed for services not available. 
(c)  Any payment made by check will be subject to a thirty dollar ($30.00) service charge for each time a check is returned by the bank for any reason. Any delinquent account paid by a check that is returned by the bank shall be subject to immediate disconnection of service. To reinstate service, full restitution must be received for the check, applicable service charges, and a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) reconnection charge. Cash may be required for payment on any account that has had payment by check returned by the bank in the past. 
(d)  The additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent for late payment of charges for water, sewer and garbage service shall not apply to persons sixty-five (65) years of age or over. In order to claim this exemption, a person must make application at the city water office and furnish proof of age. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 3.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-10-86, § 1, 10-16-86; Ord. No. O-11-86, § 2, 11-3-86; Ord. No. O-9-99, § I, 9-20-99; Ord. No. O-4A-00, § I, 4-17-00; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § I, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 19-17. - Transfer account. 
(a)  Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity who owes any amount of money to the city for water or sewer fees or both shall not be permitted a water or sewer connection at any premises which the delinquent debtor subsequently purchases, owns, leases, rents or otherwise occupies until all delinquencies have been paid in full. Further, any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity be found to be purchasing, owning, leasing, renting or otherwise occupying any premises and owing any amount of delinquent water or sewer fees or both to the City of Crockett shall have the water and sewer connections immediately disconnected to all premises so purchased, owned, rented, leased or otherwise occupied until all delinquencies are paid in full. 
(b)  If disconnected or terminated for nonpayment, no customer shall be reconnected to city water or sewer services until payment is received for all past due bills, plus the penalty and reconnection charge. The charge for first or second reconnection will be fifty dollars ($50.00). For third, and all subsequent, reconnections the charge will be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(c)  Any payment made by check will be subject to a thirty dollar ($30.00) service charge each time a check is returned by the bank for any reason. Any delinquent account paid by a check that is returned by the bank shall be subject to immediate disconnection of service. To reinstate service, full restitution must be received for the check, applicable service charges, and the applicable penalty and reconnection charge. Cash may be required for payment on any account that has had payment by check returned by the bank in the past. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 3.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-02-16 , § I, 2-22-16) 
Sec. 19-18. - No free service. 
    No free service shall be allowed, and, to the extent that the city or any of its departments avail themselves of the services and facilities afforded by the waterworks and sanitary sewer systems, they shall pay therefor the same rates and charges herein prescribed for other customers. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 3.05, 12-17-84) 
Secs. 19-19, 19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Stagnant water declared a nuisance, § 11-16. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-21. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to do, commit, or assist in committing any of the following acts in the city: 
(1)  Opening, closing hydrants, valves, etc. To open or close any fire hydrant, stopcock or other water fixture connected with the waterworks system of the city, or life or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without the permission of the public works director, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the fire department. 
(2)  Interfering with, destroying waterworks equipment. To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure or wantonly force open any gate, or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any part of any engine house, reservoir, standpipe, elevated tank, buildings or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs or fixtures or property pertaining to the waterworks system. 
(3)  Climbing on water tanks or standpipes. To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on any elevated water tank or standpipe of the waterworks system, except by permission of the director of public works. 
(4)  Obstructions near fire hydrants. To place any telegraph, telephone or electric pole or any obstruction whatsoever within three (3) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(5)  Use of fraudulent devices. To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connections or premises contrary to the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(6)  Injuring tanks, hydrants, etc. To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, value or other apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or to hitch or tie any animal thereto. 
(7)  Using water without permit. To make or permit to be made any connection with the main or service pipes of the waterworks system or to turn on or use the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(8)  Concealing valve boxes, etc. To cover or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box. 
(9)  Removing, tampering with meters. To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any water meter; provided, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity. 
(10)  Turning on disconnected water supply. To turn on the water supply of any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing the waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. D-7, § 1, 7-17-78) 
Sec. 19-22. - Meters to be set by city; separate meters required. 
(a)  All meters whether private or belonging to the waterworks system shall be set by the employees of the city. If the meter fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order. All water that passes through the meter shall be charged for, whether used or not. 
(b)  Each consumer of water living in a separate house must have a separate connection and meter for each house; where a residence is not in reach of a city water main, arrangements may be made, at the option of the city, to secure water from another user of city water. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, §§ 1.06, 1.07, 12-17-84) 
Editor's note- Sections 1.06 and 1.07 of Ord. No. O-12-84, adopted Dec. 17, 1984, have been treated by the editor as superseding the provisions of § 19-22, which pertained to the position and number of meters and was derived from Code 1960, § 11-1-7. 
Sec. 19-23. - Certain water cooling systems prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or allow to be used, water drawn from or flowing directly or indirectly, from the water mains of the city as a cooling agent in any type of cooler or cooling system rated at more than two thousand (2,000) c.f.m. for the purpose of regulating the temperature of the air, unless such cooler or cooling system collects such water and recirculates it after use by means of a lift pump or similar device. 
(Code 1960, § 11-1-9) 
Sec. 19-24. - Water leaks to be reported. 
    It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force to report to the director of water utilities, upon blanks furnished for that purpose, any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention; also, any violation of Ordinance No. O-12-84 shall be noted. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.05, 12-17-84) 
Editor's note- Sections 1.05, 1.08 and 1.11 of Ord. No. O-12-84, adopted Dec. 17, 1984, not specifically amendatory of the Code, have been included herein as §§ 19-24-19-26, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 19-25. - Repair of water lines. 
    In the interest of water conservation, if at any time, water lines and connections from the meter loop connection into the residence, house, barn, business, yard, or similar places become rusted out, broken or, in general, deteriorated, it shall be the duty of the owner of the premises to place his lines in a good and serviceable condition. The replaced and repaired lines must meet specifications laid down by the city plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.08, 12-17-84) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note following § 19-24. 
Sec. 19-26. - Water rationing. 
    The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro-tem, of the city, may, when necessary to do so to protect the citizens of the city, order a rationing system suited to the emergency then existing, by declaring an emergency. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.11, 12-17-84) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note following § 19-24. 
Sec. 19-27. - Water conservation and emergency water demand management plan. 
(a)  The city council adopts the water conservation and drought contingency plans attached to Ordinance No. O-04-14, on file with the city. All ordinances that are in conflict with the provisions of Ordinance No. O-04-14 are hereby repealed. 
(b)  The city administrator or chief administrative officer or their designee, is hereby directed to file a copy of the plan and the ordinance codified in this section with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality in accordance with Title 30, Chapter 288 of the Texas Administrative Code and with Texas Water Development Board in accordance with Title 31, Chapter 363 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 2, 5, 4-28-14) 
Secs. 19-28-19-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Sections 1.01-1.04, 1.09, 1.10, 1.12-1.14 of Ord. No. O-12-84, adopted Dec. 17, 1984, have been treated by the editor as superseding the provisions of Div. 2 with the exception of § 19-42. Former Div. 2, §§ 19-36-19-41, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from: Code 1960, §§ 11-1-1, 11-1-2, 11-1-4-11-1-6; Ord. No. O-10-82, § 4, 10-4-82; Ord. No. O-4-83, 4-18-83; and Ord. No. O-8-84, §§ 1, 4, 8-23-84. See also §§ 19-14-19-18. 

Sec. 19-36. - Application for connection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection to the mains or pipes of the waterworks system without first making application to the city, stating fully the several and various uses for which water is wanted, giving the name of the property, the number of the lot and block name of the street and house number. Upon the payment of the tapping fee, the director of water utilities shall make, or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a curb stop box and curb cock and connected with any water main, or being supplied with any water from the waterworks system, shall have a separate service connection, curb stop box and curb cock installed by and at the expense of the owner of the premises. If the application is approved by the director of water utilities, a permit will be issued. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed by applicable sections of this article. 
    A customer applying for new service has to make application with the city water office before putting up their deposit and has to be eighteen (18) years or older. If a person making application in either the husband's name or wife's name (or wife's previous name) owes an old bill in either name or names to the city, the old bills will have to be paid before the application is approved. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.01, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 19-37. - Water rates. 
(a)  The monthly rates or charges for service furnished by the city's water works system inside the city limits shall be as follows: 
(1)  The rates for residential water shall be twenty-four dollars and sixty-seven cents ($24.67) minimum for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons and four dollars and eighty-nine cents ($4.89) per one thousand (1,000) for anything over two thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(2)  The rates for commercial water shall be thirty-four dollars and seventy-one cents ($34.71) minimum for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons and four dollars and eighty-nine cents ($4.89) per one thousand (1,000) for anything over two thousand (2,000) gallons. 
(3)  Rates for water service outside the city limits shall be two (2) times those inside the city limits. 
(b)  Where there is more than one (1) residential unit (including apartments), business, mobile home, or trailer connected to one (1) meter, the minimum charge for water-sewer-garbage will be assessed for each of the units served by the meter. Any additional amount the meter registers above the minimums on water shall be charged accordingly. The sewer charge will be likewise increased. 
(c)  Water meters. 
(1)  Water meters shall be installed at the request of the owner of the improvements or the real property (hereinafter called the "property owner"), as the case may be. If the property involved is a detached entity having open space on all exterior walls or an apartment or duplex complex, the water meters can be titled in the name of the lessee. Each detached entity shall have its own meter. All other water meters shall be titled in the name of the property owner. The property owner shall pay for the installation of the water meters and for all water that flows through the water meters in the property owner's name. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the property owner if more than one (1) residential unit (including apartments), business, mobile home, trailer is connected to a water meter to: 
a.  Notify the city water department before the connection is made; and 
b.  Collect a minimum charge for water-sewer-garbage from each occupier of an additional residential unit (including apartments), business, mobile home, or trailer. The property owner shall also collect for any additional amount the meter registers above the minimum on water and sewer. 
(3)  Payment for water shall be the responsibility of the property owner, and the city will look to the property owner for such payment. The property owner will be billed for all water flowing through meters in his name. The occupier of the extra residential units, business mobile home or trailer will not be billed. 
(d)  This section shall be retroactive and shall apply to all persons presently using water meters. 
(e)  Definition of unit. A unit for water and sewer purposes is a unit that contains within itself connections for and fixtures used for water and sewer. A space occupied by lessee is not a unit if the water and sewer facilities are used in common by all the lessees. 
(f)  Bulk water sales. 
(1)  The City of Crockett shall be allowed to sell bulk water to customers at the following rates: A basic service charge of four hundred dollars ($400.00) and an additional nineteen dollars ($19.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(2)  Whenever a city employee is required to dispense the water to a purchaser of bulk water, an additional service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed against the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-2-86, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. O-7A-86, § 1, 7-7-86; Ord. No. O-10-86, § 2, 10-6-86; Ord. No. O-9B-87, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. O-10A-87, §§ 1-3, 10-19-87; Ord. No. O-2-89, Arts. I, II, 2-20-89; Ord. No. O-11-89, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-89; Ord. No. O-9D-91, §§ 1, 2, 9-16-91; Ord. No. O-9C-97, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-97; Ord. No. O-9-99, §§ II, III, 9-20-99; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § I, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09C-07, § I, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09C-08, § I, 9-2-08; Ord. No. O-09G-10, § I, 9-7-10; Ord. No. O-09B-12, § I, 9-4-12; Ord. No. O-09B-13, § I, 9-9-13; Ord. No. O-08C-14, § I, 8-18-14; Ord. No. O-08C-16 , § I, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 19-38. - Tapping city mains. 
(a)  The tapping fees for connection to the waterworks system shall be the following, plus a meter deposit: 
Size of Connection (in inches) Fee 3/4 $400.00 1 $400.00 plus the difference in cost between a 3/4" meter and a 1" meter 2 $700.00 plus the difference in cost between a 3/4" meter and a 2" meter 4 The total cost of materials, labor and equipment 6 The total cost of materials, labor and equipment Larger than 6 To be set by council  
(b)  If the tap requires a road bore, there shall be added to the fee the cost charged by the road boring contractor, plus fifteen (15) percent of that cost. 
(c)  If the tapping requires an open cut road, there shall be an additional charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per foot of open cut, plus additional charges if special equipment or materials are required to meet state highway requirements. 
(d)  Hot tap fees will be based on the total cost of materials, labor and equipment. 
(e)  In the case of apartment complexes, mobile home parks, office buildings, motels, townhouses, multifamily dwellings, and all other facilities other than single-family dwellings served by one (1) master meter; the charges shall be: 
(1)  Mobile home parks: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each mobile home space plus the total cost of materials and labor for the master meter. 
(2)  Apartment complexes, townhouses, office buildings, multifamily dwellings and similar structures served by one (1) master meter: 
a.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each unit as shown on the plans submitted for a building permit plus the total cost of materials and labor. 
b.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each separate place of business as shown on the plans submitted for a building permit plus the total cost of materials and labor. 
(f)  Taps outside the city limits shall be one and one-half (11/2) times those charges within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-11-91, § I, 11-18-91; Ord. No. O-10B-02, § I, 10-7-02; Ord. No. O-09C-07, § II, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09G-10, § II, 9-7-10) 
Sec. 19-39. - Discontinuance of service. 
    Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the waterworks system must give notice hereof to the city; otherwise, the charge for service will be continued until such notice has been given. No charge will be made for shutting off such service. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.04, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 19-40. - Meter deposit. 
(a)  Each water consumer shall make a meter deposit in at least the following amounts when service is applied for: 
Residential ..... $150.00 
Commercial ..... 200.00 
(b)  Additional deposits may be required. 
(1)  Should the deposit amount be insufficient to pay an average monthly bill, or if experience has proven that a consumer does not pay water bills promptly and as due, or if a new consumer applying for service cannot show sufficient financial ability to be able to pay future billings, the city administrator may require the meter deposit to be in any sum he or she deems necessary to protect the city from unpaid water and sewer bills. 
(2)  The meter deposit may be applied to the payment of any water and sewer charges overdue to the city. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the consumer at the time service is discontinued. 
(c)  Each water consumer who does not have an ownership interest in the premises for which a water meter is requested must, at the time application is made for a water meter, furnish a copy of a fully executed lease or rental agreement or written verification of the rental signed by the property owner. Water service will be provided only to the tenant designated on the lease or rental agreement or in the written verification. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.09, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-10-86, § 3, 10-6-86; Ord. No. O-1A-99, § II, 1-20-99; Ord. No. O-4-00, § I, 4-17-00; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § III, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 19-41. - New service at existing connections. 
    A charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be made for turning on a new water service where a water connection, including tap and meter, already exists. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.10, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § IV, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 19-42. - Place of payment. 
    All water accounts shall be payable at the city hall to the person designated by the city administrator. 
(Code 1960, § 11-1-3) 
Sec. 19-43. - Nonliability of city regarding water turn-on. 
    The city will not be liable for any damages arising after water is turned on and faucets are on in the house and not turned off. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 1.14, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-2-86, § 2, 2-3-86; Ord. No. O-7A-86, § 2, 7-7-86) 
Sec. 19-44. - Extension of water mains to subdivisions and within subdivisions, or to individuals. 
(a)  Developers of subdivisions or individuals developing single parcels of land shall bear the entire cost for all off-site approach mains and service lines to the property to be developed. 
(b)  All on-site extensions of water service lines to individual lots or lots in a subdivision shall be borne by the developer. 
(c)  The sizes of all water mains and service lines shall be determined by the city. 
(d)  The city may, at its own expense, extend an off-site approach main for the first one hundred (100) feet of the extension to the property to be developed. 
(e)  Where off-site approach mains are required to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, the cost of the off-site mains fronting on property not owned by the developer but required and necessary to provide water service to property to be developed shall be borne solely by the developer. The developer will be eligible for reimbursement of the cost of the off-site approach main which fronts on property not owned by him as follows: 
(1)  A charge known as "pro rata," shall be made against each lot or tract of land adjacent to the water main, and the owner thereof, whose water lines will be hereafter connected with any water mains in the city, shall be charged the actual cost for all materials and labor. The pro rata charge shall be based on the frontage of each lot. Where lots or tracts have irregular sizes and shapes, pro rata charges shall be based upon average frontage of such lots. (Average frontage of a lot equals the front lot width and rear lot width divided by two (2).) Where individual residential service connections are made along the alignment of the water main, the same pro rata charge as established above shall be made. 
(2)  Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, the city will enter a pro rata reimbursement agreement with the developer which shall include, but not be limited to, engineering data, verification of cost of all materials and labor associated with the line and agreements as to the warranty of the line installed by the developers. 
(3)  The city will refund to the subdivider pro rata charges received from applicants who desire to connect to the off-site mains with the total amount of refund not to exceed the amount of the subdivider's cost of the off-site improvements. 
(4)  In addition to the pro rata charges on off-site approach mains, the applicants who desire to connect to the mains must pay the other connection charges established in this division. 
(5)  The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the subdivider for the off-site mains shall not exceed five (5) years. 
(f)  Where the city requires the developer to install a main which has a diameter larger than eight (8) inches to serve areas other than those to be developed by the developer, the city will pay, upon acceptance, and when funds are available, an amount being the difference between the cost of the oversized main and an eight-inch diameter main. 
(g)  The city may extend water mains in streets, alleys, or easements within the city limits in order to permit connections by those persons desiring water services. A pro rata charge may be made against each lot or tract of land adjacent to the water main. The owner whose water lines shall be hereafter connected with any water mains in the city shall be charged the actual cost for all materials and labor. Pro rata charges shall be based on the frontage of each lot. Where lots or tracts have irregular sizes and shapes, pro rata charges shall be based upon average frontage of such lots. In addition to the pro rata charges on water mains, the property owners must pay the connection charges as established herein. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, §§ 1.12, 1.13, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-2-86, § 3, 2-3-86) 
Sec. 19-45. - Temporary water meter turn-off. 
    A five dollar ($5.00) service charge will be assessed on a customer's water account for having meter turned off for a temporary period, as during cold or freezing weather, an out-of-town trip, or while having plumbing work done. No additional service charge will be assessed for turning the meter back on. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-86, § 3, 7-7-86) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. O-7A-86, adopted July 7, 1986, added §§ 19-43 and 19-44 to div. 2. Inasmuch as sections designated as such had previously been included in div. 2, said §§ 19-43 and 19-44 have been redesignated §§ 19-45 and 19-46, respectively, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 19-46. - Temporary water service. 
(a)  Temporary water service may be given to a customer who already has a water account in good standing with the city water department. Temporary service shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days. No meter deposit will be required on such service, and garbage charges may be waived if the customer does not plan to use the service. The connect charge for temporary service shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). The customer will be billed based on the current rates for water and sewer set by the city council. 
(b)  The fifteen dollar ($15.00) service charge for turning on new service where a water connection already exists will remain in effect in all cases other than those where temporary service arrangements are made. 
(Ord. No. O-7A-86, § 3, 7-7-86; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § V, 9-6-05) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 19-45. 
Sec. 19-47. - Service agreement. 
    A service agreement must be executed and delivered to the city by each customer prior to providing continuous water service to new construction, on any existing service when the city has reason to believe that cross-connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist, to any new location, to renewed service to any existing location and after any material improvement, correction or addition to private plumbing facilities. The service agreement shall contain the language specified in section II of Ordinance No. O-2A-96, incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. O-2A-96, § I, 2-19-96) 
Editor's note- The service agreement referred to in § 19-47 above has not been included within the Code, but may be found within § II of Ord. No. O-2A-96, on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Secs. 19-48-19-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-84, §§ 2.01-2.05, adopted Dec. 17, 1984, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been treated as superseding the provisions of art. III, with the exception of §§ 19-56 and 19-62. Formerly, §§ 19-57-19-61 of art. III pertained to similar subject matter and were derived from: Code 1960, § 11-2-1; Ord. No. O-6C-82, § 2, 6-7-82; Ord. No. O-10-82, §§ 2, 4, 10-4-82; Ord. No. O-4-83, 4-18-83; and Ord. No. O-8-84, §§ 2, 4, 8-23-84. See also §§ 19-14-19-18. 

Sec. 19-56. - Damaging sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 5(A), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-57. - Connection to sewer required. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for the owners, situated in any section of the city where a sanitary sewer now exists, or where it may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within two hundred (200) feet of any such sewer are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same to the city sewer, under the supervision of the plumbing inspector; provided, however, that where there now exists a septic tank in proper sanitary working condition, it may be permitted to remain in use until such time as it may be found to be unsanitary, and in this event, it may be ordered removed by the plumbing inspector upon ten (10) days' notice to the owner thereof, and all facilities shall be connected to the city sewer within ninety (90) days after service is available. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any such property owners or occupants of such property to keep and maintain the water closet and connection therein in satisfactory working condition and free from any obstruction, and it shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault above or below the ground in the city or on any lot or parcel of land. All persons now having such privies in such locations are hereby required to abate the same within thirty (30) days after notice by the plumbing inspector to do so and to construct and install water closets and connect the same to the city sewer. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 2.01, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 19-58. - Sewer rates. 
    The monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the sanitary sewer system of the city inside the city limits shall be as follows: 
(1)  The rates for residential customers shall be twenty-four dollars and sixty-seven cents ($24.67) minimum for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons of usage and two dollars and forty-two cents ($2.42) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for anything above two thousand (2,000) gallons, up to a maximum of twenty thousand (20,000) gallons. There will be no charge for residential usage over twenty thousand (20,000) gallons. 
(2)  The rates for commercial customers shall be thirty-four dollars and seventy-one cents ($34.71) minimum for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons of usage and two dollars and forty-two cents ($2.42) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for anything above two thousand (2,000) gallons. There will be no ceiling on commercial sanitary usage charges. 
(3)  Each commercial customer and each residential customer shall be charged one dollar and six cents ($1.06) per month, per meter, for a sewer meter fee. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 2.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-2A-89, arts. I, II, 2-20-89; Ord. No. O-09E-05, § VI, 9-6-05; Ord. No. O-09C-07, § III, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09C-08, § II, 9-2-08; Ord. No. O-09B-13, § II, 9-9-13; Ord. No. O-08C-14, § II, 8-18-14; Ord. No. O-09B-15, § I, 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-08C-16 , § II, 8-15-16) 
Sec. 19-59. - Tapping city mains. 
(a)  The tapping fees for connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be as follows: 
Size of Connection 
(in inches) Fee 4 $400.00 6 $500.00 Larger than 6 Total cost of materials, labor and equipment  
(b)  If the tapping requires a road bore, there shall be added to the fee the cost charged by the road boring contractor, plus fifteen (15) percent of that cost. 
(c)  If the tapping requires an open cut road, there shall be an additional charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per foot of open cut, plus additional charges if special equipment or materials are required to meet state highway requirements. 
(1)  Mobile home parks: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each mobile home space plus the total cost of materials and labor for the master meter. 
(2)  Apartment complexes, townhouses, office buildings, multifamily dwellings and similar structures served by one (1) master meter: 
a.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each unit as shown on the plans submitted for a building permit, plus the total cost of materials and labor. 
b.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each separate place of business as shown on the plans submitted for a building permit, plus the total cost of materials and labor. 
(d)  Taps outside the city limits shall be one and one-half (11/2) times those charged within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 2.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-11-91, § II, 11-18-91; Ord. No. O-10B-02, § II, 10-7-02; Ord. No. O-09C-07, § IV, 9-4-07; Ord. No. O-09F-10, § I, 9-7-10) 
Sec. 19-60. - Extension of sewer mains to subdivisions and within subdivisions, or to individuals. 
(a)  Developers of subdivisions or individuals developing single parcels of land shall bear the entire cost for all off-site approach mains and service lines to the property to be developed. 
(b)  All on-site extensions of sewer service lines to individual lots or lots in a subdivision shall be borne by the developer. 
(c)  The sizes of all sewer mains and service lines shall be determined by the city. 
(d)  The city may, at its own expense, extend an off-site approach main for the first one hundred (100) feet of the extension to the property to be developed. 
(e)  Where off-site approach mains are required to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, the cost of the off-site mains fronting on property not owned by the developer but required and necessary to provide sewer service to property to be developed shall be borne solely by the developer. The developer will be eligible for reimbursement of the cost of the off-site approach main which fronts on property not owned by him as follows: 
(1)  A charge known as "pro rata," shall be made against each lot or tract of land adjacent to the sewer main, and the owner thereof, whose sewer lines will be hereafter connected with any sewer mains in the city, shall be charged the actual cost for all materials and labor. The pro rata charge shall be based on the frontage of each lot. Where lots or tracts have irregular sizes and shapes, pro rata charges shall be based upon average frontage of such lots. (Average frontage of a lot equals the front lot width and rear lot width divided by two (2).) Where individual residential service connections are made along the alignment of the sewer main, the same pro rata charge as established above shall be made. 
(2)  Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, the city will enter a pro rata reimbursement agreement with the developer which shall include but not be limited to, engineering data, verification of cost of all materials and labor associated with the line and agreements as to the warranty of the line installed by the developers. 
(3)  The city will refund to the subdivider pro rata charges received from applicants who desire to connect to the off-site mains with the total amount of refund not to exceed the amount of the subdivider's cost of the off-site improvements. 
(4)  In addition to the pro rata charges on off-site approach mains, the applicants who desire to connect to the mains must pay the other connection charges established in this article. 
(5)  The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the subdivider for the off-site mains shall not exceed five (5) years. 
(f)  Where the city requires the developer to install a main which has a diameter larger than eight (8) inches to serve areas other than those to be developed by the developer, the city will pay, upon acceptance, and when funds are available, an amount being the difference between the cost of the oversized main and an eight-inch diameter main. 
(g)  The city may extend sewer mains in streets, alleys, or easements within the city limits in order to permit connections by those persons desiring sewer services. A pro rata charge may be made against each lot or tract of land adjacent to the sewer main. The owner whose sewer lines shall be hereafter connected with any sewer mains in the city, shall be charged the actual cost for all materials and labor. Pro rata charges shall be based on the frontage of each lot. Where lots or tracts have irregular sizes and shapes, pro rata charges shall be based upon average frontage of such lots. In addition to the pro rata charges on sewer mains, the property owners must pay the connection charges as established herein. 
(Ord. No. O-12-84, § 2.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. O-2-86, § 4, 2-3-86) 
Sec. 19-61. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-62. - When no sewer service is provided. 
    Any person having a water meter registered in his name at premises which are not connected to the sewer system of the city, and who shall execute an affidavit to be provided by the water department, in a form substantially as follows, shall be exempt from further billing for sewer service at such premises: 
State of Texas 
County of Houston 
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public in and for Houston County, Texas, on this day personally appeared ____________ , who, having been duly sworn by me, upon his oath said: 
1.  I am the person or I am the duly authorized agent, officer or partner (strike one) of ____________ to whom a water meter is registered at the property at ____________ Street, in the City of Crockett and used as a ____________ . 
2.  The foregoing premises are not connected to the sewer system of the City of Crockett. 
3.  Sewage from the foregoing premises is deposited by means of a ____________ . (Septic tank, cesspool or some other type of sewage disposal) 
____________ 
Subscribed and sworn to by me this ____________ day of ;daterule;, A.D., 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
Notary Public, State of Texas 
(Code 1960, § 11-2-7) 
Secs. 19-63-19-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in divisions 1 and 2 of this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority shall mean the city engineer (or other official designated by the city administrator) or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade expressed in parts per million. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in "Standard Methods". 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys to the building sewer beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the sewer or other place for disposal. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Domestic sewage shall mean water-borne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Engineer shall mean the city engineer or the city's consulting engineer or their duly authorized representatives. 
    Hearing board shall mean that board appointed according to the provisions of section 19-81. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean all water-borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    Normal domestic sewage shall mean normal sewage for the city in which concentration of suspended materials and five-day, twenty-degree centigrade BOD is established at two hundred forty (240) parts per million each, by weight, on the basis of the normal daily contribution of twenty-hundredths pound per capita, per one hundred (100) gallons. 
    Parts per million shall mean a weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods". 
    Permittee shall mean that person applying for a permit to construct a sanitary sewer main or to connect to an existing sanitary sewer. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewage shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage. 
    Sewerage shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Sewer service charge shall mean the charge made on all users of the public sewerage system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during the normal operation. 
    Standard Methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, The American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater run-off shall mean that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the storm sewers. 
    Surcharge shall mean the charge in addition to the published water and sewer rates. The basis for surcharges on industrial wastes is a capital and operating cost for suspended solids. BOD and chlorine demand exceeding normal sewage. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods". 
    Unpolluted water or waste shall mean any water or waste containing none of the following: Free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenolsk or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten (10) parts per million each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed fifty (50) parts per million. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 1, 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-77. - Notice of violations; continued violations. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation of his industrial sewer connection application shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer and/or water service. Such disconnection and reconnection shall be at the total expense of the sewer user. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 6(C), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-78. - Right of entry; indemnification of city employees; termination of service. 
(a)  The approving authority, and other duly authorized employees of the city acting as its duly authorized agent and bearing credentials and identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The approving authority or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties under subsection (a), the approving authority or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(c)  Where wastes, acids, chemicals or other deleterious substances are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with the proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 6(D), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-79. - Failure to pay bills and/or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to public sewer. 
    Failure to pay monthly bills for water and/or sanitary sewer service when due, or failure to pay the established sewer surcharge for industrial waste when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to the sanitary sewer shall be sufficient cause to disconnect any and all services to the water and sanitary sewer mains of the city and the penalties and charges provided for in this Code for failure to pay the bill for water and sewer service when due shall be applicable in cases of failure to pay the established surcharge for industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer mains. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 9(A), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-80. - Liability to city for violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violations. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 10, 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-81. - Hearing board. 
(a)  A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of differences between the approving authority and permittee or sewer user on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article by the approving authority. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the city and the permittee or sewer user. 
(b)  One (1) member of the board shall be a registered practicing professional engineer; one (1) member shall be a lawyer; one (1) member shall be a representative of an industrial or manufacturing enterprise; and two (2) members shall be selected at large for their interest in accomplishing the objectives of this article. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 11, 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-82. - Discharges requiring prior approval. 
    Review and acceptance of the approving authority shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any wastes and waters having the following: 
(1)  A five-day, twenty-degree centigrade biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred forty (240) parts per million. 
(2)  Suspended solids with a content greater than two hundred forty (240) parts per million. 
(3)  Chlorine demand greater than five (5) parts per million. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(A), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-83. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged either directly or indirectly any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquid having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade). 
(2)  Any waters or wastes which contain wax, grease, oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees to one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards or in any other way be injurious to persons, property or the operator of the sewage works. 
(4)  Any solids, slurries or viscous substances of such character as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids. 
(5)  Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded. If properly comminuted or shredded, then it may be accepted under the provisions established by the definition of "property shredded garbage" as set forth in section 19-76. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous substance, which either singly or by interaction with other substances is capable of causing objectionable odors, or hazard to life; or forms solids or creates any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, alteration or expense to handle such materials. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. 
(8)  Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment or in the public sewage works. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating or heat treating wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters or the sewage treatment plant. 
(10)  Any cyanide greater than 1.0 part per million, as CN. 
(11)  Any hexavalent chromium greater than 2.0 parts per million. 
(12)  Any trivalent chromium greater than 5.0 parts per million. 
(13)  Any copper greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(14)  Any nickel greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(15)  Any cadmium greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(16)  Any zinc greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(17)  Any phenols greater than 0.005 part per million. 
(18)  Any iron greater than 2.0 parts per million. 
(19)  Any tin greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(20)  Any barium greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(21)  Any lead greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(22)  Any silver greater than 1.0 part per million. 
(23)  Any chlorides greater than 250.0 parts per million. 
(24)  Any radioactivity as radium -226 and strontium -90 greater than 3 uuc per liter and 10 uuc per liter, respectively. In the known absence of strontium -90 and alpha emitters, the known concentration shall not be greater than 1,000 uuc per liter. 
(25)  Any mercury greater than 0.005 part per million. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 3(B), 10-4-71; Ord. of 2-5-73, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 19-84. - Discharge of unpolluted water. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface discharge, downspouts, yard drains, yard fountain and ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority. 
(b)  Unpolluted processed water may be discharged upon prior written approval of the approving authority to a storm sewer or natural outlet or into the sanitary sewer system by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of three (3) gallons per minute, provided the waste does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 3(A), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-85. - Discharge of substances requiring lower concentration levels. 
    Except in quantities, or concentrations, or with provisions as stipulated by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer system containing the following: 
(1)  Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of one hundred (100) parts per million (833 pounds per million gallons) of either or both or combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion of the approving authority it appears probable that such wastes: 
a.  Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers. 
b.  Can overload skimming and grease handling equipment. 
c.  Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving waters without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes. 
d.  Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities. 
(2)  Any radioactive wastes greater than the allowable stipulated in subsection 19-82(24). 
(3)  Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on acidification in excess of one-half part per million by weight, such as CN, in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers. 
(4)  Material which exert or cause the following: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of solids or composition; as for example, in total suspended solids of inert nature (such as fuller's earth) and/or in total dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride or sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration. 
c.  Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand. 
d.  High hydrogen sulfide content. 
(5)  Unusual flow and concentration shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city, if such wastes can: 
a.  Cause damage to collection facilities. 
b.  Impair the processes. 
c.  Incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage. 
d.  Render the water unfit for stream disposal. 
Where discharge of such wastes to the sanitary sewer are not properly pretreated or otherwise corrected, the approving authority shall reject the wastes or terminate the service of water and/or sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 3(C), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-86. - Control of admissible wastes. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days from the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any person desiring to deposit or discharge any industrial waste into the public sewers of the city or any sewer connected therewith, or who is now so doing, shall make application to the approving authority for a permit therefor upon application forms to be obtained from the city. 
(b)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the permittee, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) days from the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any person discharging or desiring to discharge an industrial waste mixture into the public sewers of the city or any sewer connected therewith, shall provide and maintain in a suitably accessible position on the permittee's premises, or such premises occupied by him, an inspection chamber or a manhole near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel or connection which communicates with the sewer or sewer works of the city on any sewer connected therewith. Each such manhole or inspection chamber shall be of such design and construction which will prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters and be filtered by screens with a maximum opening of one (1) inch, but with sufficient fineness to prevent the entrance of objectionable slugs of solids to the sanitary sewer system, and shall be so maintained by the person discharging wastes so that any authorized representative or employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for construction of the control manholes or inspection chambers including such flow-measuring devices as may be required, shall be included with the industrial sewer connection application. 
(d)  Sampling of the effluent of waste discharges may be accomplished manually or by use of mechanical equipment to obtain a composite sample which would be representative of the total effluent. Samples shall be taken at six-month intervals to establish the BOD, suspended solids and chlorine demand of the industrial waste for billing purposes, or at such intervals as determined by the approving authority as necessary to maintain a control over the discharges from the permittee. The method used in the examination of all industrial wastes to determine BOD, suspended solids, chlorine demand and prohibited wastes shall be as set forth in "Standard Methods". 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 4(D), 10-4-71) 
Secs. 19-87-19-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY TREATMENT 

Sec. 19-101. - When preliminary treatment may be required. 
    Where required, in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, process or operation of the sewage disposal works, the person proposing the discharge shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render his wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(B), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-102. - Submission of information and application. 
    Design calculations, plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed industrial waste pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for approval or disapproval by the approving authority prior to start of their construction, if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. The following industrial sewer connection application shall be fully completed and submitted to the approving authority. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(C), 10-4-71) 
INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION 
To the City of Crockett, Texas 
The undersigned being the __________(Permittee)__________ of the property located at ______________________________________________________________ does hereby request a permit to __________(Install, Use)__________ an Industrial sewer connection serving the __________(Name of Company)__________ which company is engaged in _____________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________ at said location. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(C), (D), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-103. - Approval of application required; amendments; maintenance. 
    A permittee under this division shall not connect to the public sewer without prior approval of the approving authority of the permittee's industrial sewer connection application. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to file an amendment for approval to the permit thirty (30) days prior to the change of any item of information on the permit. Failure to maintain the permit as an accurate representation of the permittee's waste discharges to public sewers shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(C), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-104. - Pre-application conference; conditional approval. 
(a)  Prior to filing an industrial sewer connection application, the permittee shall consult with the approving authority or his duly authorized representative concerning the types, concentration and volumes of industrial wastes proposed for discharge. Conditional approval as to the general requirements must be obtained from the approving authority prior to preparation of the industrial sewer connection application. The application shall include: 
(1)  A plot of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains. 
(2)  A complete schedule of all process waters and raw industrial waste produced or expected to be produced before pretreatment (if any) at said property, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rate of discharge and a representative analysis of the raw waste. 
(3)  Plans and specifications covering all pretreatment facilities for waste treatment proposed to be performed on the waste under the permit with a full description (laboratory analysis) of the character of the waste to be discharged to the public sewer, daily volume and maximum rate of discharge to the public sewer. 
(4)  Plans and specifications of the grease, oil and sand interceptor and control manhole. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree to the following conditions: 
(1)  To operate and maintain any waste pretreatment facilities as may be required or as a condition of the acceptance into the public sewer of the industrial wastes involved, in an efficient manner at all times, and at no expense to the city. 
(2)  To cooperate with the approving authority and his representatives in their inspecting, sampling and study of the industrial wastes and any facilities providing pretreatment. 
(3)  To notify the approving authority immediately in the event of any accident, negligence or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewerage system any wastes or process waters not covered by the permit. 
(4)  To accept and abide by all provisions of this chapter and of all pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted in the future. 
(5)  To accept and pay when billed the sewer service charge and industrial wastes surcharge which is over and above the published water and sewer rates as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 2(D), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-105. - Surcharge established; terms; prerequisites; violations. 
(a)  Persons discharging industrial wastes which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited by this article other than excessive BOD or suspended solids but having a concentration for a duration of fifteen (15) minutes greater than four (4) times that of normal sewage as measured by suspended solids and BOD and/or by an average concentration during a normal working day of the permittee's industry of suspended solids or BOD content in excess of normal domestic sewage shall be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the requirements of normal sewage; however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The waste will not cause damage to the collection and treatment facilities. 
(2)  The waste will not impair the treatment process. 
(3)  The donor of the waste enters into an industrial sewer connection application and agree to pay the sewer service charge and industrial waste surcharge. 
(b)  The donor of the wastes shall enter into an industrial sewer connection application with the city providing for a surcharge over and above published water and sewer rates. The basis for surcharge on industrial wastes is a capital and operating cost of twelve cents ($0.12) per part per million gallons for the BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) and a capital and operating cost of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per part per million per million gallons for the suspended solids exceeding "normal" sewage. The cost of the chlorination is based on the city's contract cost of chlorine per pound per million gallons for each part exceeding the five (5) parts of normal sewage. These rates shall continue until changed by action of the city council. The surcharge shall be calculated for billing purposes with the following formula: 
SC = V[0.12(BOD - 240) + 0.36(SS 1 - 240) + 8.345 P c (C - 5)] 
SC = Surcharge in dollars for time related to volume 
V = Volume in million gallons based on metered water 
BOD = BOD - 5 day @ 20? of industrial waste (ppm) 
SS 1 = Suspended solids of industrial waste (ppm) 
P c = City's contract price of chlorine per pound 
C = Chlorine demand of the industrial waste (ppm) 
(c)  Any person who refuses to comply with or who resists or willfully discharges wastes prohibited from discharge into public sewers, or who refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, shall be served by the approving authority with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of violation of his industrial sewer connection application and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary and/or water service, such disconnection and reconnection to be of total expense to the customer. Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer and cause rapid deterioration of these structures or interferes with the proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate service by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 7(C), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-106. - Billing of surcharge. 
    The industrial waste surcharge provided for in section 19-105 shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges shall be paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the person become due and payment for water and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of the sewer service charges and industrial waste surcharges. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 8(A), 10-4-71) 
Sec. 19-107. - When treatment is not feasible. 
    In cases where, and in the opinion of the approving authority, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant building or other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system, the approving authority shall have the right to require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the system. 
(Ord. No. A-71, § 3(A), 10-4-71) 
Secs. 19-108-19-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-9A-88, adopted Sept. 6, 1988, amended Ord. No. O-12-84 by adding §§ 3, 4, and 5 thereto. For purposes of classification, the editor has included the substantive provisions of such sections as Div. 3, Subdivs. A-C, at his discretion. 

Subdivision A. - Generally 

Sec. 19-121. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 125; et seq. 
    Approval authority. The city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner of proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidation of inorganic or organic matter present in the water or wastewater, with testing conducted according to "Standard Methods" expressed in mg/l. 
    City. The City of Crockett, Texas, or any authorized person acting on its behalf. 
    Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the "approval authority" defined hereinabove; or the city manager if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic sewage. Water-carried wastes normally discharging into the sanitary sewers of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions; free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
    Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Grade. The slope or fall of a line of pipe in reference to a horizontal plane. It is usually expressed as a percentage (feet of fall per one hundred (100) feet of run). 
    Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U. S. C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user. A user of the sewage works, regardless of amount of flow, who discharges any type of nondomestic wastes into the sewage works. 
    Industrial waste. All water-carried solids, liquids, and gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
    Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 U. S. C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l). A weight per volume concentration; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 is equivalent to pounds of constituent per million gallons of water. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U. S. C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U. S. C. 1342). 
    New discharger. An industrial user which begins discharging industrial wastes into the sewage works after the effective date of Ordinance Number O-9A-88. 
    New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 U. S. C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
    Normal domestic sewage. Sewage (excluding industrial wastes) discharged into sanitary sewers with average concentrations of two hundred (200) mg/l of BOD and two hundred fifty (250) mg/l of TSS. 
    pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined by one (1) of the methods outlined in "Standard Methods". 
    Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment program. A local program for monitoring and enforcing pretreatment standards and requirements; or a state program for performing or overseeing these duties. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U. S. C. 1291) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this division, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Public sewer. A sewer controlled by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer. A sewer that conveys wastewater, and into which storm, surface and ground wastes or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Shall is mandatory: May is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five (5) percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, state water commission or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Slug. Any discharge water, sewage or industrial waste other than toxic materials which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity or flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. The SIC number characterizes the type of industrial process or operation. 
    Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    State. State of Texas. 
    Storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW treatment plant and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge. The charge in addition to the sewage service charge which is made on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal charges or are greater in flow. 
    Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods". 
    To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
    Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes, or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater. Shall mean wastewater containing none of the following: Free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, collodial state or solution; and noxious or otherwise obnoxious, odorous gases. It shall contain not more than twenty (20) mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in "Standard Methods". 
    User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into city's POTW. 
    Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in Subdivision C. 
    Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifiers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. II, § 3.01, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-122. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations 
COD. Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA. Environmental Protection Agency 
l. Liter 
mg. Milligrams 
mg/l. Milligrams per liter 
NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW. Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC. Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U. S. C. 6901, et seq. 
USC. United States Code 
TSS. Total suspended solids 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. II, § 3.02, 9-6-88) 
Secs. 19-123-19-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision B. - Regulations 

Sec. 19-131. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which, by itself or by interaction with other wastes, may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharge shall conform to requirements of this division. 
(c)  A user shall not contribute to the POTW and stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, foundation drains, subsurface drainage, downspouts, yard drains, ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer, or into any building sewer or industrial sewer connected thereto. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into storm sewers or to natural outlets approved by the city. 
(d)  All building drains, building sewers, industrial sewers, and sanitary sewers leading to the public sewers, including connections thereto, shall be constructed and maintained so as to exclude any ground or surface water from entering the sewer. The city shall require the owner of any of these facilities to correct at his own expense any leaks or other conditions allowing the entry of groundwater or surface water into the sewage works. This provision shall apply to all such leaks or conditions whether they exist prior to the effective date of this division or occur at a later date. 
(e)  Unpolluted process water (if not returned to a process) must be discharged into storm sewers or natural outlets approved by the city. The city may require cooling before discharge. When the superintendent determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall: 
(1)  Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference with POTW. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV. § 401, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-132. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than one (1.0) mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade). 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provision of subsection (a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.02, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-133. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards-Generally. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categoric pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this [for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this]. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.03, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-134. - Same-Modification. 
    Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403) "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution", promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.04, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-135. - Hazardous metals. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "Standard Methods" are: 
Not to Exceed Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample (1)  Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3 (2)  Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0 (3)  Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2 (4)  Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0 (5)  Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0 (6)  Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5 (7)  Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0 (8)  Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01 (9)  Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0 (10)  Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2 (11)  Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2 (12)  Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0  
( Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of section 5.131 and 5.132, Texas Water Code, Hazardous Metals, and in accordance with Texas Department of Water Resources Rule 156.19.) 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.05, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-136. - Limitations for other hazardous materials. 
    No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the city specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: antimony, beryllium, bismuth, chlorinated hydrocarbons, cobalt, cyanides or cynogen compounds, iron (greater than five (5) mg/l), molybdenum, phenolic compounds, rhenium, strontium, tellurium, uranyl ion, herbicides, fungicides, and pesticides. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.06, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-137. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.07, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-138. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.08, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-139. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. (Comment: Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in section 19-132, e.g., the pH prohibition.) 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.09, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-140. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Generally. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. No user who commences contributions to the POTW after the effective date of this division shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posed on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. IV, § 4.10, 9-6-88) 
Secs. 19-141-19-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision C. - Administration 

Sec. 19-151. - Wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the any, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW any wastewater, except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.01, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-152. - Wastewater contribution permits. 
(a)  Discharge permits required. The following contributors of wastewater discharging into the POTW shall be required to obtain a discharge permit from the city. 
(1)  Any person discharging domestic wastes of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more. 
(2)  All significant industrial users. 
(3)  Any person discharging wastes with: 
a.  BOD greater than two hundred (200) mg/l. 
b.  TSS greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
c.  COD greater than four hundred (400) mg/l. 
(b)  Application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application, in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee as set forth in the user charge ordinance. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this division, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and term appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location, (if different from the address). 
(2)  SIC number according the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Subdivision B, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g. hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (9)a. shall exceed nine (9) months. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
    The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)  Modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit, as required by subsection (a), the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the superintendent within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(8) and (9), above. 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge of schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may included sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Compliance schedules. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 19-153). 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subdivision B are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.02, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-153. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsections 19-152(b)(4) and (5). At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The superintendent may impose limitations of users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature of concentration, or production and mass were requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.03, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-154. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Required. The city shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  Maintenance. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Compliance with construction standards and specifications. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.04, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-155. - Inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. 
(b)  The city, approval authority (or the state where the NPDES state is the approval authority) and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guard so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.05, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-156. - Pretreatment. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
    The city shall annual publish in the Free Press a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials [of the EPA or the state water commission upon request]. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.06, 9-6-88) 
Sec. 19-157. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(c)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available, upon written request, to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(d)  Information accepted by the city as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. O-9A-88, Art. V, § 5.07, 9-6-88) 
Secs. 19-158-19-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-181. - Program adoption. 
    The City of Crockett ("city") developed this identity theft prevention program ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flags Rule ("rule"), which implements Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, 16 C.F.R. § 681.2. This program was developed for the utility department of the city ("utility") with oversight and approval of the city council. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the city council determined that this program was appropriate for the city's utility, and therefore approved this program on December 1, 2008. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-182. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Establish an identity theft prevention program. To establish an identity theft prevention program designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing covered account and to provide for continued administration of the program in compliance with Part 681 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing Sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003. 
(b)  Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the red flags rule. The red flags rule ("rule") defines "identity theft" as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person" and a "red flag" ("red flag") as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. Under the rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to: 
(1)  Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
(2)  Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program; 
(3)  Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and 
(4)  Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(c)  Red flags rule definitions used in this program: 
    City: The City of Crockett, Texas. 
    Covered account: Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks. 
    Creditors: The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors". 
    Identifying information is defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person", including: name, address, telephone number, Social Security Number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routing code. 
    Program: The identity theft prevention program for the city. 
    Program administrator: The utility director is the program administrator for the program. 
    Utility: The utility is the utility department for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Secs. 19-183-19-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RED FLAGS 

Sec. 19-206. - Identification of red flags. 
    In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories: 
(1)  Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies. 
a.  Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report; 
b.  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant; 
c.  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and 
d.  Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity, including but not limited to: 
1.  Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries; 
2.  Unusual number of recent credit applications; 
3.  A material change in use of credit; 
4.  Accounts closed for cause or abuse. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. 
a.  Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic; 
b.  Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
c.  Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
d.  Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identifying information. 
a.  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides ( example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social Security Number range and date of birth); 
b.  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, Social Security Number or an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
c.  Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
d.  Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
e.  Social Security Number presented that is the same as one given by another customer; 
f.  An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person; 
g.  A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law Social Security Numbers must not be required) or an applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet; and 
h.  A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(4)  Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account. 
a.  Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
b.  Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account; 
c.  Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use ( example: very high activity); 
d.  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
e.  Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility; 
f.  Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity; 
g.  Breach in the utility's computer system security; and 
h.  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(5)  Alerts from others. Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-207. - Detecting red flags. 
(a)  New accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
(1)  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)  Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
(3)  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; 
(4)  Request additional documentation to establish identity; and 
(5)  Independently contact the customer or business. 
(b)  Existing accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account: 
(1)  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)  Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and 
(3)  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-208. - Preventing and mitigating identity theft. 
    In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one (1) or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag: 
(1)  Prevent and mitigate. 
a.  Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft; 
b.  Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods; 
c.  Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts; 
d.  Not open a new account; 
e.  Close an existing account; 
f.  Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities; 
g.  Reopen an account with a new number; 
h.  Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take; 
i.  Notify law enforcement; or 
j.  Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
(2)  Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
a.  Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
b.  Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
c.  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
d.  Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis; 
e.  Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured; 
f.  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
g.  Request only the last four (4) digits of Social Security Numbers (if any); 
h.  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
i.  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-209. - Program updates. 
    This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the utility from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will consider the utility's experiences with identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other entities, consult with law enforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel. After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program or present the city council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Secs. 19-210-19-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 19-231. - Oversight. 
    Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity theft committee for the utility. The committee is headed by the program administrator. Two (2) or more other individuals appointed by the program administrator comprise the remainder of the committee membership. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-232. - Staff training and reports. 
(a)  Initially, all utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. Thereafter, all utility staff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally, all new utility employees shall undergo training. 
(b)  All utility staff shall submit reports monthly concerning the utility's compliance with the program, the training that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the program administrator, the monthly reports shall contain a recap of the incident and include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the incident. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-233. - Service provider arrangements. 
    In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the utility will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft: 
(1)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
(2)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program and report any red flags to the program administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 19-234. - Specific program elements and confidentiality. 
    For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to the identity theft committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, exh. A, 12-1-08) 
Chapter 20 - VEGETATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Burning of trees, brush and other vegetation, § 7-76 et seq.; growth or accumulation of weeds and rubbish declared a nuisance, § 11-18. 

Sec. 20-1. - Property owner's duty to trim trees and hedges. 
(a)  Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of real property in the city shall trim all trees on the property owned or occupied by him, which overhang the sidewalks, streets or alleys of the city, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or public travel. 
(b)  Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of real property in the city shall trim all hedges and shrubbery on the property which is adjacent to the public sidewalks so that no part of any hedge or shrubbery extends over any part of the public sidewalk. 
(Code 1960, §§ 9-9-1, 9-9-2) 
Sec. 20-2. - Injury to trees or shrubbery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority to do so, to willfully injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant, growing, standing or being on any private or public property in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 9-9-3) 
Sec. 20-3. - Trees outside property line. 
    The mayor and city council are hereby given full and complete control over all trees growing within the city limits which are outside of private property lines. 
(Code 1960, § 9-9-4) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance O-9-85, adopted Sept. 3, 1985, repealed former app. A, Zoning, and enacted a new app. A in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. Prior to repeal, app. A contained Ord. No. 70-E, enacted Mar. 23, 1970, as amended by Ord. Nos. O-5-81Z, O-5A-81Z, O-5C-81Z, adopted June 15, 1981; Ord. Nos. O-1A-83, O-1B-83, adopted Jan. 17, 1983; Ord. Nos. O-10-84, O-10A-84, adopted Oct. 1, 1984; Ord. No. O-1A-85, adopted Jan. 21, 1985; and Ord. No. O-2A-85, adopted Feb. 18, 1985. 
The new zoning ordinance is set out substantially as enacted; however, a uniform system of capitalization and punctuation has been employed. Material added by the editor for clarity or to correct errors has been included in brackets [ ]. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by an historical notation at the end of the affected section; the absence of such a notation indicates the section derives unchanged from Ord. No. O-9-85. 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning generally, § 11.01 et seq.; power of city council to adopt zoning plan, § 3.11(j). 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-81 et seq.; airport zoning, § 3-16 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, § 5-1 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 16-1 et seq.; subdivisions, § 17-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Zoning, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1011a et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 101. - Title. 
    This ordinance, in accordance with the authority granted in the legislature of the State of Texas in Articles 1011a through 1011j of the State's Civil Statutes, shall be known and may be cited as the Crockett zoning ordinance. 
Section 102. - Purpose. 
    The regulations contained herein have been developed in accordance with a comprehensive land use planning program directed toward the identification and documentation of public policies relating to the public and private use of land, transportation, and the development of capital improvements. The Crockett zoning ordinance is specifically directed to the protection of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, and general welfare. The regulations are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lay a proper foundation for the reasonable termination of land use activities which are not in conformance with the city's long-range land use plans; to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for water supply, sewerage, energy use and distribution, transportation, schools, parks, public utilities, and other public facilities. 
Section 103. - Application of the zoning ordinance. 
    This ordinance classifies and regulates the use of land and structures within the city limits of Crockett, as hereinafter set forth. Except as hereinafter provided, no land may be used and no structure may be erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt unless it will be used and maintained in accordance with the requirements established for the district in which the structure is to be located, and in accordance with the provisions of the articles within this ordinance as they pertain to districts. 
Section 104. - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of these regulations, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural include the singular, except where the natural and obvious construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "may" is not discretionary unless the context in which it is used indicates otherwise. The word "must" is mandatory in every instance. 
B.  For purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as follows: 
1.  Accessory building: A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main building or use located on the same lot with the main building. 
2.  Accessory use: A land use activity that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
3.  Agriculture: The use of land for producing crops, raising livestock, or other activities normally associated with commercial crop or livestock production which do not involve commercial or industrial activities such as commercial feed lots, sales yards, and auction yards. 
4.  Alley: A public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
5.  Apartment building: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of trailer camps, mobile home parks, hotels and motels. Apartments are multiple-family dwellings. 
6.  Amusement: An enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charges. 
7.  Antique shop: A business which sells items whose value is greater than the original purchase price because of age or rarity. 
8.  Automobile: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to, the following: passenger cars, light trucks, motor scooters, and motorcycles. 
9.  Automobile wash: A facility designed primarily for washing automobiles. 
10.  Automobile repair: 
Major: General repair or reconditioning of engines and air conditioning systems for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; overall painting or paintshop; vehicle steam cleaning; and other similar uses. 
Minor: Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes, and batteries; diagnostic services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starter, alternators, hoses, brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air conditioning systems, and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except motor trucks, but not including any operation named under "automobile repair-major" or other similar use. 
11.  Automobile service station: An establishment which is for the dispensing, sale or offering for sales at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories including lubrication of automobiles and minor automobile repairs. 
12.  Automobile salvage or wrecking yard: An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or "wrecked" or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored. 
13.  Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surround by public highways, streets, streams, railway rights-of-way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof. The planning and zoning commission is the city's authority as to a determination of questions regarding the limits or extent of a block. 
14.  Board of adjustment: The officially designated municipal body that is responsible for hearing appeals made from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer; appeals for variances to the requirements of the zoning ordinance; designations of nonconforming uses; and determinations of the abandonment of a nonconforming use. 
15.  Boarding house or loading house: A dwelling other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging or both meals and lodging are provided for three (3) to seven (7) persons. 
16.  Building: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated will be deemed a separate building. 
Primary: A building in which the primary activity associated with the lot is conducted. In any residential district any dwelling will be a primary building. 
Secondary: A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary building located on the same lot. 
17.  Building area: That portion of a lot upon which buildings may be placed, excluding required yards and limited by the maximum building coverage as specified for each zoning district. 
18.  Building coverage: The percent of the lot area covered by the building, exclusive of all overhanging roofs. 
19.  Building height: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
20.  Building lines: The lines established on a lot, behind which a building can be constructed and in front of which are the unoccupied front, side, and rear yards. 

21.  Building site: A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure. 
22.  Carport: A permanent roofed structure open on at least two (2) sides, designed for the parking and shelter of private passenger vehicles. 
23.  Child care facility: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time, which periods are not continuous for twenty-four (24) hours per day, compensation is given. This definition does not extend to churches or other religious or public institutional buildings in which children are cared for while their parents or legal guardians are attending services, meetings, or classes, or are engaged in church activities. 
24.  City council: The governing body of the City of Crockett, Texas. 
25.  Clinic: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions, including, but not limited to, dental and physician offices. 
26.  Comprehensive city plan: The planning document or documents which are adopted by the city council. The comprehensive plan contains statements of official municipal policy pertaining to the subjects of land use, community facilities, transportation, housing and other related topics. 
27.  Convalescent, rest, nursing or extended care facility: A health care facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continued nursing care for compensation. 
28.  Counseling and rehabilitation home: A nonmedical facility providing living facilities (either with or without board), recreational, counseling and other rehabilitative service to noninstitutionalized individuals of either sex, who require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. The facility must be approved by an appropriate local and/or state agency. 
29.  Country club: An area of twenty (20) acres or more containing a golf course and a club house and available only to private specific membership. Such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as a private club, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service facilities. 
30.  Density transfer of dwelling unit clustering: Within a planned unit development, this term refers to the substitution of common open space for private open space relinquished by waiver of minimum yard requirements for individual buildings. The average density in dwelling units per acre for the total planned unit development remains the same as permitted in the appropriate zoning district before the planned unit development designation is given. (See example 2.) 

Example 2 - Density Transfer of Dwelling Unit Clustering 
31.  District zoning: Any section or sections of the City of Crockett for which regulations governing the use of buildings and/or premises are described in Article 2 of this ordinance and as shown on the official zoning map of Crockett. 
32.  Drive-in restaurant: Any establishment where food, and/or beverage is sold to the consumer, motor vehicle parking space is provided and where patrons are served in their respective vehicles. 
33.  Dry cleaning or laundry: Any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance(s). 
34.  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more families, but not including mobile homes or recreational vehicles: 
Attached: A dwelling having any portion of each of one (1) or more walls in common with adjoining dwellings. 
Detached: A dwelling having open space on all exterior walls. 
Single-family: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one (1) family. 
Two-family: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
Multiple-family: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of recreational vehicle camps, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, or resort facilities. 
Townhouse or rowhouse dwelling: Three (3) of more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be owned by one (1) family. 
35.  Easement: A right given by the owner of a parcel of land to another person, public agency or private corporation for a specific and limited use of that parcel. 
36.  Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood or marriage including adopted children or a group of not to exceed five (5) persons not related by blood or marriage occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. 
37.  Family care facility for children: A facility which provides room, board, care and supervision of three (3) to seven (7) or more children, exclusive of a family unit of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. Such group care facility must be licensed or supervised by the State of Texas and shall be limited to foster homes and homes for the temporary placement of children for evaluation. 
38.  Fraternal lodge or service organization clubhouse: An enclosed space, room or structure used by a fraternal lodge or service organization for the purpose of holding organization related meetings, gatherings or social functions. 
39.  Floor area: 
Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of the walls separating two (2) buildings, and including, but not limited to, basements; elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; attic space providing headroom of seven (7) feet or more; and accessory uses in enclosed space but excluding space used for off-street parking. 
Net: The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom of seven (7) feet or more, whether above or below the finished lot grade. 
40.  Floor area ratio: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. 
41.  Garage apartment: A dwelling unit for one (1) family erected in or above a private garage. 
42.  Garage: 
Private: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is accessory. 
Public: Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, used for the care or servicing of automobiles where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale. 
43.  Group care facility for children: A facility which provides room, board, care and supervision to eight (8) or more children, exclusive of a family unit of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. Such group care facility for children must be licensed or supervised by the State of Texas and shall be limited to foster homes and homes for the temporary placement of children for evaluation. 
44.  Homeowner's association: A formal nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (a) each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit development or other described land area is automatically a member and (b) each lot may be subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintenance of common property, and (c) if unpaid, the charge may become a lien against the nonpaying homeowner's property. 
45.  Reserved. 
46.  Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient, medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
47.  Hotel or motel: A building or group of buildings under one (1) ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied, as the temporary abiding place for persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including a hospital or recreational vehicle camping area. 
48.  Junk or salvage yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals and automobiles, used plumbing fixtures, and other materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, or cleaned, and places or yards for the storage of salvaged materials and equipment from house wrecking and salvaged structural steel materials and equipment, this definition excludes establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture, and household equipment, and the processing of used discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
49.  Kennels: A lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs more than six (6) months of age are kept. 
50.  Loading space: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. The minimum dimensions of the loading space must be scaled to accommodate the largest vehicle used for such pickups and deliveries, including vertical clearance. Required off-street loading space cannot be included as off-street parking space as required in the computation of such space for certain zoning districts. 
51.  Corner lot: A lot on which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a street. 
Lot width: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
52.  Mobile home: A manufactured structure that includes plumbing, heating, and electrical systems, is transportable in one (1) or more sections, either on wheels attached to an axle on the unit or by truck and trailer, which, in travelling mode is eight (8) or more feet in width and forty (40) or more feet in length, or when erected on site has a width that is less than forty (40) percent of its length, whose undercarriage may require a permanent foundation or which may support the unit on its own, and which is designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities. 
53.  Mobile home park: Any development site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing long-term occupancy of more than thirty (30) days for the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes including all buildings used or maintained for the use of the residents of the development. This term is not to be used in conjunction with any mobile homes or trailer sales lots which contain unoccupied units that are intended for purposes of inspection and sale. 
54.  Mobile home pad area: An area designed for the exclusive use of an individual mobile home. 
55.  Modular home: A manufactured structure that includes plumbing, heating, and electrical systems, is transportable in one (1) or more sections by truck and trailer, which, when secured on site, has a width that is not less than forty (40) percent of its length, whose undercarriage is designed to be set on a permanent foundation, and which is constructed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities. 
56.  Motor truck: Any truck with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds and which is used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. "Light" trucks, pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks are not "motor trucks" under this definition. 
57.  Neighborhood business: An activity carried out in a residential district which is secondary to the principal use of the building as a dwelling or which is the primary use of the building. Such an activity must not create any noise, odor, or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which the activity is conducted and must not act as a traffic generator to the detriment of the neighborhood. In connection with a neighborhood business, there shall be no display of more than two (2) square feet in area attached to the main or accessory building. Activities such as beauty shops, professional offices, antique stores, tailoring and alteration services could be classified as a "neighborhood business" if they met this definition. 
58.  Nonconformance: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. This may include, but is not limited to, failure to conform to use, height, area coverage or off-street parking requirements. 
59.  Nonconforming use: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a land use activity that does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated and which has been identified as a nonconforming use by the Crockett zoning board of adjustment. 
60.  Open storage: The storage of any equipment, machinery, building materials, or commodities, including raw, semifinished, finished materials, the storage of which is not accessory to a residential use, which is visible from any point on the lot when viewed from ground level. Vehicular parking is not open storage. 
61.  Parking space: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. For purposes of this ordinance, the size of a parking space for one (1) vehicle consists of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than eight (8) feet by eighteen (18) feet plus adequate area for ingress and egress. 
62.  Planned unit development (PUD): An area with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a unified site design plan, containing one (1) or more residential uses. 
63.  Planning and zoning commission: The planning and zoning commission of Crockett, Texas. 
64.  Private club: A building or portion of a building in which liquor-by-the-drink is served by permission of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to persons having membership in said club. 
65.  Public: A recognized public agency, unit of government, or public utility. 
66.  Recreational vehicle: A mobile unit built on a chassis and intended to be used generally for temporary living and sleeping quarters for travel, recreation and vacation purposes. The term includes travel trailers designed to be towed, motor homes designed as temporary dwellings equipped to travel under their own power, and any other portable contrivance intended to be used as temporary living and sleeping quarters which may be moved under its own power, towed or transported by another vehicle. This definition does not include mobile homes. 
67.  Recreational vehicle camping area: Any development, site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing short term occupancy of camper vehicles, recreational vehicles, tents or trailers. 
68.  Residential density: The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located or residing within a residential density. 
Gross density: The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located within the total acreage of a residential area. 
Net density: The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located within the total acreage of a residential area, exclusive of street rights-of-way, easements, nonresidential land use sites, and acreage unsuitable for development. 
69.  Setback: A distance between the lot line and the building line. (See example 1.) 
70.  Specific use: A land use activity that may be appropriate within a designated zoning district but which must be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. The criteria for determining the appropriateness of a land use activity requiring a specific use permit is found in section 303 of this ordinance. 
71.  Stable: 
Private stable: A stable for private use with a capacity of not more than two (2) horses or mules. 
Public stable: A stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more than two (2) horses or mules. 
72.  Story: 
Full Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
Half story: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersections of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartments or living quarters will be counted as a full story. 
73.  Street: Any public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access between various land use activities. 
74.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground or an attachment to something located on the ground. 
75.  Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing wall of partitions, column, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
76.  Trailer: 
Camping, recreational or travel trailer: See recreational vehicle. 
Hauling trailer: A mobile unit to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
77.  Truck terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and stored for shipment by motor truck. A truck terminal is a motor freight terminal. 
78.  Truck stop: A building and/or area in which fuels, oils, and in some cases, accessories and minor parts, for motor trucks and commercial buses are sold. Restaurants, parking areas, and motor truck maintenance may also be associated with truck stops. 
79.  Use permitted by right: A land use activity that does not require the review and approval of the planning and zoning commission or the city council unless otherwise specified. 
80.  Yard: An open space on a lot between the lot line and the building line which is unoccupied by any building or part of a building line except for roof overhangs. 
Front yard: The minimum depth of the front yard is the distance between the nearest point of the street-side wall of building; and the front line of the lot, or that line produced, measured at right angles of the front line of the lot. 
Rear yard: The unoccupied space between the rear lot line and the building line, as specified for each zoning district, which is parallel to the front lot line. 
Side yard: The unoccupied space between the side lot line and the building line, as specified in each zoning district, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
81.  Zoning or code enforcement officer: The municipal employee who has been officially designated as the individual responsible for determining compliance with the regulations and policies found in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 1, 4-5-99) 
ARTICLE 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS, REGULATIONS, AND ZONING MAP 

Section 201. - Establishment of zoning districts and regulations. 
A.  The City of Crockett, Texas, is hereby divided into zoning districts which are described in this ordinance and which are shown on the official zoning map. 
B.  The city's zoning districts are as follows: 
1.  AR Agricultural-residential district. 
2.  R-1 Single-family residential district. 
3.  R-2 Two-family residential district. 
4.  R-3 Multiple-family residential district. 
5.  C-1 Neighborhood commercial district. 
6.  C-2 Planned shopping district. 
7.  C-3 City center shopping district. 
8.  M Manufacturing, warehousing and wholesaling district. 
9.  I General industrial district. 
C.  The regulations for each zoning district enumerated above are as written on the following pages. 
Section 201.1. - AR agricultural-residential district. 
A.  Description. The AR agricultural-residential district is intended to provide a location for agricultural and residential land use activities in areas situated on the fringes of Crockett's present boundaries. Land use activities permitted within this zoning district are appropriate for areas that will be undergoing urbanization in the future. Most of these areas are in close proximity to residential and commercial enclaves. Therefore, the agricultural and residential activities permitted within the district are intended to be beneficial to other land uses. It is not intended that this zoning district provide a location for a lower standard of residential development than is authorized in other districts. The land use regulations provided for in the AR zone are designed to encourage and protect appropriate agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in zoning district classification is made. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  Agricultural activities. 
2.  Accessory buildings related to the primary building on the lot. 
3.  Churches and related secondary buildings. 
4.  Country clubs. 
5.  Golf courses and driving ranges. 
6.  Facilities for special events, including weddings, reunions, conferences and parties. 
7.  Modular dwellings. 
8.  Plant nurseries. 
9.  Public and private parks. 
10.  Public schools, buildings and facilities. 
11.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Cemeteries. 
2.  Child care facilities. 
3.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
4.  Counseling and rehabilitation homes. 
5.  Drilling for oil, natural gas or the extraction of sand, gravel or minerals; provided that the operation is conducted in accordance with the ordinances of Crockett and the laws of the State of Texas. 
6.  Family care facilities for children. 
7.  Fraternal, lodge or service organization clubhouses. 
8.  Group care facilities for children. 
9.  Kennels. 
10.  Mobile home dwellings. 
11.  Private airport or landing field. 
12.  Radio or television station and transmission lines. 
13.  Recreational vehicle camping areas. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring a specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the AR district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Recreational vehicle camping area requirements. The recreational vehicle camping area requirements are the same as those stated in section 201.4 for mobile home parks. 
1.  Skirting, security to pad, and pad area requirements do not apply. 
F.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit must comply with the project plan requirements as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 2, 4-5-99; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-01-16 , § I, 1-11-16) 
Section 201.2. - R-1 single-family residential district. 
A.  Description. This is the most restrictive residential zoning district. The primary use of land is for single-family dwellings and related religious, educational and recreational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities that do not perform a function necessary to sustain the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, efficiency and security are encouraged by the provision for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of these various elements. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  Accessory buildings related to the primary building on the lot. 
2.  Churches and related secondary buildings. 
3.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Modular home dwellings. 
6.  Public and private parks. 
7.  Public schools, buildings, and facilities. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Cemeteries. 
2.  Child care facilities. 
3.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
4.  Counseling and rehabilitation homes. 
5.  Country clubs. 
6.  Family care facilities for children. 
7.  Fraternal, lodge or service organization clubhouses. 
8.  Golf courses or driving ranges. 
9.  Group care facilities for children. 
10.  Mobile home dwellings. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring a specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the R-1 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or a zoning amendment to achieve R-1 status must comply with the project plan requirements as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 3, 4-5-99; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 2, 4-20-09) 
Section 201.3. - R-2 two-family residential district. 
A.  Description. The R-2 district is intended to serve as a residential zone that provides a slightly higher population density but with the basic restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use for land in the R-2 district is for single-family and two-family dwellings along with related religious, educational and recreational facilities normally required for the provision of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities that are incompatible with residential development. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration for the proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  Accessory buildings related to the primary building on the lot. 
2.  Churches and related secondary buildings. 
3.  Detached single-family dwellings and related secondary buildings. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Modular home dwellings. 
6.  Public and private parks. 
7.  Public schools, buildings and facilities. 
8.  Two-family dwellings and related secondary buildings. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Bed and breakfast facilities (see section 307 of the Zoning Ordinance for related restrictions). 
2.  Cemeteries. 
3.  Child care facilities. 
4.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
5.  Counseling and rehabilitation homes. 
6.  Country clubs. 
7.  Family care facilities for children. 
8.  Fraternal, lodge or service organization clubhouses. 
9.  Garage apartments. 
10.  Golf courses or driving ranges. 
11.  Group care facilities for children. 
12.  Mobile home dwellings. 
13.  Private schools. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the R-2 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or an amendment to the zoning map to achieve R-2 status must comply with the project plan review as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-4A-88, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 4, 4-5-99; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 3, 4-20-09) 
Section 201.4. - R-3 multiple-family residential district. 
A.  Description. This is a residential district to provide for medium density development of up to fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings consisting of townhouses, rowhouses, garden apartments, etc. Recreational, religious and educational land use activities normally appropriate to service such residential neighborhoods are also permitted to provide the basic elements of a convenient, balanced and attractive living area. Mobile home parks are permitted by specific use permit. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  Accessory buildings related to the primary building on the lot. 
2.  Churches and related secondary buildings. 
3.  Detached single-family dwellings and related secondary buildings. 
4.  Family care facilities for children. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Modular dwellings. 
7.  Multiple-family dwellings and related secondary buildings. 
8.  Public and private parks. 
9.  Public schools, buildings and facilities. 
10.  Two-family dwellings and related secondary buildings. 
11.  Garage apartments. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Boarding houses and lodging houses. 
2.  Child care facilities. 
3.  Clinics. 
4.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
5.  Convalescent, rest, nursing or extended care facilities. 
6.  Counseling and rehabilitation homes. 
7.  Fraternal, lodge or service organization clubhouses. 
8.  Group care facilities for children. 
9.  Mobile home dwellings. 
10.  Mobile home parks. 
11.  Neighborhood business. 
12.  Private schools. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the R-3 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or a zoning amendment to achieve R-3 status must comply with the project plan requirements as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
F.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any apartment use and a developed single-family residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
G.  Mobile homes on individual lots. Mobile homes to be located on individual lots in residential districts shall conform to the setback requirements of structures in those districts. No more than one (1) mobile home may be located on a single lot except as allowed in mobile home parks. 
H.  Structural safety and skirting requirements. 
1.  Each mobile home located within the City of Crockett must be secured to its pad or foundation material by a cable, harness or other safety device meeting federal and state standards and approved by the city building inspector. 
2.  Skirting is required along the bottom of each mobile home so that no space under the mobile home may be seen with the exception of the tongue. This skirting must be installed within sixty (60) days of the specific use permit being issued. 
I.  Mobile home parks. 
1.  Pad area requirement. Mobile home parks must have a pad area for each mobile home to be placed in the park. 
2.  Access. Each mobile home pad area must have access to an all-weather surfaced interior roadway that conforms to the specifications provided by the Crockett Platting Ordinance. 
3.  Length, width and square footage of pad area. Each mobile home pad area must have a minimum length of not less than eighty (80) feet and a minimum width of not less than forty (40) feet. The minimum square footage of area required for a pad area is three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet. 
4.  Clearance. Each mobile home must be located so that at least fifteen (15) feet of clearance is maintained between it and other mobile homes or structures located within a mobile home park except that mobile homes placed end-to-end may have a clearance of ten (10) feet where opposing rear walls are staggered. 
J.  Mobile home park site standards. All mobile home parks must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Setbacks. All mobile homes and structures must be set back from exterior street right-of-way lines to comply with the following standards: 
a.  The minimum depth of a yard abutting an exterior street must be thirty (30) feet. When a site has double frontage this provision must be met on both yards. 
b.  All mobile homes and structures must be set back at least five (5) feet from any easement or property line. 
c.  All mobile homes and structures must be set back at least five (5) feet from all side lot lines. 
See examples A and B below for illustration. 

2.  Coverage. Primary and secondary buildings cannot cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot or site area on interior lots and sites, and fifty (50) percent of the lot or site area on corner lots or sites. Secondary buildings cannot cover more than twenty (20) percent of a rear yard. 
3.  Subdivision design and construction standards applicable. All mobile home parks must comply with the design and construction standards as specified in the Crockett Subdivision Regulations. 
K.  Required recreational areas. In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty-five (25) or more mobile homes there shall be one (1) or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum one hundred (100) square feet for each lot. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 5, 4-5-99; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 4, 4-20-09) 
Section 201.5. - C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
A.  Description. The C-1 neighborhood commercial district is designed to accommodate trade and personal services that meet basic needs of the families residing in areas adjacent to such centers. Requirements for sunlight, natural air circulation, open space, on- and off-street parking are more restrictive in the C-1 district because the retail trade and services located within it are intended to become an integral part of the neighborhood and must operate in harmony with other residential, educational, religious and recreational land use activities. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  Barber shops. 
2.  Beauty shops. 
3.  Book, cards and stationery shops. 
4.  Child care facilities. 
5.  Clinics. 
6.  Convalescent, rest, nursing or extended care facilities. 
7.  Dance, art or music studios. 
8.  Dry cleaning or laundry establishments. 
9.  Flower and plant sales. 
10.  Fraternal lodge or service organization clubhouses. 
11.  Newspaper and magazine sales. 
12.  Photography galleries and studios. 
13.  Professional offices. 
14.  Public schools, offices and facilities. 
15.  Public and private parks. 
16.  Shoe repairs. 
17.  Tailoring and alteration services. 
18.  Churches. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Antique sales. 
2.  Appliance sales and servicing. 
3.  Bakery shops. 
4.  Branch banks and similar financial institutions. 
5.  Camera sales and servicing. 
6.  Candy stores. 
7.  Catering. 
8.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
9.  Dairy products including ice cream stores. 
10.  Delicatessens. 
11.  Grocery stores. 
12.  Hardware stores. 
13.  Hospitals. 
14.  Messenger and telephone answering services. 
15.  Optical sales and repairs. 
16.  Paint and decorating stores. 
17.  Pet shops. 
18.  Private schools and colleges. 
19.  Radio, sound system and television sales and servicing. 
20.  Research and technical laboratories. 
21.  Restaurants. 
22.  Toy shops. 
23.  Veterinary clinics. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the C-1 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or a zoning amendment to achieve C-1 status must comply with the project plan review as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
F.  Access to C-1 sites. Not more than two (2) entrance/exit points of access to a C-1 site will be permitted except as allowed on state highways in the access design standards of the state highway department. 
G.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and a developed residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 5, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-08C-10, § 1, 8-16-10) 
Section 201.6. - C-2 commercial district. 
A.  Description. The C-2 district is intended to provide retail shops and stores that provide goods and services for the residents of the general community. The C-2 district serves the need for commercial activities that may not be met by those activities presently located in Crockett's City Center Shopping District. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  All uses permitted by right and specific use in the C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
2.  Apparel sales and rentals. 
3.  Amusements. 
4.  Automobile laundry. 
5.  Automobile repair-Minor. 
6.  Automobile sales and rentals. 
7.  Automobile service station. 
8.  Department stores. 
9.  Drive-in restaurants. 
10.  Farm machinery, implements and supply sales. 
11.  Funeral sales. 
12.  Meeting and assembly halls. 
13.  Plant nurseries and garden supply sales. 
14.  Plumbing equipment sales and servicing. 
15.  Printing and reproduction services. 
16.  Retail sales in general. 
17.  Sports or special events stadiums. 
18.  Theaters-Indoors. 
19.  Mini-warehouses. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
2.  Drive-in theaters. 
3.  Private clubs. 
4.  Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in chapter 15.5 of the Crockett Code. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the C-2 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or a zoning amendment to achieve C-2 status must comply with the project plan requirements as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
F.  Access to C-2 sites. Not more than two (2) entrance/exit points of access to a C-2 site will be permitted, except as allowed on state highways in the access design standards of the state highway department. 
G.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and a developed residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-9-95, § 3, 7-25-95; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 6, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-08C-10, § 1, 8-16-10) 
Section 201.7. - C-3 city center shopping district. 
A.  Description. The C-3 district is intended to encourage and facilitate the maintenance and redevelopment of Crockett's Central Business District. Any type of office or retail-commercial business is permitted within the C-3 district. The district's area regulations are the most liberal in this ordinance because it is recognized that the full lot coverage pattern which characterizes the district's development would create may difficulties if altered. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. All uses permitted by right in a C-2 planned shopping district (commercial district) to include "bed and breakfast facilities." 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Automobile and truck repairs-Major. 
2.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the C-3 district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and a developed residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
F.  Additional parking requirements with enlargement of business not applicable. Additional parking requirements with the enlargement of a business found in section 401 are not applicable within the C-3 district. A parking lot located two (2) blocks off of the square at Lamar and Fifth Street provides for employee and/or customer parking for the C-3 district. 
(Ord. No. O-5-86, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. O-8-90, § 1, 8-6-90; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 7, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-08C-10, § 1, 8-16-10) 
Section 201.8. - M manufacturing, warehousing and wholesaling district. 
A.  Description. The M district is intended to serve the needs of manufacturing, fabrication, assembling, warehousing and wholesaling businesses. The district may serve as a buffer between heavy industrial zones and other inharmonious land use activities. Because of its proximity to residential environs the land use activities and related operation characteristics of the M district are regulated to a greater extent than are those associated with the I district. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  All uses permitted by right in a C-2 commercial district, except churches. 
2.  Assembly, fabrication and manufacturing of: 
a.  Clothing. 
b.  Electronics. 
c.  Jewelry. 
d.  Leather goods. 
e.  Measuring instruments. 
f.  Metal. 
3.  Automobile repairs-Major. 
4.  Bottling plants. 
5.  Building material and lumber sales facilities. 
6.  Petroleum bulk stations. 
7.  Publishing and printing. 
8.  Truck stops. 
9.  Truck terminals. 
10.  Warehousing facilities. 
11.  Wholesaling facilities. 
C.  Specific uses. 
1.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
2.  Drive-in theaters. 
3.  Mobile homes. 
4.  Private clubs. 
5.  Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in chapter 15.5 of the Crockett Code. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
D.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the M district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
E.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or amendment to the zoning ordinance to achieve M status must comply with the project plan review as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
F.  Access to M district sites. Not more than two (2) entrance/exit points of access to an M district site will be permitted. 
G.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and a developed residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
H.  Application of performance standards. The performance standards found in section 301 of this ordinance are specifically applicable to land use activities located in M districts. These performance standards are intended to serve as additional safeguards for the community. While applied here specifically to the M district, they are equally applicable to all other areas within Crockett and should be interpreted in that manner. 
I.  Major automobile repair restrictions. Major automobile repair activities are permitted by right when the premises of such activities are conducted wholly enclosed within a building or behind a wooden or brick screening fence. The material and maintenance requirements of such a screening fence are found in section 305 of this ordinance. Major automobile repair businesses now in existence in the City of Crockett which do not have such screening fences shall be made to conform with this fencing requirement on or before one (1) year from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-3-87, § 1, 3-2-87; Ord. No. O-9-95, § 3, 7-25-95; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 8, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-08C-10, § 1, 8-16-10) 
Section 201.9. - I general industrial district. 
A.  Description. The I district is intended to serve as the location for general industrial activities. The character, intensity and extensive nature of the land use activities permitted in the district are such that it is never permitted to directly abut a residential area. 
B.  Uses permitted by right. 
1.  All uses permitted by right in an M district except those commercial uses permitted by right in a C-2 shopping district [commercial district]. 
2.  Automobile salvage or wrecking yards. 
3.  Blacksmithing and machine shop facilities. 
4.  Cement, concrete, lime and gypsum manufacturing plants. 
5.  Chemical manufacturing and storage facilities. 
6.  Commercial feed lots, sale yards, and auction yards for cattle and hogs. 
7.  Heavy earth moving equipment rentals, sales and storage. 
8.  Junk yards. 
9.  Leather tanning and refinement facilities. 
10.  Oil field equipment rentals, sales, and storage facilities. 
11.  Open storage. 
12.  Paper manufacturing plants. 
13.  Petroleum refining and storage facilities. 
14.  Storage of toxic and combustible materials. 
C.  Uses not permitted in I district. 
1.  Explosive manufacture. 
2.  Dead animal reduction, dumping or the distillation of bones or fat rendering. 
3.  Ore smelting. 
D.  Specific uses. 
1.  Communication towers for cellular telephones, radio, television and other communications. 
2.  Mobile homes. 
3.  Private clubs. 
Refer to the land use matrix for land uses permitted by right or requiring specific use permit. 
E.  Area, coverage and height regulations. All buildings in the I district must conform to the requirements as listed in the land use district standards. 
F.  Mandatory project plan requirements. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or amendment to the zoning ordinance to achieve I status must comply with the project plan requirements as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
G.  Access to I district site. Not more than two (2) entrance/exit points of access to an I district site will be permitted except as allowed on state highways in the access design standards of the state highway department. 
H.  Screening requirement. A screening fence is required between any commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and a developed residential use in accordance with section 305 of this ordinance. 
I.  Junkyard and automobile wrecking yard restriction. 
1.  Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards are permitted by right when the premises on which such activities are conducted are surrounded by a wooden or brick fence which is at least six (6) feet in height and forms a solid and continuous screen. Such a screen shall be maintained in good condition. 
2.  Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards in existence in the City of Crockett which do not have such screening fences at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall be made to conform with this fencing requirement on or before one (1) year from the effective date of this ordinance. 
J.  Mandatory project plan review. Individuals requesting a specific use permit or an amendment to the zoning ordinance to achieve I status must comply with the review process as prescribed in section 303 of this ordinance. 
K.  Application of performance standards. The performance standards found in section 301 of this ordinance are specifically applicable to land use activities located in I district. These performance standards are intended to serve as additional safeguards for the community. While applied here specifically to the I district, they are equally applicable to all other areas within Crockett and should be interpreted in that manner. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-3-87, § 1, 3-2-87; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 9, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-08C-10, § 1, 8-16-10) 
LAND USE DISTRICT STANDARDS 
Subject AR R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 M I Front Yard 30 20 20 30 20 20 NA 20 30 Rear Yard 20 20 20 20 15 15 15 20 20 Side Yard 10 10 10 10 10 10 NA 15 15  Corner Lot 15 15 Minimum Lot 
 Size* 10,000* 6,000* 6,000* 6,000* 7,500* 7,500* NA 10,000* 10,000*  Two-family 7,500* 7,500*  Multifamily 0.50 acre Minimum Lot 
  Width NA 60 60 60 60 60 NA NA NA  Two-Family 75 75  Multifamily 100 Maximum Lot 
 Coverage  Interior 25% 25% 30% 40% 50% 50% 100% 60% 60%  Corner 30% 30% 40% 50% 60% 60% 100% 60% 60% Maximum Dwel- 
 ling Unit Den- NA 7 7 7  sity/Gross NA 11 dup. 11 dup. 11 dup. Acre 15 multifam. Maximum 
 Height 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 45  
All numbers in feet unless otherwise indicated. 
* = Square feet 
NA = Not applicable 
Any tract of land platted before October 10, 1984, for residential use shall have a minimum of 5,000 sq. ft. 
The principal structure on these lots shall not cover more than 50% of said lots. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Land Use Matrix -Residential 
Land Uses AR R-1 R-2 R-3 Accessory Buildings P P P P Agricultural Activities P N N N Board and Lodging House N N N S Cemetery S S S N Child Care Facilities S S S S Churches and Related Buildings P P P P Communications Towers for Cellular Telephones, Radio, Television and Other Communication S S S S Convalescent Facilities N N N S Country Club P S S N Drilling/Extraction S N N N Fraternal Organizations S S S S Golf Courses P S S N Health Care Facilities N N N S Kennel S N N N Mobile Home Dwellings S S S S Mobile Home Dwelling Parks N N N S Modular Dwellings P P P P Multiple-Family Dwellings N N N S Neighborhood Business N N N S Plant Nursery P N N N Private Airport S N N N Public Facilities P P P P Public and Private Parks P P P P Radio or Television Station S N N N Single-Family Dwellings P P P P Two-Family Dwellings N N P P P-Land Use Permitted S-Specific Use Permit Required N-Land Use Not Permitted  
(Ord. No. 0-4-99, § 6, 4-5-99; Ord. No. O-04-09, § 10, 4-20-09) 
Land Use Matrix -Commercial 
Land Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 Antique Sales S P P Apparel Sale/Rentals N P P Appliance Sales/Service S P P Amusements N P P Art and Craft Sales/Services P P P Art or Photography Studio P P P Automobile Repair-Minor N P P Automobile Washes S P P Automobile Sales/Service N P P Automobile Service Station N P P Bakery Shops S P P Banks/Financial Institutions S P P Barber/Beauty Shops P P P Bookstores P P P Camera Shops S P P Candy Stores S P P Catering Services S P P Child Care Facilities P P P Churches and Related Buildings N N N Communications Towers for Cellular Telephones, Radio, Television and Other Communication S S S Convalescent Facilities P P P Dairy Products Sales S P P Dance, Art, or Music Studios P P P Delicatessens S P P Department Stores N P P Drive-in Restaurants N P P Drive-in Theaters N S N Dry Cleaning/Laundry P P P Farm Machinery, Implements, and Supply Sales N P P Florists P P P Fraternal Organizations P P P Furniture Sales/Services N P P Funeral Sales N P P Grocery Markets S P P Hardware Stores S P P Health Care Facilities P P P Hospitals S P P Hotels and Motels N P P Meeting and Assembly Halls N P P Messenger/Telephone Services S P P Multiple-Family Dwellings N N P Music/Instrument Sales P P P Newspaper/Magazine Sales P P P Nursery/Garden Supply Sales N P P Offices P P P Optical Sales/Service S P P Paint/Home Decorating Sales S P P Pet Shops S P P Plant Nurseries N P P Plumbing Sales/Services N P P Printing Services N P P Private Clubs N S S Private Schools/Colleges S P P Professional Offices P P P Public Facilities P P P Public Garages N N N Public and Private Parks P P P Radio/TV Sales and Service S P P Research Laboratories S P P Restaurants S P P Service Stations S P P Shoe Repair P P P Single-Family Dwellings N N N Sports or Special Events Stadiums N P P Tailor Services P P P Theaters N P P Toy Shops S P P Two-Family Swellings N N N Veterinary Clinics S P P P-Land Use Permitted S-Specific Use Permit Required N-Land Use Not Permitted  
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 10, 4-20-09) 
Land Use Matrix -Industrial 
Land Uses M I Assembly/Manufacturing  -Clothing P P  -Electronics P P  -Jewelry P P  -Leather Goods P P  -Measuring Instruments P P  -Metal/Paper/Plastics/Wood P P Auto Salvage or Wrecking Yard N P Automobile Repair-Major P P Blacksmith/Machine Shop N P Book Binding/Manufacturing P P Bottling Plants P P Building Materials Sales P P Cement Manufacturing N P Chemical Manufacturing N P Communications Towers for Cellular Telephones, Radio, Television and Other Communication S S Drive-in Theater S N Heavy Moving Equipment N P Junk Yards N P Oil Field Equipment N P Open Storage N P Petroleum Bulk Stations P P Petroleum Refining N P Private Club S S Publishing and Printing Facilities P P Toxic Material Storage N P Truck Stops P P Truck Terminals P P Warehousing Facilities P P Wholesaling Facilities P P P-Land Use Permitted S-Specific Use Permit Required N-Land Use Not Permitted  
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 10, 4-20-09) 
Section 202. - Establishment of official zoning map. 
A.  There is hereby created an official zoning map for the City of Crockett. This map, which will be permanently filed with the city secretary, will have in association with it copies of each amendment to the map which have taken place since the map was last submitted. 
B.  An updated version of the zoning map will be submitted once each year to the city secretary who will certify that it is correct as of the date of its submission. 
C.  Only one (1) official zoning map will be filed with the city secretary. Other copies of the map which may be used by other city offices must be dated and bear the following statement: 
    "Notice: This map is not official and interested parties are directed to the official zoning map on file with the Crockett City Secretary." 
ARTICLE 3. - ADDITIONAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS 

Section 301. - Performance standards. 
    Upon and after the effective date of this ordinance, the following performance standards apply: 
A.  Environmental compatibility. 
1.  Any use established or changed to and any building, structure, or tract of land that is developed, constructed or used for, any permitted, primary or secondary land use must not produce any noise, vibrations, air pollution or odor that would substantially and reasonably interfere with another person's use and enjoyment of his/her property. 
2.  Any existing use or structure that is nonconforming with respect to this standard must be made to conform within two (2) years from the effective date of this ordinance, or from the effective date upon which the land use or structure falls within the zoning jurisdiction of the city. 
B.  Land use district standards. The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, or for any building herein erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced to an area less than the district requirements of this ordinance. 
The minimum lot standards by zoning district are shown in the table of land use district standards. The following information is to be used in interpreting the district standards: 
1.  When a lot has double frontage, the street with the heavier traffic load and the larger right-of-way width is the boundary of the front yard. The rear yard must be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
2.  When a lot faces three (3) or four (4) streets, the street with the heaviest traffic load and the largest right-of-way width is the boundary of the front yard. All other yards facing a street must be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Number of buildings per lot. 
1.  Only one (1) primary residential structure per lot is allowed except in an apartment complex. A duplex is considered to be a primary residential structure. A mobile home or modular home is considered to be a primary residential structure. 
2.  The conversion of an existing garage into a garage apartment is allowed by specific use permit in R-2 districts and by right in R-3 districts. Lots on which a garage is to be converted into a dwelling must meet the minimum requirements for a duplex. The construction of a new structure to be placed on a lot as a garage apartment is not allowed. 
3.  For nonresidential development, more than one (1) building may be placed on a lot provided that the lot coverage restrictions of each zoning district are met. The minimum separation between buildings is ten (10) feet unless otherwise specified in the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 302. - Building permits. 
    No permit for the erection, alteration or enlargement of any building shall be issued unless there first be filed in the building inspector's office by the applicant a plan, drawn to scale, and in such form as may be prescribed by the city administrator, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied and the dimensions and locations, on the lot of the building to be erected, altered or enlarged. This application should state that the information on it is true and correct and be signed by the applicant. This plan shall show the use for which the building is arranged, intended or designed, and furnish such other information as may be required in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. Any failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit by the city. A record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the city administrator. 
Section 303. - Specific use permit and procedures. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  Applicant: The individual seeking a specific use permit under the provisions of this section of the ordinance. 
2.  Specific use: A land use activity permitted within a zoning district on the basis of specific criteria and approval by the city council. 
3.  Specific use permit: An authorized document issued by the city council upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission in association with its approval of a specific use. 
4.  Project plan: Drawings and related information illustrating and describing the proposed land use activity for which the specific use permit is sought. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The planning and zoning commission will, after a review of the project plan and a public hearing, recommend approval or disapproval for specific parcels of land the issuance of a specific use permit in accordance with the specific use schedules in those districts where it is indicated that a specific use permit for a specific use may be approved. 
2.  The city council may, after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, authorize the issuance of a specific use permit in accordance with the specific use schedules in those districts where it is indicated that a specific use permit for a specific use may be approved. 
3.  The designation of a specific use on the specific use schedule in a given district does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each specific use permit application shall be evaluated as to its probable effects on adjacent property and the community welfare and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate. 
4.  Any of the imposed conditions shall not be construed as a change in zoning of such property, but shall be construed as conditions of precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. 
C.  Criteria for specific use permits. The following criteria will be used as the basis upon which a decision to approve a specific use permit is made: 
1.  Will the proposed use adversely affect the character and appropriate use of the area or neighborhood in which it would be located? 
2.  Will the proposed use substantially depreciate the value of adjacent and nearby properties for use in accordance with regulations of the zoning district in which they are located? 
3.  Will the proposed use be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this ordinance? 
4.  How will the proposed use affect the traffic circulation of the district in which it is proposed? 
5.  How will the proposed use affect the public utilities of the district in which it is proposed? 
6.  How will the proposed use affect the health, safety and general welfare of the community? 
D.  Specific use permit procedure. 
1.  An applicant must contact the code enforcement officer for an initial feasibility review discussion. The officer must provide the applicant with an appropriate application form and all necessary information for the applicant to proceed. 
2.  The applicant must file an application form with the officer at which time a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid. The application form must be supplemented with a blueline or blackline print of the project plan, supportive materials and a legal description of the site for which the specific use permit is sought. 
3.  The planning and zoning commission and the city council will hold a public hearing on the proposed project. The hearing must follow the procedure outlined in section 603 of this ordinance. 
4.  In submitting its recommendation, the planning and zoning commission must clearly indicate each reason in support of its recommendation for approval or denial of the application. 
5.  The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this ordinance, require such developmental standards as are deemed to be important to the welfare of the applicant, the protection of adjacent property and protection of the community as a whole. 
6.  Where the city council approves the issuance of a specific use permit, the conditions imposed must be cited on the project plan and a copy of that plan must be permanently filed in the office of the city planner. 
7.  The city council must approve a specific use permit by a three-fourths majority where the proposed specific use is opposed by twenty (20) percent or more of the property owners whose lands are lying within three hundred (300) feet of the site for which the specific use permit is sought. 
E.  Contents of a project plan. The following information must be shown on a project plan: 
1.  The name of the proposed project, such as, "Specific Use Permit for Mobile Home at 100 Oak St." 
2.  A smaller scale map showing the location of the proposed project and a directional arrow. 
3.  All existing streets and points of access to the project. 
4.  Dimensions of the lot. 
5.  Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot. 
6.  The proposed location, type and size of the following: 
a.  Buildings and structures. 
b.  Streets, drives and points of access. 
c.  Off-street parking areas with parking spaces individually drawn and counted. 
d.  Sidewalks. 
e.  Signs. 
7.  The density of dwelling units per gross acre. 
8.  The following may be additionally required by the planning and zoning commission or the city council: 
a.  Topography and the plan for the final grading of the site. 
b.  The location and size of existing utilities within or adjacent to the proposed project site. 
c.  Other information necessary for a reasonable understanding of the scope and nature of the proposed project. 
F.  Indications on zoning map. The location and type of the specific use permits granted by the city council shall be indicated on the zoning district map. 
G.  Compliance. Failure of a permittee to honor and abide by the terms of the grant of a specific use permit constitutes immediate and automatic termination of the permit. The code enforcement officer will notify a permittee of such a termination and within thirty (30) days of such notification the holder of the voided permit must terminate all land use activities relating to the permit. Thereafter, the site may be used only for activities defined as uses permitted by right within the appropriate zoning district. 
H.  Lapse of specific use permit. 
1.  If no construction has begun or no used established for which the specific use permit has been granted within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of approval by the city council such specific use permit will lapse and be of no other effect. In its discretion, and for good cause, city council may, after receipt of a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, extend for an additional one hundred twenty (120) days the period for the beginning of construction or the establishment of a use. If the specific use permit lapses under the provisions of this section, the city secretary shall remove the specific use permit indication from the zoning district map and shall file a notice of revocation in the applicant's permit file. 
2.  If the use for which a specific use permit was issued is discontinued and not resumed within ninety (90) days from the last day in which the use existed, the specific use permit will lapse and be of no other effect. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-09D-10, § I, 9-7-10) 
Section 304. - Planned unit development (PUD) designation. 
A.  Description. A planned unit development or "PUD" is a residential design incorporating the concepts of density transfer and common open space. 1 When a residential tract receives PUD status it continues to retain its standard zoning district classification. 2 However, the added PUD designation enable the land developer to modify the yard and setback requirements. In many instances the creative use of the PUD concept facilitates residential neighborhood designs which are more interesting, visually pleasing and socially integratable than the standard single family lot arrangement. 
Supplemental Notes: 
1   See example 2 in section 104 of this ordinance. 
2   For example, an area that has been zoned R-1 single-family residential does not lose that district classification because a part of it receives PUD designation. A PUD symbol of the letters "PUD" are placed in the appropriate site on the zoning map to denote that a subdivision plat has been received for this parcel of land which utilizes the density transfer concept. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the development of a PUD is: 
1.  To encourage a more efficient use of land. 
2.  To make changes in the technology of land development so that the resulting economic situation will be to the benefit of those who will be moving into the area. 
3.  To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways. 
4.  To provide common open space for the utilization of neighborhood residents. 
5.  To encourage residential design that results in smaller networks of utilities and streets. 
6.  To provide a procedure that will relate the type, design, and layout of residential development to the respective site and the particular demand for housing in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within developed areas of the city. 
7.  To provide a more desirable environment than would be possible through a strict application of other sections of this ordinance. 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  Common open space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the proposed site designed for the enjoyment of the residents. Common open space may contain complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the residents. 
2.  Landowner: The legal or beneficial owner of all land proposed to be included in a PUD including the possessor of an option or contract to purchase or other persons having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
3.  PUD plan: The provisions for development of a planned unit development, including drawings that serve as a plat, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, intensity of use or density of development, private streets, ways and parking facilities. 
4.  Planned unit development (PUD): An area of land with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one (1) or more residential land use activities. 
5.  PUD designation: A graphic notation evidencing that an area is to be developed as a planned unit development. 
D.  PUD location. A planned unit development may only be located within an AR, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district and only after the site in question has received PUD designation. 
E.  Minimum PUD size. A parcel of land may not be designated for PUD use unless that parcel contains at least four (4) acres. In calculating the minimum area required, the measurements may include the area of all streets located entirely within the site and one-half of the area of boundary streets. 
F.  Conditions. 
1.  The planning and zoning commission shall, after a review of the project plan and a public hearing, recommend that the city council approve or disapprove the designation of an area as a PUD. 
2.  The city council may, after a recommendation is made by the planning and zoning commission and after holding a public hearing, authorize an area of land to be designated as a PUD. 
G.  PUD designation procedures. 
1.  Submission of preliminary PUD plan. An applicant for PUD designation and PUD plan approval must file an application form with the code enforcement officer at which time a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid. The application form must be supplemented with a blueline or blackline print of the preliminary plan, supportive materials and a legal description of the site for which the PUD designation is requested. 
2.  Contents of preliminary PUD plan. The following information must be shown on the preliminary plan: 
a.  The name of the owner of the land and his engineer. 
b.  The date the project is submitted to the planning and zoning commission. 
c.  The name of the proposed project. 
d.  A key map. 
e.  Topography and a plan for final grading of the site. 
f.  All existing streets, drives, buildings, and watercourses. 
g.  The location and size of existing utilities within or adjacent to the proposed site. 
h.  The proposed location, type and size of the following: 
(1)  Buildings and structures. 
(2)  Streets, drives and curbs. 
(3)  Off-street parking areas with parking spaces individually drawn and the number of spaces notated. 
(4)  Sidewalks. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
(6)  Common open space sites. 
(7)  Sites for solid waste containers. 
(8)  Signs. 
i.  The total number of dwelling units and nondwelling units to be constructed on the site. 
j.  The density of dwelling units per gross acre as evidenced by the proposed project. 
The planning and zoning commission and the city council are empowered to require additional information necessary for a complete understanding of the proposed PUD project. 
2.  Submission of final PUD plan. After a PUD preliminary plan has been approved and a PUD designation has been granted for a parcel of land, the applicant must submit a PUD final plan to the planning and zoning commission. The PUD final plan must be approved before a building permit may be issued or before any development action on a designated PUD site may begin. The PUD final plan must include all of the information in subsections a. through j. above and must also include any additional specifications, covenants, easements, conditions, bonds, or other information required by the commission. The filing of this plat shall follow the procedure set up in the Crockett subdivision ordinance. 
G.  Standards for PUD development. All development within a PUD must conform to the following minimum standards: 
1.  Intensity of land use. 
a.  The gross density within a designated PUD site remains the same as that which would be permitted if the area were developed in accordance with the regulations of the zoning district for the type of residential dwelling unit proposed. Within the PUD site, the permitted number of dwelling units may be reallocated in accordance with the concepts of density transfer. 
(1)  A site may not contain more than one (1) dwelling unit for every two (2) acres of land area in an AR district. 
(2)  A site may not contain more than seven and twenty-six hundredths (7.26) dwelling units per gross acre of land area in an R-1 district. 
(3)  A site may not contain more than eleven and sixty-two hundredths (11.62) dwelling units per gross acre of land in an R-2 district. 
(4)  A site may not contain more than fifteen (15) dwelling units per gross acre of land in an R-3 district. 
2.  Lot area and yard requirements. Within a PUD site, lot sizes, dimensions, and locations will be freely arranged in conformity to the overall density standards shown in subsection G and to the approved PUD plan. Minimum lot size, yard, and coverage requirements are not specified although the planning and zoning commission may be guided by the regulations of the applicable zoning district in its approval of the PUD plan. 
3.  Common open space. Common open space such as parks, recreation areas, or playgrounds must be provided in a PUD and must constitute not less than twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the site. The improvement and maintenance of common open space areas are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The City of Crockett may at any time and from time to time, accept the dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and maintenance. 
b.  The city may require the PUD developer to create a homeowner's association to act as the owner and maintenance agency for common open space areas. A homeowner's association may not be dissolved or permitted to dispose of any common open space by sale, lease or grant, without first offering to dedicate the site in question to the city. 
c.  In the event that a homeowner's association fails to maintain that common open space or fails to fulfill other conditions precedent to PUD approval, the city may serve written notice to the association, setting forth the manner in which the association has failed to fulfill the obligation. Such a notice must include a demand that the deficiencies be cured within a specified period of time. If the deficiencies are not cured within the specified time period, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties in both the PUD and in the surrounding neighborhood, and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space, may maintain it, and may perform other related duties associated with the association until such time as the association again resumes its obligations. All costs incurred by the city in carrying out the obligations of the homeowner's association may be assessed against the properties within the PUD and become a tax lien on those same properties. 
H.  PUD designation remains with parcel of land until land is replatted. The PUD designation remains with the parcel of land designated as a PUD and for which a PUD final plan has been approved and filed with the county clerk until such time that the parcel of land is replatted. 
Section 305. - Screening. 
A.  Screening between commercial or industrial land and residential land required. Where there is a common side or rear lot line or lot lines between developed residential land and land to be developed to a commercial or industrial use, the owner of said commercial or industrial land shall erect a fence that properly screens adjacent residential lots from adverse influences such as noise, vehicular lights, trespass and other adverse influences as part of the normal operation of buildings dedicated to said nonresidential usage. 
B.  Screening between single-family residential and apartment uses. Where there is a common side or rear lot line or lot lines between developed single-family residential land and land to be developed into apartment usage, the owner of the apartment land shall erect a fence that will properly screen adjacent single-family residential land from adverse influences such as noise, vehicular lights, trespass, and other adverse influences as part of the normal operation of the apartment project. 
C.  Screening material. Such screening shall be made of brick or wood, shall be at least six (6) feet in height, and shall form a solid and continuous screen between the residential and nonresidential land uses. In the case of rear lot lines such screening fence shall be continued from one side lot line along the rear lot line to the other side lot line. In the case of side lot lines, such screening fence shall be continued from the rear lot line along the side lot line to the front setback but no farther than a point fifteen feet from the street right-of-way line. Each such screening fence shall be maintained in good condition by the owner of said commercial, industrial or apartment project, for as long a time period as may be needed to protect adjacent residential land uses. 
Section 306. - Temporary buildings and equipment. 
    Temporary buildings and equipment for uses incidental to construction work on premises are allowed in any zone but shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. None shall be located on any public street at any time during construction. 
Section 307. - [Restrictions on bed and breakfast facilities]. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to bed and breakfast facilities: 
1.  A bed and breakfast facility is defined as an owner-occupied private home which offers lodging for paying guests and which serves breakfast to these guests and which conducts other operations not inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this ordinance; 
2.  The maximum number of bedrooms which may be rented is five (5) unless the city council specifically finds that the structure and tract on which it is located is of sufficient size to permit more bedrooms and that the same will not adversely impact the surrounding properties; 
3.  One (1) attached sign shall be permitted on the premises. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall not include the words hotel or motel, and the sign shall not be lighted; 
4.  All such facilities shall be responsible for the collection of the city hotel/motel tax; 
5.  All city-county health officers, building inspectors, the fire marshal and his assistants and other code enforcement officials of the city shall have the right to go on any premises for which a specific use permit for a bed and breakfast facility has been issued during normal hours for the purpose of verifying compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the city; 
6.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space to each bedroom in the residence; 
7.  The off-street parking area shall be screened by a solid six-foot fence or by dense bushes or shrubbery; 
8.  No alterations or modifications shall be made to the exterior of a building to alter the appearance of the building as a residence; 
9.  The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be fourteen (14) consecutive days at any one (1) time; 
10.  Breakfast shall be the only meal served, and it shall be served only to paying, overnight guests. No cooking facilities of any nature shall be permitted in any of the bedrooms; and 
11.  In a residential district, no new structures or annexes shall be built for the purposes of housing bed and breakfast facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-4A-88, § 2, 4-18-88) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. O-4A-88, adopted Apr. 18, 1988, did not specifically amend the zoning ordinance; therefore, said section has been added herein as § 307 by the editor. 
Section 308. - Home occupations. 
a.  Intent. To provide peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods of the city and to guarantee to all residents freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effects of commercial uses being conducted in residential areas. 
b.  Definitions. 
1.  A "home occupation" is defined as any business, professional or commercial activity that is conducted or petitioned to be conducted on or from property that is zoned for residential use, including property zoned AR, R-1, R-2 and R-3. 
2.  A home occupation permit is a permit issued for home occupation that is authorized by this section without hearing. A home occupation permit is granted only to a designated person who resides at a residential address. It is not transferable from person to person or from address to address. 
3.  A home occupation conditional use permit is a permit authorized by the city council only after a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission. 
c.  No home occupation shall be permitted without the prior issuance of a home occupation permit or conditional use permit. 
d.  A home occupation permit for the following home occupations shall be issued by the code enforcement officer, upon application to the city and payment of the permit fee, without hearing, provided that said home occupation is conducted solely and singly by the applicant, who shall reside on the premises, does not constitute a significant impact upon the neighborhood, and conforms to all the rules and regulations of this section 308: 
1.  Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring; 
2.  Painting, sculpturing, or writing; 
3.  Telephone answering; 
4.  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, and cabinet making; 
5.  Teaching music or tutoring, limited to one student at a time; 
6.  Home cooking and preserving; 
7.  Computer programming; and 
8.  Secretarial service. 
e.  All home occupations, whether authorized by permit or conditional use permit, shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Permitted home occupations shall not be conducted in any building on the premises other than the building which is used by the occupant as his or her private dwelling, and, further, not more than one (1) room may be used for such purpose. 
2.  No interior or exterior business sign shall be permitted unless authorized by the sign regulations for residential districts. 
3.  There shall be no exterior or open garage storage of goods, equipment, materials, merchandise or inventory. 
4.  The area set aside for home occupation shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of such residence. 
5.  Permitted home occupations shall not include the employment of any person not residing on the premises. 
6.  The use of mechanical equipment other than is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes is prohibited. 
7.  Off-street loading and parking requirements of applicable laws and ordinances must be followed. 
8.  Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within or outside of the residence. 
9.  The operation of any wholesale or retail business, unless it is conducted entirely by mail and does not involve the sale, shipment, or delivery of merchandise on the premises, is prohibited. 
10.  Any manufacturing business or activity which produces noxious matter or perceptible noise beyond the lot line is prohibited. 
11.  Trucks or vans shall not operate out of residential districts. 
12.  Conditional use permits shall not be granted when it appears to the city council that the proposed home occupation will constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring property values, or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, excessive noise, odors, or other circumstances. 
13.  In order to guarantee that a home occupation, once authorized, will not become a nuisance to the neighbors or otherwise violate these guidelines, the planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may impose reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
14.  An applicant for a permit or conditional use permit must reside at the location of the proposed home occupation. 
15.  Garage sales are permitted without special permit provided they meet the following standards: 
aa.  Sales last no longer than three (3) days. 
bb.  Sales are held no more than twice yearly. 
cc.  Sales are conducted on the owner's property. Multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the participants. 
dd.  No goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale. 
ee.  No consignment goods may be offered for sale. 
ff.  All directional and advertising signs shall be free-standing and removed after completion of the sale. 
gg.  All directional and advertising signs placed on private property shall have the owner's permission. 
hh.  No directional or advertising signs may be larger than two (2) feet by three (3) feet. 
f.  Inspections. 
1.  There may be one (1) annual inspection each year by the code enforcement officer or his designee of each property covered by a permit or conditional use permit. In addition, the code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall have the right at any time, upon reasonable request, to enter and inspect the premises covered by said permit for safety and compliance purposes. 
g.  Application for permits. 
1.  The annual fee for permits and conditional use permits issued under this section shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year and shall be payable no later than May 1 of each year. 
2.  Permits and conditional use permits shall expire April 30 of each year, and once granted may be renewed without additional hearings, subject to the provisions of this section, by completing the renewal form prescribed by the code enforcement officer and paying the annual permit fee. Failure to timely apply for renewal, or failure timely to pay the annual fee for a permit or conditional use permit shall cause the expiration and automatic termination of a permit or conditional use permit, without option for renewal. 
h.  Conditional use permits. 
1.  Conditional use permits granted by this section shall be temporary in nature and shall be granted to a designated person who resides at a residential address. They are not transferable from person to person or from address to address. 
2.  Applications for home occupation conditional use permits shall be filed with the code enforcement officer, together with a filing fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). The application shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for a public hearing. All such hearings shall be at public meetings of the planning and zoning commission and shall be conducted as provided in the City of Crockett Zoning Ordinance. Legal notice of all such hearings shall be given as required for petitions for rezonings, variances, and other conditional uses. At the conclusion of its hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make findings of fact and recommendations to the city council, which shall hold a public hearing after giving legal notice of such hearing in the manner required for petitions for rezonings, variances and other conditional uses. The city council may accept, reject or modify the findings and recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. 
i.  General provisions. 
1.  Should a home occupation permit holder or conditional use permit holder die or move to a new location, the existing permit shall be automatically terminated, except that, in the case of death, should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home occupation, written notice to that effect shall be given to the code enforcement officer, and the code enforcement officer may authorize continuation of that permit without further hearing. 
2.  Permits and conditional use permits, once granted, may be revoked by the city council for cause after hearing before the city council. Complaints seeking the revocation of such permit shall be filed with the code enforcement officer and may be initiated by the planning and zoning commission or any three (3) residents of the block (both sides) where the home occupation is being conducted. All such revocation hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the City of Crockett Zoning Ordinance. Publication and notice requirements shall be the same as for home occupation conditional use permit application hearings. 
3.  All home occupations being lawfully conducted under the terms of the City of Crockett Zoning Ordinance in effect prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be nonconforming uses, and the provisions of Article 5, Nonconformance, of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Crockett, Texas shall apply thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-4-99, § 7, 4-5-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-4-99, § 7, adopted April 5, 1999, added new provisions to the zoning ordinance as § 307. Inasmuch as other provisions existed within the zoning ordinance as § 307, the provisions of Ord. No. O-4-99, § 7, have been redesignated as § 308 at the editor's discretion. 
Section 309. - Exhibition of music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
A.  The terms "coin operated machine," "music coin-operated machine," and "skill or pleasure coin-operated machine" are as defined in Chapter 2153 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
B.  For purposes of zoning, the city shall treat the exhibition of a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine in the same manner as the city treats the principal use of the property where the machine is exhibited. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine may be exhibited within three hundred (300) feet of a church, school or hospital. 
(Ord. No. O-12B-04, § I, 12-6-04) 
ARTICLE 4. - PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 401. - Parking requirements. 
A.  General. It is the intent of these regulations that adequate parking facilities be provided off the street for each land use activity's particular needs. The basis of the regulations which follow is the parking demand created by each land use activity. These parking regulations apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise specified. 
    It is also the intent of this ordinance that access points to parking areas be controlled and traffic maneuvering take place on the site of the nonresidential development to prevent traffic accidents. 
B.  Required open space. The area required for off-street parking must be in addition to the yard areas required for each district, except that the front yard in a C-1, C-2, C-3, M or I zoning district may be used for uncovered parking. (Commercial, industrial, and manufacturing front yards may be used for parking lots). 
C.  Location. A private off-street parking lot must be located within two hundred (200) feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the primary land use and must have direct access to a street or alley. 
D.  Joint parking facilities. Whenever two (2) or more uses are located in a common building, shopping center, or other integrated building complex, a common parking area may be cooperatively maintained. The number of spaces must not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses. A legally sufficient written agreement assuring the perpetual joint usage of said common parking for the combination of uses or buildings must be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned and approved as to form and execution by the planning and zoning commission. Parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment, for a church, for multifamily dwelling units, or for a school, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours if specifically approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
E.  Parking requirements with existing buildings. Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, or seating capacity after the date of this ordinance, compliance with the parking requirements will be met. 
F.  Employee parking. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space per employee is required for each nonresidential use in addition to the required parking spaces [subsection I]. 
G.  Parking lot design. Parking lots are to be designed with the following minimum characteristics: 
1.  Each space will be eight (8) by eighteen (18) feet in size except in high turnover areas such as convenience stores. 
2.  High turnover areas require spaces ten (10) feet in width. 
3.  Aisles between parking bays should be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet in width. 
4.  A minimum of eighteen (18) feet between parking spaces and buildings is required if the parking spaces are to be parallel to the building. 
5.  A minimum of eighteen (18) feet of driveway at an access point is required for entering or existing traffic. 
6.  Driveways are to be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet in width for two-way traffic and ten (10) feet in width for one-way traffic. Signs clearly marking the direction the driver is to take are to be provided. 
7.  Access to be provided across state highways in the city limits requires an access permit which is issued by the building inspector and is in compliance with the state highway department's access design standards. 
H.  Handicapped parking stalls. Special handicapped parking stalls must be provided at buildings of public use that in addition to the eight-foot-wide stall, have a four-foot-wide island or paved loading area on each side. This loading area may be used in common with another handicapped parking stall if one is adjacent. The minimum width for a single handicapped stall is sixteen (16) feet, and the minimum stall width for two (2) handicapped stalls is twenty-eight (28) feet. Parking for the handicapped must be located close to the building entrance, and a barrier-free path to the entrance must be provided with wheelchair ramps installed at all restrictive curbs. A sign should be posted for each handicapped stall restricting its use to the handicapped and posting the one dollar ($1.00) to two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine established by the state for violation of the handicapped restriction. A minimum of one (1) handicapped space per fifty (50) spaces of parking is required. 
I.  Amount of off-street parking required. 
Spaces Per 1. Residential: a. Townhouse or rowhouse 2 Dwelling unit b. Apartment 11/2 Dwelling unit c. Boarding or rooming house 1 For each two rooms d. Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1 Guest room or residence unit. Minimum of 3 extra for guests or visitors for first 20 rooms, then 1 for every 10 rooms. e. Mobile home or house trailer i. Mobile home 2 Lot, plot, tract or stand ii. Travel trailer 1 Lot, plot, tract or stand f. Private dormitory 11/2 2 occupants per [designed occupancy] g. Duplexes 11/2 Dwelling unit 2. Institutional and Special: a. Community or welfare center 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area b. School-Private or public i. Elementary 1 25 students ii. Junior high 1 18 students iii. Senior high 1 5 students c. Place of public assembly 1 4 seats d. College or university 1 4 day students e. Church 1 4 seats in sanctuary or auditorium f. Kindergarten, day nursery, or day care 1 8 pupils g. Hospital-Chronic care 1 6 beds h. Hospital-Acute 1 Bed i. Home for the aged 1 Dwelling unit j. Library 1 350 sq. ft. of public area k. Fraternity or sorority 11/2 2 members or residents l. Student religious center 1 250 sq. ft. of floor area m. Mortuary, funeral chapel 1 4 seats in chapel 3. Recreation, Special and Entertainment: a. Theater 1 4 seats b. Bowling alley 6 Lane c. Tavern, nightclub, private club 1 30 sq. ft. floor area d. Commercial amusements (outdoor) exclusive of buildings 1 500 sq. ft. of site area e. Ballpark, stadium 1 8 seats f. Lodge, fraternal organization 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area 4. Personal Service and Retail: a. Personal service shop 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area b. Retail stores or shops (inside) 1 400 sq. ft. of floor area c. Furniture store 1 1000 sq. ft. of floor area d. Open retail sales exclusive of building 1 600 sq. ft. of site area 5. Food and Beverage Service: a. Eating or drinking place 1 100 sq. ft. of floor area, minimum of 12 spaces b. Eating or drinking place (inside only) 1 150 sq. ft. of floor area 6. Business Service: a. Bank 1 300 sq. ft. of floor area b. Savings and loan or similar institution 1 350 sq. ft. of floor area c. Medical, dental, clinic or office 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area d. Other office, business or professional 1 300 sq. ft. of floor area 7. Automotive and Equipment: a. Service station 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area, minimum of 4 spaces b. Auto repair, garage or shop (indoor) 1 500 sq. ft. of floor area, minimum of 5 spaces c. Auto parts and accessories sales 1 800 sq. ft. of floor area, minimum of 10 spaces d. Vehicle or machinery sales (indoor) 1 500 sq. ft. of floor area, minimum of 5 spaces e. Vehicle or machinery sales (outdoor) 1 1000 sq. ft. of floor area f. Car wash 5 Service lane 8. Storage, Wholesale and Manufacturing: a. Brick or lumberyard or similar area 1 4000 sq. ft. of site area b. Open storage or sand, gravel, petroleum 1 3000 sq. ft. of floor area c. Warehouse and enclosed storage, wholesale or manufacturing operation 1 3000 sq. ft. of floor area d. Wholesale or manufacturing operation 1 1000 sq. ft. of floor area e. Freight docks 1 1000 sq. ft. of floor area 9. For nonresidential uses, other than those specified above, which are allowed in the commercial district, 1 space per 400 square ft. of net floor area. Off-street loading requirements would remain the same (see section 402 of this ordinance). 10. For nonresidential uses, other than those specified above, which are allowed in the commercial-industrial district, one space per 600 square ft. of net floor area. 11. For nonresidential uses allowed in the industrial district, one space per every 2, 1 space per 1000 square ft. of net floor area, whichever is greater.  
J.  Off-street parking lot construction and maintenance. 
1.  In residential districts or on lots adjacent to residential districts, parking lots must adhere to setback requirements. Corner lots in nonresidential districts must not restrict the view of drivers attempting to turn. On these corner lots no parking will be permitted, and no wall, fence, sign, structure, or plant growth will be allowed within a triangle formed by joining the corner of the lot at the street intersection with points thirty (30) feet in each direction along the adjacent streets. 
2.  Yards that are part of the parking area must be landscaped with grass or other ground cover and maintained throughout the year. 
3.  The intensity of lights and reflectors must be such that it does not interfere with residential development in the area. 
4.  No signs will be erected on the site except signs stating the conditions and terms of use of the area, and signs guiding traffic. Only nonintermittent lighting of signs will be permitted. 
5.  All open off-street parking areas, except those accessory to one-or two-family dwellings, should be improved with a compacted select gravel base surfaced with an all-weather, dustless material suitably designed for the intended use to a standard approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 402. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    The following provisions apply to R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, M and I districts: 
    No off-street loading and unloading facilities may be located in the front or side yards adjacent to a street. Loading and unloading areas must be hard-surfaced and constructed according to the paving standards found in the subdivision regulations. All loading and unloading facilities abutting a residential district must be enclosed with an opaque fence or wall having a height of not less than five (5) feet or more than six (6) feet. Such a fence or wall must be maintained in good condition. 
ARTICLE 5. - NONCONFORMANCE 

Section 501. - Nonconforming use regulations. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  Within the districts established by this ordinance or its amendments, there may exist lots, structures, land usage or other characteristics which were lawful prior to the enactment of this ordinance or its amendments, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. It is the intent of this ordinance to discourage the continuance of such nonconformance and to provide for an efficient, fair and responsible process for their termination. 
2.  It is also the intent of this ordinance that existing nonconforming uses be prohibited from enlargement, expansion or use as a base for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zoning district. 
3.  Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the uses permitted by right and the specific uses authorized by specific use permit within the district involved. 
B.  Regulation of nonconforming uses. Unless otherwise provided, no nonconforming use of land or buildings nor any nonconforming structures may be enlarged, changed, altered or repaired except in conformity with the regulations contained in this article. 
C.  Nonconformance status. Any use or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located is deemed to be a nonconforming use when: 
1.  The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of [Zoning] Ordinance No. 70-E on March 23, 1970, was lawfully operating at the time of the passage of this ordinance, and has since been in regular and continuous use; or 
2.  The use or structure was lawfully being used at the time of the passage of Zoning Ordinance No. 70-E on March 23, 1970, was lawfully being used at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this ordinance and by such amendment was placed in a district wherein it is not otherwise permitted; or 
3.  The use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the City of Crockett and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
D.  Continuing lawful use of property. 
1.  The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued until termination is required in accordance with the provisions of the article. If discontinuance occurs between the time of designation as nonconforming and notification of a termination date, any future use of the premises must be in conformity with the general provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  A legal nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, cannot be resumed. Discontinuance or abandonment is defined as follows: 
a.  When land use for a legal nonconforming use ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of thirty (30) days. 
b.  When a structure designed or used for a nonconforming use, except a private club, ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. A structure used for a nonconforming private club is discontinued or abandoned if it ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of ninety (90) days. 
3.  Abandonment of a nonconforming use will be determined by the board of adjustment and may include a consideration of the following factors in addition to the prima facie evidence of abandonment cited in subsection 2, above: 
a.  The intent of the user or owner; or 
b.  The apparent act of discontinuance as supported by evidence submitted to the board of adjustment. 
E.  Substitution of nonconforming uses prohibited. No nonconforming use or structure may be substituted for any other nonconforming use or structure. Only uses permitted by right and uses authorized by specific use permit may be substituted for nonconforming uses or structures. 
F.  Restoration of damaged property. A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, wind, flood, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its reasonable value may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 502. - Survey and certification of nonconformance. 
    The code enforcement officer is responsible for the production of an annual survey and report on the status of zoning nonconformance. The officer's report must be sent to the board of adjustment at its first regular meeting of the official municipal year. The board must review the report and must approve or reject the certification of each site that the officer has identified as being nonconforming. Once certified by the board as nonconforming, a site must be given a numerical designation for future reference. Upon receipt of the certified report from the board of adjustment, the officer must notify each user and owner of the official nonconforming use certification of his/her property. 
Section 503. - Termination of nonconformance. 
A.  The right to use a parcel of land or a structure in a nonconforming manner must terminate under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  When the use is abandoned. 
2.  When any provision of this or any other ordinance is violated with respect to a nonconforming use. 
3.  When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use by means of an amendment to the zoning text or map. 
4.  When the structure in which a nonconforming use is housed, operated or maintained is damaged to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value. 
5.  When the right to maintain or operate a nonconforming use has been terminated in accordance with an amortization schedule established by the board of adjustment as described in section 504 of this ordinance. 
Section 504. - Amortization of nonconformance. 
A.  Responsibility of the board of adjustment. It is the responsibility of the board of adjustment to provide a program for the orderly termination of all nonconforming land uses and structures in Crockett. The board must cooperate with the code enforcement officer in reviewing the status of certified nonconforming uses and structures for amortization scheduling and termination. 
B.  Public hearing required prior to amortization scheduling. Prior to the establishment of an amortization schedule for a nonconforming land use or structure, the board of adjustment must hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing must be given in conformance with section 603 of this ordinance. 
C.  Factors to be used by the board in amortization scheduling. In determining the amortization schedule for the termination of a certified nonconforming land use or structure, the board of adjustment must consider the following factors: 
1.  The length of time required for the user or owner of the property to amortize his/her investment. 
2.  The general condition of the site and facility. 
3.  The length of time the property has been used or owned. 
4.  Conforming land use activities that can be used in connection with the site in question. 
5.  The land use activities surrounding the site in question. 
6.  The long-range land use plans of the City of Crockett and the place of the site in question with regard to those plans. 
D.  Notification and recording of the amortization schedule. The board of adjustment must send a copy of all approved amortization schedules for the termination of nonconforming uses or structures to the owners and lessees of such sites. The termination date and the reasons for the schedule term must be clearly described in the notice. The code enforcement officer must keep a permanent record of all amortization schedules for Crockett. 
E.  Violations of an amortization schedule. The failure of a user or owner of a certified nonconforming land use activity or structure to comply with the termination date of a recorded amortization schedule constitutes a violation of this section of the ordinance and is punishable in accordance with the terms of Article 6 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 6. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 601. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
    The duties and powers of the zoning enforcement officer include: 
1.  Presenting facts and information about zoning permits, problems, or appeals to the board of adjustment, planning and zoning commission or city council. 
2.  Receiving and reviewing all applications of zoning permits and certificates of occupancy; approving or disapproving such application; issuing zoning permits and certificates of occupancy. 
3.  Maintaining and updating the zoning maps. 
4.  Maintaining a record of all actions taken in connection with administering this ordinance. 
5.  Instituting all legal proceedings as the city council authorizes to enforce compliance with the ordinance. 
Section 602. - Certificate of occupancy. 
1.  No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural or single-family residential purposes until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the code enforcement officer. 
2.  No premises shall be used and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied, or changed in use, until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector under the laws and provisions of the regulations. 
3.  Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alterations of such buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the code enforcement officer. 
4.  No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
5.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses. Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use shall be filed within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance with the zoning enforcement officer. 
Section 603. - Public hearings. 
A.  Public hearings shall be held in conjunction with the following: 
1.  Requests to the city council for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, a specific use permit, or a PUD designation. 
2.  Requests to the city council for approval of annexation plans as required in section 606. 
3.  Requests to the board of adjustment for variances or appeals to the board of adjustment on the decisions of the zoning enforcement officer or for the determination of abandonment of a nonconforming use. 
4.  Establishment of an amortization schedule for a nonconforming use by the board of adjustment. 
5.  Requests to the planning and zoning commission for recommendations on specific use permits, recommendations on zoning amendments, and recommendations on PUD designations. 
B.  Notice of all public hearings must be published in a newspaper of circulation in Crockett at least one time, fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
C.  For public hearings held by the planning and zoning commission, all property owners, as listed on the current Crockett city tax rolls, or listed in the tax rolls of the Houston County appraisal district, with land lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property for which the proposed change is sought must be notified in writing ten (10) days prior to said public hearings. 
D.  For public hearings held by the board of adjustment, owners of the property for which a decision will be made must be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to a public hearing. 
E.  For public hearings held by the city council on zoning related issues, public notice will be served through newspaper publication not less than fifteen (15) days prior to said hearings. 
F.  The City of Crockett shall place a twelve-square-foot sign on the property being considered for rezoning stating that the property is being considered for rezoning, ten (10) days prior to the hearing held by the planning and zoning commission. 
Section 604. - Meetings. 
A.  Public notice as required by Texas law, shall be given prior to each meeting of the planning and zoning commission and the board of adjustment and all meetings shall be open to the public. 
B.  Minutes of the proceedings of the board and commission shall be kept, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board or commission and shall be a public record. 
C.  Withdrawal of proposals. Any applicant who desires to withdraw his proposal may do so by filing a written request to that effect with the zoning enforcement officer. Such receipt [request] shall be effective upon the date of its official receipt. However, no such request shall be valid unless it shall have been received seventy-two (72) hours or more prior to the scheduled hearing, except on action of the planning and zoning commission or the city council. Withdrawal of a proposal at any stage of its processing shall terminate all consideration of it by the city and the applicant shall have forfeited his application fee. The case file thereon shall be closed. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 605. - Amendments to the zoning map and text. 
A.  Authority to amend. The Crockett City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition from property owner, or on recommendation from the planning and zoning commission amend the boundaries of the zoning districts or the regulations established by this ordinance. 
1.  An amendment application must be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover costs of review and processing. 
2.  Applications for amendments where only a portion of a lot is to be rezoned or where the lot lines cannot be identified by the legal description must be accompanied by a survey drawing showing the exact locations of the proposed district boundaries. 
B.  Planning and zoning commission report required. Before taking any action to amend the zoning map or text, the city council must receive a report on such proposed action from the planning and zoning commission containing its conclusions and recommendations. 
C.  Public hearing required prior to amendments. Public hearings must be held by the planning and zoning commission and the city council before the city council may approve or reject the amendment request. The specific requirements for public hearings as set forth in section 603 shall be used. 
D.  Requirement of a three-fourths majority vote by city council. The city council must approve a map amendment by a three-fourths majority vote where the proposed amendment is opposed by twenty (20) percent or more of the property owners whose lands are lying within three hundred (300) feet of the site for which the zoning classification change is sought. 
E.  Limitations on zoning amendment reapplications. In order to insure the stability of land use within Crockett and in an effort to promote and protect the quality of life for the citizens of the city with respect to the use and enjoyment of their respective property, no reapplication for a zoning amendment to the map or text will be accepted by the city within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the city council's denial of the initial application. However, upon receipt of documented proof from the applicant that conditions have substantially and materially changed in Crockett since the initial submission of his/her application, and upon further evidence that such changes justify a rehearing of the matter, the city council may waive the mandatory holding period and accept a reapplication. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. O-09C-10, § I, 9-7-10) 
Section 606. - Classification of annexed land. 
A.  Planning and zoning commission report required. Prior to the annexation of land to Crockett, the planning and zoning commission must study the proposed area to be annexed and must file a report with the secretary of the city council. The report must contain a plan for the following: 
1.  Land use. 
2.  Circulation. 
3.  Community facilities and public services. 
In submitting its report the planning and zoning commission must include a recommendation for a zoning component which will support the plan. 
B.  City council to hold a public hearing. Upon receipt of the planning and zoning commission's report the city council must hold a public hearing in conformance with the procedure described in section 603, and must adopt a plan and a zoning component for the annexed area. 
C.  Amendment of zoning map to include the annexed area. Upon the completion of the annexation process the city council must convert the aforementioned zoning component to ordinance form and must amend the official zoning map at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
Section 607. - Penalties. 
A.  Violation of Crockett's Zoning Ordinance is a misdemeanor. Violation of the regulations contained in this ordinance is a class C misdemeanor and is punishable by [a] fine. Each day that a violation exists may constitute a separate fine. 
B.  City may seek injunctive relief. In accordance with Texas Civil Statutes, the City of Crockett may, in addition to the penalties described in subsection A. above, seek injunctive relief through district court. 
Section 608. - Invalidity and savings clause. 
A.  Invalidity of a part. In the event that any portion of this ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of proper jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance will not be invalidated, but will remain in full force and effect. 
B.  Savings clause. All rights or remedies are expressly saved as to any and all violations of any previous zoning ordinance or amendments to it that have accrued at the time of the effective date of this ordinance. All existing violations of the previous zoning ordinances which would otherwise become nonconforming uses of land and structures under this ordinance shall be considered as violations of this ordinance in the same manner that they were violations prior to its enactment. 
ARTICLE 7. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-5B-86, § 1, adopted May 19, 1986, amended art. 7 in its entirety to read as set out in §§ 701-703. Formerly art. 7 contained §§ 701-704, which pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 70-E, adopted Mar. 23, 1970. 

Section 701. - Creation of the board of adjustment. 
    There is hereby created a board of adjustment for the City of Crockett, Texas with the powers and responsibilities as hereinafter set forth. 
A.  Membership on the board of adjustment. 
1.  The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members who are residents of the City of Crockett, each to be appointed for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and upon public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
2.  Two (2) alternate members of the board of adjustment shall be appointed who will serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city administrator as the case may be. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. 
B.  Quorum of four members required. All cases to be heard by the board of adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. 
C.  Meetings. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board will be held in accordance with section 604 of this ordinance. 
D.  Rules of order. The board will adopt rules of order in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 702. - Power of the board of adjustment. 
    The board of adjustment is specifically empowered to exercise authority in the following areas: 
A.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the code enforcement officer in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
B.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit and intent of the ordinance will be observed and substantial justice done. It is specifically provided, however, that under no circumstances may the board issue a use variance. 
C.  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance. 
D.  To designate nonconforming land use activities and amortization of the same as covered in section 501 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
Section 703. - Decisions by the board of adjustments. 
A.  Procedures. 
1.  A person wishing to receive a variance, a special exception to the ordinance or make an appeal on the decision of the zoning enforcement officer will make application to the board on forms provided by the city. 
2.  A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will accompany each application to defray costs associated with notification of the hearings. 
3.  Public hearings will be held in conjunction with each decision made by the board of adjustment in accordance with section 603 of this ordinance. 
B.  Concurring vote of four (4) members. The concurring vote of four (4) members is necessary to: 
1.  Reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning enforcement officer; 
2.  To decide in favor of any applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass; 
3.  To grant a variance to the terms of the ordinance; 
4.  Designate a nonconforming use. 
If four (4) members cannot concur on the action to be taken, the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning enforcement officer is upheld and remains in full force and effect. 
C.  Meetings. Meetings will be held by the board in accordance with section 604 of this ordinance. 
D.  Appeals to the board of adjustments on the decision of the zoning enforcement officer. 
1.  Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Crockett affected by a decision of the code enforcement officer. 
2.  Every ruling made by the board of adjustment on this appeal must be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on the testimony. 
3.  Appeals to the board of adjustment must be taken within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the code enforcement officer. 
4.  An appeal stays all activities in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the code enforcement officer certifies to the board of adjustment that by reasons of facts stated in the record, that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such an instance the activities may not be stayed other than by a restraining order issued by the board of adjustment or by a court of record. 
5.  The board may not rehear an appeal unless it is shown by pertinent facts that the appellant was prevented from presenting important factors or that the case has materially and substantially changed since the public hearing. 
E.  Validity of variances, special exceptions, and appeals. Any variance, special exception, or appeal granted by the board of adjustment shall not be valid if construction authorized by the granting of such variance or appeal is not begun within a period of sixty (60) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-5B-86, § 1, 5-19-86) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1960 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1960 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1960 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1-1 14-1 1-1-7 19-22 1-5-28 2-3 1-13-1 7-31-7-35 1-13-2 7-36 7-45 1-13-3 7-37-7-44 7-46 6-1-1 4-1 6-1-6 10-4 6-1-7 15-1 6-2-1 4-2 6-2-2 4-3 6-2-3 4-4 6-2-4 4-5 6-4-1 15-16 6-4-2 15-3 6-4-3 15-17 6-4-4 15-18 6-5-1 15-2 8-1-2 9-19 9-21 9-23, 9-24 8-6-4 10-1 9-9-1, 9-9-2 20-1 9-9-3 20-2 9-9-4 20-3 10-1-1 14-241 10-1-2 14-243 10-1-3 14-246 14-248 10-1-4, 10-1-5 14-242 10-1-6 14-247 10-1-7 14-249 10-1-8 14-244 10-1-9 14-245 10-1-10 14-250 10-3-1 14-68 10-3-2 14-3 14-9 14-12 14-13 14-36-14-38 14-120 10-3-3 14-41 14-45 14-50 10-3-4 14-141 10-3-5 14-40 10-3-6 14-42 14-121-14-123 14-125 10-3-7 14-11 14-14 14-16 14-80, 14-81 14-83 14-86-14-89 10-3-8 14-15 14-17, 14-18 14-124 10-3-9 14-206-14-210 10-3-10 14-163 14-165 10-3-11 14-161, 14-162 14-164 14-181 10-3-12 14-38 11-1-1 19-39 11-1-2 19-38 11-1-3 19-42 11-1-4 19-40 11-1-5 19-36 11-1-6 19-37 11-1-9 19-23 11-2-1 19-57 11-2-7 19-62 11-3-1 10-20 11-3-2 10-21-10-23 11-3-6 10-25 11-3-7 10-24 11-3-8 10-2 11-3-9 10-46 11-3-10 10-6 11-3-12 10-47 11-3-13 10-32 11-3-15 10-26 11-3-17 10-5 12-2-2 15-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1960 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1960 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 10- 9-61 1 17-3 2 17-2 3 17-1 4 17-4, 17-5 17-26 5 17-76 6 17-77 7 17-91, 17-92 8 17-8 9 17-9 17-41, 17-42 17-56-17-59 10 17-6 17-27, 17-28 11 17-7 12 17-10 12-11-61 10-23 3-23-64 7-1 11-28-66 1, 2 3-19 70-E 3-23-70 1-20 App. A, §§ I-XX 70-F 5- 4-70 II 14-266 III 14-268 IV 14-269 XI 14-274 6-21-71 1, 2 10-20 4 10-21-10-23 6 10-25 7 10-27 A-71 10- 4-71 1 19-76 2(A) 19-82 2(B) 19-101 2(C) 19-102, 19-103 2(D) 19-104 3(A) 19-84 3(A) 19-107 3(B) 19-83 3(C) 19-85 4(D) 19-86 5(A) 19-56 6(C) 19-77 6(D) 19-78 7(C) 19-105 8(A) 19-106 9(A) 19-79 10 19-80 11 19-81 7-10-72 1 10-22 2 10-48 A-12-72 12-18-72 1 18-16 2 18-17 2- 5-73 1, 2 19-83 174-E 6-17-74 1 7-16 2 7-18 D-1 1-16-78 1 14-228 2 14-226 3 14-227 D-2 1-23-78 Art. I 8-1 Art. II, § A 8-2 Art. II, § B 8-3 Art. II, § C 8-36 Art. II, § D 8-4 Art. II, § E 8-5 Art. II, § F 8-6 Art. II, § G 8-7 Art. III, § A 8-21 Art. III, § B 8-22 Art. III, § C 8-37, 8-38 Art. III, § D 8-51-8-58 Art. IV, § A 8-71 Art. IV, § B 8-72 Art. IV, § C 8-73 D-7 7-17-78 1 10-1 10-3 19-21 D-8 9- 5-78 1, 2 18-1 O-1-79 1- 8-79 2 5-96 3 5-97 4 5-104 5 5-98 6 5-99-5-101 7 5-102, 5-103 O-6-79 6- 4-79 1 4-21 2 4-24 3 4-25 4 4-26 5 4-27 6 4-22, 4-23 7 4-28 4-29, 4-30 8 4-31-4-33 9 4-34 10 4-46, 4-47 O-7-79 7-2-79 1 5-426 3 5-427 4 5-428 5-430 5 5-429 7 5-432 8 5-434 9 5-433 12 5-435 O-10B-79 10-1-79 1 18-33, 18-34 2 18-31 3 18-32 4 18-35 5 18-36 6 18-37 7 18-38 8 18-39 O-10C-79 10-15-79 1 7-61 2 7-62 3 7-91, 7-92 7-95 4 7-94 5 7-93 7 7-77-7-79 O-11A-79 11-19-79 1 5-16 2 5-36-5-38 3 5-39 4 5-40-5-42 5 5-17 6 5-43 7 5-18 8 5-21 O-11B-79 11-19-79 1 5-356 2 5-371-5-376 5-388-5-392 3 5-393 4 5-406-5-409 O-11C-79 11-19-79 2 5-76-5-78 3 5-81 4 5-79 5 5-80 O-11D-79 11-19-79 1 5-1 O-11E-79 11-19-79 1 5-271 2 5-286 3 5-287-5-289 4 5-301, 5-302 5 5-316-5-322 6 5-323-5-330 7 5-341 8 5-342 9 5-272 O-11F-79 11-19-79 1 5-131 2 5-116 3 5-138 5-140, 5-141 4 5-156 5 5-157-5-159 6 5-196-5-198 7 5-211-5214 8 5-133 9 5-171-5-183 5-251-5-256 10 5-226 5-228-5-235 11 5-227 12 5-135 13 5-134 14 5-136 15 5-137 16 5-236 17 5-139 O-6A-80 6- 2-80 101 2-81-2-83 102 2-84 103 2-85 104 2-86 105 2-87 106 2-88 201 2-89 202 2-90 203 2-91 301 2-92 302 2-93 303 2-94 304 2-95 305 2-96 306 2-97 307 2-98 308 2-99 401 2-100 501 2-101 O-9-80 9-30-80 Art. I 8-3 Art. III 8-73 Art. IV 8-74 O-5D-81 5-18-81 2 10-20 10-30 O-5A-81Z 6-15-81 App. A, §§ VI-IX O-5C-81Z 6-15-81 App. A, § XVI O-7A-81 7-20-81 1 14-182 2 14-183 14-184 3 14-185 4 14-186 5 14-187 6 14-188 7 14-189 O-8-81 8-3-81 1 18-33 O-8A-81 8-3-81 2 4-31 O-8B-81 8-17-81 1 14-10 O-9-81 9-8-81 1 12-1-12-5 O-9A-81 9-22-81 1-7 2-46 O-9B-81 9-22-81 1-5 2-47 O-9C-81 9-22-81 1-3 2-48 O-4-82 4-19-82 1 18-2 O-6-82 6-7-82 1 10-49 2 10-66-10-72 O-6A-82 6-7-82 1 5-199 O-6B-82 6-7-82 1 5-304 4 5-303 O-6C-82 6-7-82 2 19-58-19-60 3 19-60 O-6D-82 6-7-82 2 5-20 O-6E-82 6-21-82 1 6-1 6-3, 6-4 2 6-5 3 6-6 4 6-2 5 6-7 6 6-8 7 6-9 8 6-10 9 6-11 10 6-12 11 6-13, 6-14 12 6-15 O-10-82 10-4-82 3 10-29 4 19-39 O-11-82 11-15-82 2-50 O-12-82 12-6-82 1, 2 2-49 O-1-83 1-3-83 1 2-2 O-1A-83 1-17-83 1 App. A, §§ V, VI O-1B-83 1-17-83 App. A, §§ V, VI O-4-83 4-18-83 10-28 19-41 O-5-83 3-16-83 1 11-36, 11-37 2 11-38 O-9-83 9-6-83 1, 2 2-4 O-9B-83 9-19-83 1 16-26 2 16-29 3 16-27 O-10-83 10-3-83 2 2-81 O-10A-83 10-3-83 11-36 O-11-83 11-7-83 1 13-16 2 13-36 3 13-37 4 13-38-13-40 5 13-41 6 13-42 7 13-43 8 13-44 9 13-45 10 13-46 11 13-17 12 13-18 13 13-47, 13-48 14 13-49 15 13-20 16 13-19 O-2-84 2-6-84 1 16-27 2 16-28 O-2A-84 2-20-84 11-36 O-5A-84 5-21-84 1 14-183 14-185 O-8-84 8-23-84 1 19-39 2 19-60 3 10-29 4 10-31, 19-39, 19-60 O-9B-84 9-4-84 2-50 1, 2 2-49 O-10-84 10-1-84 App. A, § V O-10A-84 10-1-84 App. A, § XVI O-10B-84 10-1-84 I 11-36, 11-37 O-11-84 11-19-84 1-3 15-4 O-12-84 12-17-84 1.01-1.04 19-36-19-39 1.05 19-24 1.06, 1.07 19-22 1.08 19-25 1.09 19-40 1.10 19-41 1.11 19-26 1.12, 1.13 19-44 1.14 19-43 2.01-2.04 19-57-19-60 3.01-3.05 19-14-19-18 O-1A-85 1-21-85 App. A, § X(g) O-2-85 2-4-85 1-8 Adopting Ord., p. vii O-2A-85 2-18-85 App. A, § V O-2B-85 2-18-85 1 17-1 O-3-85 3-18-85 1.1-1.12 4-21 2.1-2.8 4-36-4-42 3.1-3.6 4-43 5.1-5.3 4-22-4-24 5.4 4-62 6.1, 6.2 4-25 7.1 4-61 7.3 4-67 7.4 4-66 7.5-7.7 4-63-4-65 10.1-10.3 4-26 11.1-11.5 4-27 12.1 4-28 13.1 4-69 13.2, 13.3 4-29, 4-30 14.1 4-68 O-7-85 7-1-85 1 5-427 O-7A-85 7-1-85 1 14-266 2 14-267(a) 3 14-269 5 14-268 O-7B-85 7-15-85 1 14-266 O-7C-85 7-15-85 1, 2 11-18, 11-19 3 11-20(b) O-8-85 8-19-85 1, 2 10-49 O-8A-85 8-19-85 1, 2 11-36, 11-37 O-9-85 9-3-85       Rpld App. A       Added App. A, §§ 101-104, 201, 202, 301-306, 401, 402, 501-504, 601-608, 701-703 O-9C-85 9-16-85 1       Rpld 5-426-5-435 2       Added 5-426-5-434 O-11-85 11-4-85 17-1 O-2-86 2-3-86 1 19-37 2 19-43 3 19-44 4 19-60 O-2A-86 2-3-86 1 4-6-4-7.6, 4-8, 4-8.1, 4-9, 4-10, 4-25.1 O-3-86 3-3-86 1 17-2(a), (b) O-4-86 4-21-86 1 15-24 O-4A-86 4-21-86 1 11-58 O-5-86 5-5-86 1 App. A, § 201.7.C O-5A-86 5-5-86 1 14-183 2 14-190 O-5B-86 5-19-86 1 App. A, §§ 104.B.3., 14., 20., 45., 51., 57., 80., 201.1.B.2, E.a., 201.3.C.10., 11., 201.4.B.10., C.11., H., I.3., 201.5.B.18., F., 201.6. catchline, A., B.19., F., 201.8.B.1, 201.9.G., table (LUDS), 301.B., C., 303.D.7., 401.A., E., G., H., 501.D.2.b., 604.C., 605.A.1., 2., 701-703 O-6-86 6-2-86 1 15-25-15-31 O-7-86 7-7-86 1 17-2(c) O-7A-86 7-7-86 1 19-37 2 19-43 3 19-45, 19-46 O-7B-86 7-7-86 1, 2 18-33(b) 3 18-33(note) O-9-86 9-15-86 1 11-36(1)(a)-(e) O-10-86 10-6-86 1 19-16(a)-(c) 2 19-37(e) 3 19-40 O-10A-86 10-20-86 1 Ch. 13, Art. II(title) 2, 3 13-16, 13-17 4 13-36 5 13-38(a) 6 13-40 7 13-41(4) 8 13-45 9 13-44 O-11-86 11- 3-86 1 10-28, 10-29(c) 2 19-16(d) O-3-87  3- 2-87 1 App. A, §§ 201.8.C.3., 201.9.D.2. O-3A-87  3- 2-87       Rpld 8-1-8-7 8-21, 8-22, 8-36-8-38, 8-51-8-58 8-71-8-74 Art. 1, §§ A-D       Added 8-1-8-4 Art. 2 8-5 Art. 3, §§ A, B 8-6, 8-7 C 8-23 D-G 8-8-8-11 Art. 4, §§ A, B 8-21, 8-22 C, D 8-24, 8-25 Art. 5, §§ A-E 8-36-8-40 Art. 6 8-26 O-8-87  8- 3-87 1 14-183(a)-(d) 2       Rpld 14-185-14-187 O-8A-87  8- 3-87 1 18-3 O-9B-87  9- 8-87 1 19-37(a) O-9C-87  9- 8-87 1 10-29(a), (b) 2 10-30(1)-(3) O-9D-87  9-21-87 1 17-78-17-80 O-9E-87  9-21-87 1 16-1 O-10-87 10- 5-87 1 2-81 2 2-84 3 2-87 O-10A-87 10-19-87 1-3 19-37(f) O-12-87 12- 7-87 1, 2 15-5 O-4-88  4- 4-88 1-4 7-2 O-4A-88  4-18-88 1 App. A, § 201.3.C.12 O-5-88  5- 2-88 1 10-49 O-5B-88  5-19-88 1 5-271(a) 2, 3 5-271.1 4 5-271(c) O-7-88  7-25-88 1 10-29(c) O-9A-88  9- 6-88 Art. III, §§ 3.01, 3.02 19-121, 19-122 Art. IV, §§ 4.01-4.10 19-131-19-140 Art. V, §§ 5.01-5.07 19-151-19-157 O-9B-88  9- 6-88 1 15-6 O-9D-88  9-19-88 1 4-31(a), (b) 2 4-31(c) O-10A-88 10- 3-88 1 2-49(a), (b) 2 2-51(a)-(e) 3 2-49(c), 2-51(f) O-10B-88 10-17-88 1 7-1 O-10C-88 10-17-88 1 15-6 O-2-89  2-20-89 Arts. I, II 19-37(a)(3) O-2A-89  2-20-89 Arts. I, II 19-58 O-3-89  3- 6-89 I 10-49 O-3A-89  3- 6-89 1-3 2-5 O-4-89  4-17-89 I 17-4 II 17-8 III 17-10 IV 17-26 V 17-28 VI 17-58(6) VII 17-60 O-9B-89  9-18-89 1, 3 2-49 2, 3 2-51 O-9C-89  9-18-89 1, 2 2-52 O-9D-89  9-18-89 1 2-53 O-11-89 11- 6-89 1, 2 19-37(a), (f)(1), (2) O-1-90  1-22-90 1 15-6 O-4-90  4-11-90 I 10-29(a), (b), 10-30 O-8-90  8- 6-90 1 App. A, § 201.7.B O-9B-90  9-24-90 I 10-29(a), (b), 10-30 O-12-90 12-17-90 1-13 5-96-5-108 O-7-91  7-22-91 I 5-426(a)(7) II 5-429 III       Added 5-429.1 IV 5-430(d) V       Rpld 5-433 VI       Added 5-435 O-8-91  8-19-91 I 7-16 II 7-43 III 7-46 O-9-91  9-16-91 1 2-49(a)-(d) 2 2-51(a)-(e) 3       Added 2-51.1(a) 4 2-49(e), 2-51(f)       Added 2-51.1(b) O-9B-91  9-16-91 I 10-29(a), (b), 10-30 O-9D-91  9-16-91 1, 2 19-37(a), (f) O-11-91 11-18-91 I 19-38 II 19-59 O-2-93  2- 1-93 I       Added 10-1(c) II 10-21 III       Added 10-22.1 IV       Added 10-26(c) V 10-29(c) VII       Added 10-100 O-10-94 10-17-94 1-13 2-201-2-213 O-9-95  7-25-95 2 15.5-1-15.5-21 3 App. A, 
§§ 201.6.C.3, 
201.8.C.4 O-11-95 11-20-95 1 7-100-7-104 O-2-96  2- 5-96 I 15-19 O-2A-96  2-19-96 I 19-47 O-4-96  4-15-96 I 19-15 O-5-96  5- 6-96 1-14 13-61-13-74 O-6-96  6-17-96       Rpld 5-96-5-108 1-14       Added 5-96-5-109 O-9-96  9- 9-96 I 15-6(c) II       Rpld 15-6(e) O-9C-96  9-23-96 I 15-5 O-11-96 11- 4-96 1 4-29 2 4-31 O-11A-96 11- 4-96 I 10-29, 10-30 O-11B-96 11-18-96 1, 2 14-183, 14-184 3-5 14-188-14-190 O-1-97  1- 6-97 1 14-190 O-1A-97  1- 6-97 1 14-191 O-1B-97  1-27-97 1 5-23 O-4-97  4-21-97 1 14-40.1 O-5-97  5-19-97 I 5-1 II 5-16(a) III 5-76(a) IV 5-131 V       Rpld 5-132 VI 5-271(a) VII       Rpld 5-271.1 VIII 5-356(a) IX 7-16 X 9-1 O-7-97  7- 7-97 1 2-54 O-9C-97  9-15-97 1, 2 19-37(a), (f) O-6-98  6-15-98 1-8 15-51-15-58 O-6A-98  6-15-98 1 14-166 2 14-6(a)(11) O-1A-99  1-20-99 II 19-40 O-4-99  4- 5-99 1       Rpld App. A, § 104.B.45 2       Rpld App. A, § 201.1.B.6 3       Rpld App. A, § 201.2.B.4 4       Rpld App. A, § 201.3.B.4 5       Rpld App. A, § 201.4.B.5 6 App. A, Land Use Matrix-Residential 7 App. A, § 308 O-9-99  9-20-99 I 19-16 II 19-37(a), (f) O-3-00  3- 6-00 1 10-1 O-4-00  4-17-00 I 19-40 O-4A-00  4-17-00 I 19-16  7-17-00 2-49, 2-51, 2-51.1 O-1-01  1-16-01 1-3 2-4 O-3-01  3-19-01 I 10-7 O-6-01  6-18-01 1-3 15-7 O-10-01 10- 1-01 I 5-427 II 5-427.1 III 5-429 O-01-02  1- 7-02 I 5-16.1 II-V 5-17-5-20 VI 5-22 VII 5-131 O-01C-02  1- 7-02 2-2 O-01D-02  1-22-02 I 13-100-13-103 O-02-02  2-19-02 I       Rpld 14-266-14-274 II       Added 14-266-14-269 O-09B-02  9-16-02 I-III 11-20-11-20.2 O-10-02 10- 7-02 I 5-199 II 5-304 III 5-393 O-10B-02 10- 7-02 I 19-38 II 19-59 O-10C-02 10- 7-02 I, II 12-1, 12-4 O-10D-02 10- 7-02 I-IV 15-60-15-63 O-03-03  3-24-03       Rpld 13-100-13-103 1-4       Added 13-100-13-103 O-08-03  8-18-03 I 15-24.1 O-09B-03  9- 2-03 1A 1-11.1 O-09C-03  9- 2-03 1-3 1-11.2 O-03-04  3-15-04 1 14-90 O-09-04  9-20-04 6-16 O-12-04 12- 6-04 1       Rpld 13-16-13-20, 13-36-13-49 2(13.010-13.150)       Added   
13-16-13-30 2(13.210-13.310)       Added   
13-36-13-46 2(13.410-13.440)       Added   
13-51-13-54 O-12B-04 12- 6-04 I App. A, § 309 O-12C-04 12- 6-04 II(13-101)- 
V(13-104)   
13-121-13-124 O-02-05  2- 7-05 1 14-167 2 14-6(a)(12) O-03-05  3- 7-05 I 10-7 O-03B-05  3- 7-05       Rpld 13-61-13-74 II(13.510-13.523)       Added   
13-61-13-74 O-03C-05  3- 7-05 II(13.610-13.626)   
13-141-13-157 O-06-05  6- 6-05 1 14-208 2, 3       Added 14-212, 14-213 O-08C-05  8-15-05 1, 2 14-183, 14-184 O-09-05  9- 6-05 I       Added 14-103 O-09C-05  9- 6-05 I 15-6 O-09D-05  9- 6-05 I 5-16 II, III 5-40, 5-41 O-09E-05  9- 6-05 I 19-16 II 19-37 III, IV 19-40, 19-41 V 19-46 VI 19-58 O-09F-05  9- 6-05 I 10-21 II-IV 10-28-10-30 V 10-32 VI-VIII 10-46-10-48 IX       Dltd 10-49 X-XVI       Dltd 10-66-10-72 O-12-05 12- 5-05 1       Rpld ch. 11, art. III 2       Added 11-36-11-39 O-02-06  2- 6-06 1 15-5 O-08-06  8- 7-06 1 15-5 O-10-06 10- 2-06 I       Rpld 15-7 O-01-07  1-16-07 I-III       Added 10-33-10-35 O-01B-07  1-16-07 I-XI       Added 8-60-8-71 O-04-07  4-16-07 1 10-100 2, 3       Added 10-200-10-201 O-05-07  5-21-07 I, II       Added 13-200-13-212 O-09B-07  9- 4-07 I, II 10-29, 10-30 O-09C-07  9- 4-07 I, II 19-37, 19-38 III, IV 19-58, 19-59 O-09D-07  9- 4-07 1 14-266 2 14-268 O-11-07 11-19-07 I       Added 15-24.2 O-2-08 2-4-08 1 2-4(c) O-02B-08 2-4-08 14-103 O-06-08 6-2-08 I       Added 13-236-13-276 O-09B-08 9-2-08 I, II 10-29, 10-30 O-09C-08 9-2-08 I 19-37 II 19-58 O-10-08 10-6-08 6-16 O-12-08 12-1-08 exh. A       Added 19-181-19-234 O-04-09 4-20-09 1 App. A, § 201.1C. 2 App. A, § 201.2C. 3 App. A, § 201.3C. 4 App. A, § 201.4C. 5 App. A, § 201.5C. 6 App. A, § 201.6C. 7 App. A, § 201.7C. 8 App. A, § 201.8C. 9 App. A, § 201.9C. 10 App. A, matrix table O-11-09 11-2-09 6-16 O-04-10 4-5-10 1-8 15-51-15-58 O-04B-10 4-5-10 1       Added 11-22 O-07-10 7-12-10 I 15-24 O-08B-10 8-16-10 1       Added 13-1 O-08C-10 8-16-10 1 App. A, §§ 201.5D., 201.6D. App. A, §§ 201.7D., 201.8D. App. A, § 201.9E. O-09B-10 9-7-10 I 15-6 O-09C-10 9-7-10 I App. A, § 605A. O-09D-10 9-7-10 I App. A, § 303D.2. O-09E-10 9-7-10 I Ch. 10, Art. III, title O-09F-10 9-7-10 I 19-59 O-09G-10 9-7-10 I 19-37(f)(1) II 19-38 O-09H-10 9-20-10 I       Added 15-86-15-92 O-10-10 10-4-10 I, II 10-29, 10-30 III 10-33 O-01-11 1-11-11 I 15-4 O-03-11 3-21-11 I       Dltd 8-1-8-40       Added 8-1-8-52 O-03B-11 3-21-11 I 13-200 O-08B-11 8-29-11 1, 2       Added 13-300-13-313 O-03B-12 3-20-12 1       Rpld 4-1-4-69       Added 4-1-4-56 O-04-12 4-16-12 1, 2       Added 18-40 O-08-12 8-6-12 1, 2 13-19, 13-20 3 13-23 4       Added 13-31 O-09B-12  9- 4-12 I 19-37(f)(1) O-09C-12  9- 4-12 I, II 10-29, 10-30 O-09D-12  9- 4-12 I       Added 11-22       Rnbd 11-22       as 11-23 O-09E-12  9- 4-12 I 5-427.1 II 5-429 III 5-429.1(a) IV 5-435(a) V, VI       Added 5-436, 5-437 O-02-13  2- 4-13 I 7-16 II 5-1 III 5-271(a) IV 5-356(a) O-03-13  3- 4-13 1 13-1 O-09B-13  9- 9-13 I 19-37 II 19-58 TMRS-20 10- 7-13 1(a) 2-53(1) O-12-13 12- 9-13 I       Added 7-200 O-12B-13 12- 9-13 I 11-18 O-03-14  3-17-14 I 5-199 II 5-304 III 5-393 IV       Added 5-501 O-04-14  4-28-14 2, 5       Added 19-27 O-07-14  7-14-14 I       Added 13-209(e) O-08C-14  8-18-14 I 19-37 II 19-58 O-02-15  2- 2-15 I       Rpld 5-134 O-09B-15  9-21-15 I       Added 19-58(3) O-09C-15  9-21-15 I       Added 2-32 O-09D-15  9-21-15 I       Rpld 10-22-10-25 II 10-21 III 10-26 IV, V 10-29, 10-30 VI-VIII 10-33-10-35 IX 10-48 X       Added 10-49 O-12-15 12- 7-15 I 15-24 O-12B-15 12- 7-15 I 14-6 O-12C-15 12- 7-15 I 10-30 II, III 10-34, 10-35 O-12D-15 12- 7-15 I 10-100 O-12E-15 12- 7-15 I, II 4-28, 4-29 III 4-31 O-01-16  1-11-16 I       Added App. A § 201.1.B.6 O-02-16  2-22-16 I 19-17 O-08-16  8- 1-16 I 4-23 II 4-28 III, IV 4-49, 4-50 V, VI 4-55, 4-56 O-08C-16  8-15-16 I 19-37 II 19-58  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Vernon's Ann. 
Civ. St. 
Article Section  Section 
this Code 10 1-2 23 429b-2 1-2 46c-1 3-17 46d-1 Ch. 3(note) 46d-14 Ch. 3, Art. II(note) 3-19 46e-1 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 46e-12 3-37, 3-38 Title 110B 61.001 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3(note) 62.003 2-47 62.004 2-48 63.502, 63.503, 63.505 2-52 64.202(f) 2-53 64.204, 64.301-64.308, 64.405, 64.406, 64.408-64.410 2-53 165-3 9-3 974a Ch. 17(note) 1000 2-31 1001 2-16 1011 Ch. 7(note) Ch. 15(note) 1-11 1011(f) Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2(note) 1011a 35 App. A(note) 1013(3) 1-1 1015 Ch. 13(note) 1015(14)-(17) Ch. 4(note) 1015n Ch. 5, Art. VII(note) 11013F 63.502 2-52 63.503 2-52 63.505 2-52 1175 Char., Art. II(note) 1175(15) 14.02 1175(16)-(18) Ch. 16(note) 1175(20) Ch. 16(note) 1175(25) Ch. 7(note) 1175(28) Ch. 11(note) 1175(34) Ch. 7(note) Ch. 11(note) Ch. 13(note) Ch. 15(note) 1176a 1-1 1195 1-11 1266(j) 3a, 3b Ch. 18, Art. III (note) 4436 11-16-11-21 4465 Ch. 9(note) 4476-10 Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 6 Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 4477-9a Ch. 10(note) 4590b Ch. 11, Art. III(note) 6252-13c 13-73 6252-19 Char., § 2.02 6701d 13 14-1 21 14-2 24 14-9 24(a) 14-8 24(f) 14-8 25 14-7 27(a)(1) Ch. 14, Art. V(note) 27(a)(2) 14-4 27(a)(8) 14-141 31 14-36 32(a) 14-37 32(b) 14-43 33 14-45 35 14-47 35A 14-48 36 14-50 37 14-49 51 14-67 52 14-69 53 14-70 54 14-71 54A 14-72 55 14-73 56 14-74 57 14-75 58(b) 14-76 60 14-77 61 14-78 65 14-141 66 14-142 67 14-66 68 14-143 69 14-145 70 14-146 71 14-116 72 14-117 73 14-118 74 14-119 75 14-120 76 14-206 77 14-207 78 14-208 79 14-209 80 14-210 81 14-211 85 14-79 86 14-125 91A 14-121 92 14-122 94 14-6 95 14-161 96 14-163 100 14-80 101 14-81 104 14-82 108 14-5 166(a) 14-101 166(a)(1) 14-102 166(c) 14-101 173 14-83 174 14-16 175 14-19 178 14-241 179 14-242 180 14-246 181 14-247 182 14-248 183 14-249 184 14-250 185 14-84 186 14-85 187 14-86 6701d-11 1 14-266 6889-7 Ch. 6(note) 9102 5(c) 14-191  
Texas Constitution 
Article Section  Section 
this Code XI 6 Char., § 2.01  
Vernon's 
Ann. C.C.P. 
Article  Section 
this Code 102.017 1-11.1 102.017(d) 1-11.1 102.0172 1-11.2  
V.A.T.S. 
Election Code 
Article  Section 
this Code 1.01 Char., Art. IV (note)  
V.T.C.A. 
Agriculture 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 161.001 4-25  
V.T.C.A. 
Alcoholic 
Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code Chs. 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 69, 72, 74, 102 15-24.2 109.53 15-24.2  
V.T.C.A. 
Education 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 38.007 15-24.2  
V.T.C.A. 
Family 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code Ch. 31 15-53  
V.T.C.A. 
Government 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 853.305 2-54 853.401-853.404 2-49 853.404(d), (e) 2-51.1 853.601 2-49 854.203 2-51  
V.T.C.A. 
Health and 
Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 822.0422 4-30 822.0424 4-28 4-31  
V.T.C.A. 
Human 
Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 42.002 15-24.2  
V.T.C.A. 
Local 
Government 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code Ch. 252 Char., § 6.03(note) 380.001 19-15  
V.T.C.A. 
Occupations 
Code 
Section  Section 
this Code Ch. 17.02 4-35 Ch. 2153 App. A, § 309  
V.T.C.A. 
Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code Titles 1-3 1-2 2.02 1-12 7.21 et seq. 11-21 Ch. 21 13-22 Ch. 22 13-22 Ch. 29 13-22 Ch. 30 13-22 Ch. 31 13-22 Ch. 32 13-22  
V.T.C.A. 
Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 11.13 Ch. 18, Art. II Ch. 351, subch. A 18-40  
V.T.C.A. 
Transportation 
Code  Section 
this Code Ch. 681 14-191  
V.T.C.A. 
Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 16.315 Ch. 8 8-1  
